Food & Function

Paper

total resveratrol administered was recovered in the form of
resveratrol, dihydroresveratrol and derived metabolites (65.1%
along the gastrointestinal tract, and 0.5% in other tissues).17 So,
it may be very diﬃcult to reach eﬀective concentrations in
metabolism regulating tissues in vivo, e.g. visceral adipose
tissues. Polyphenol bioavailability and absorption may be
inuenced by its chemical structure, food matrix, and enter-
ohepatic circulation; a high percentage of resveratrol is not
absorbed in the small intestine, it arrives intact at the colon,
where it may interact with microora.18 Therefore, it seems to
be more reasonable to conclude that the eﬀects of resveratrol
might mediate by targeting on gut microbiota.

Few studies have investigated the eﬀect of dietary resveratrol
on the complex gut microbiota in vivo, and they focused mainly
on a single bacterial population and polyphenols in red wine,
tea, and coﬀee. Taken together,
in the present study, we
hypothesize that resveratrol exerts anti-obesity eﬀects partly
mediated by mechanisms of regulating the composition of gut
microbes and this, in turn, may aﬀect their functional rela-
tionships with host fat storage and metabolism. The eﬀects of
resveratrol on gut microbiota, obesity, and their relationships
are investigated in high-fat diet-fed obesity mice.

Materials and methods
Diets and animals

Male Kunming mice were obtained from Shanghai Slac Labo-
ratory Animal, Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China), which were kept in
an environmentally controlled breeding room (temperature:
23 (cid:2) 2 (cid:3)C, humidity: 60 (cid:2) 5%, 12 hour light–dark cycle) and fed
(cid:4)1, 10% calories in fat) or
a normal diet (total calories 3.25 kcal g
(cid:4)1, 50% calories in
a high-fat diet (HF) (total calories 3.68 kcal g
fat), or a high-fat diet supplemented with resveratrol (HF-RES)
(n ¼ 8) at a concentration of 200 mg per kg per day for 12
weeks.19 Resveratrol (>99%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(China) and mixed to homogeneity during preparation of the
diets. The study was carried out in strict accordance with the
recommendations of the Guide for the Care and Use of Labo-
ratory Animals of
the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee of Jiangnan University. Mice were killed by cervical
dislocation aer a 6 h period of fasting. The ileum, liver, and
visceral adipose tissues were dissected, immersed in liquid
nitrogen and stored at (cid:4)80 (cid:3)C. The colonic contents were
collected for further analysis.

Biochemical analysis
Aer a 6 h fasting period, blood samples were collected and
were isolated by centrifugation at 1500 (cid:5) g at 4 (cid:3)C for 10 min.
Blood glucose and insulin were assayed using commercial kits
(Jingmei BioTech Co. Ltd, Shenzhen, China). Blood glucose was
estimated by the glucose oxidase method.20 Concentrations of
total cholesterol (TC), triglycerides, high density lipoprotein
cholesterol (HDL-C), and low density lipoprotein cholesterol
(LDL-C) in serum were determined by enzymatic colorimetric
methods using commercial kits (Shanghai Rongsheng Biotech
Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China).

Colonic sample collection, xation and uorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH)
The cell-xation procedure was adapted from Schwiertz et al.21
One volume of the colonic contents was suspended in 9 ml of
phosphate-buﬀered saline (PBS) and vortexed with glass beads
for 3 min; then 0.2 ml of the suspension was xed in 0.6 ml
fresh 4% paraformaldehyde at 4 (cid:3)C overnight. Aer xation, the
bacteria were stored in 50% ethanol–PBS at (cid:4)20 (cid:3)C for further
analysis.

The group- or genus-specic oligonucleotide probes targeted
the bacterial 16S rRNA, including the Bacteroides–Prevotella
group (Bac303, 50-CCAATGTGGGGGACCTT), the Clostridium
I & II group (Chis150, 50-TTATGCGGTATTAATC-
cluster
the Enterobacteriaceae group (Enter1432, 50-
TYCCTTT),
the Lactobacillus group (Lab158, 50-
GTTTTGCAACCCACT),
GGTATTAGCA(C/T)CTGTTTCCA), the Eubacterium rectale group
(Mib724, 50-GCTTCTTAGTCARGTACCG), the Atopobium group
(Ato291, 50-GGTCGGTCTCTCAACCC), the Bidobacterium group
(Bif164, 50-CATCCGGCATTACCACCC), the Enterococcus faecalis
(Enf191, 50-GAAAGCGCCTTTCACTCTTATGC), and the Clos-
tridium coccoides–Eubacterium rectale cluster group (Erec482, 50-
GCTTCTTAGTCA- GGTACCG) were used for enumeration of
dominant members of the gut microbiota. The EUB338 probe
used to determine total counts was labeled with uorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC), while the group- or genus-specic probes
were labeled at the 50-end with indocyanine (Cy3; Sangon
Biotech, Shanghai, China).

(cid:4)1 NaCl, 20 mmol l

Hybridization was carried out as previously described.22
Hybridization was performed in a 50 ml of hybridization solu-
tion containing the probe resulting in a nal concentration of
(cid:4)1. Aer hybridization, 150 ml of hybridization solution
4 ng ml
was added, centrifuged at 4000 (cid:5) g for 15 min at room
temperature and then incubated in 200 ml of washing solution
(cid:4)1
(65 mmol l
EDTA, pH 8.0, 0.01% SDS) at 37 (cid:3)C for 20 min. Aliquots of 200 ml
were added to 500 ml of PBS for ow cytometry with a FACS
Calibur device (Becton Dickinson and Co, Franklin Lakes, NJ) as
previously described.23 The ow rate of events was generally
200–300 events per s. A total of 20 000 events were recorded for
each sample. Data were analyzed on line with the use of the BD
FACSDIVA soware version 4.1.1 (Becton Dickinson and Co).

(cid:4)1 Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 5 mmol l

Histology

Randomly selected epididymal fat and liver tissues obtained from
mice were washed with PBS and xed in 4% formaldehyde for 1 h
at 4 (cid:3)C. Paraﬃn-embedded epididymal fat tissue was sectioned at
3–5 mm thickness and stained with hematoxylin–eosin (HE).
Ornithine carbamoyl-transferase frozen liver tissue was sectioned
at 3–5 mm thickness and stained with oil red O. Histological
assessment of the tissue morphology was performed using an
Olympus light microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).

RNA preparation and real-time qPCR analysis

Total RNA was prepared from tissues using TRIzol® (Biomiga)
and treated with DNAse, according to a previously described

1242 | Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Published on 01 April 2014. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. View Article OnlinePaper

Food & Function

Table 1 Gene-speciﬁc primers used in qRT-PCR assaysa

Gene name

Abbreviation

Primer sequences 

Amplicon size (bp)

Fasting-induced adipose factor

Lipoprotein lipase

Cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1

Peroxisome proliferator activated
receptor g
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1

Fatty acid synthase

a F, forward; R, reverse.

Fiaf

Lpl

Cyp7a1

Scd1

Ppar-g

Acc1

Fas

F: CAATGCCAAATTGCTCCAATT,
R: TGGCCGTGGGCTCAGT
F: ACTGCCACTTCAACCACAG,
R:CCCAATACTTCGACCAGG
F: CTAAGGAGGATTTCACTTGC, R:
ACTGGTCCAAAGGTGGACAT
F: AGGCTTCTGGGCCTTATGTG, R:
TGCTTCTCTCGCCAGGAATAC
F: ATGTCTCACAATGCCATCAGGTT,
R: GCTCGCAGATCAGCAGACTCT
F: AAGTCCTTGGTCGGGAAGTATACA,
R: ACTCCCTCAAAGTCATCACAAACA
F: TGGTGAATTGTCTCCGAAAAGA,
R: CACGTTCATCACGAGGTCATG

82

361

350

128

116

126

149

method.24 The total RNA was reverse transcribed (RT) and PCR
amplied using the AccuPower® Greenstar qPCR kit (Bioneer).
QRT-PCR assays were performed for each 10 ml reaction con-
taining cDNA corresponding to 1 ng of total RNA and 900 nM
gene-specic primers (Table 1) with the following parameters: 1
cycle of 95 (cid:3)C for 5 min; 45 cycles of 95 (cid:3)C for 20 s, 60 (cid:3)C for 30 s
and 72 (cid:3)C for 20 s; and 1 cycle of 72 (cid:3)C for 5 min. b-Actin was
chosen as the housekeeping gene. Each assay was performed in
duplicate in the same run. All assays were performed in tripli-
cate with an ABI PRISM 7900HT Sequence Detection System
(Applied Biosystems). Gene expression was calculated as DCT
using b-actin as a reference, and was expressed relative to the
control group normalised to a value of 1.

Statistics
Diﬀerences between two groups were analyzed by the one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) test followed by the Tukey's test.
When variances were not homogeneous, data were analyzed by
the non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis test
followed by the
Student–Newman–Keuls (SNK) test. The data were expressed as
means with their standard errors. Pearson's correlation coeﬃ-
cient was used to determine the relationship of the body weight
and the colonic bacterial content. A P value of less than 0.05 was
considered signicant. Analysis was performed using SPSS 11.5
(SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).

Results
Eﬀect of a high-fat diet and RES treatment on the body weight
and adiposity weight

The phenotype data indicated that the animals on the control
liver, and abdominal fat weight.
diet had a normal body,
Compared with normal chow diet-fed mice, HF mice showed
signicant increases in the body, liver, and adipose weights
. Especially, there was a 1.6-fold increase in the adiposite
index of HF mice compared with the CT group. However, RES
treatment signicantly inhibited increases in body and fat

weights in HF mice, which suggests that it exerts anti-obesity
eﬀects.

Eﬀect of RES on the level of blood glucose, insulin, and lipid
in high-fat diet-fed mice
There was a signicant increase in blood glucose and insulin
levels of HF mice compared with the CT group (Table 2). RES
signicantly decreased blood glucose to that of control levels
and signicantly decreased blood insulin compared with HF
mice. In addition, HF mice showed signicant increases in
serum total cholesterol but had no signicant change in serum
triglycerides compared with normal controls (Table 2). RES
signicantly inhibited increases in serum total cholesterol in
HF mice; HDL-C levels decreased (P < 0.05), and LDL-C levels
increased (P < 0.05) in HF-fed mice. Aer RES treatment, both
the levels of HDL-C and LDL-C in plasma were signicantly
improved.

Eﬀect of high-fat diet and RES on the composition of gut
microbiota

FISH analysis, as a quantitative molecular-based technique, was
applied to assess the microbiota composition. The relative
abundance of the major bacterial groups indicated that, even
when considering a degree of interindividual variation, the HF
diet induced the gut microbiota dysbiosis . The results
of principal coordinate analysis showed that HF microbiomes
were clearly diﬀerent from those in CT and HF-RES mice
. Moreover, the principal coordinate analysis scores plot
in Fig. 2B supports the presence of overlapping clusters between
HF-RES and CT groups, which illustrated the relative similarity
of CT and RES treated mice in microbiotal proles. Lactobacillus
was reduced by 1.8-fold in HF mice and Bidobacterium was
decreased by 1.9-fold, whereas Enterococcus
faecalis was
increased by 1.8-fold in the HF group compared with CT mice
. Aer RES treatment, Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium
were signicantly increased, whereas Enterococcus faecalis was
signicantly decreased to that of control levels . In

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249 | 1243

Published on 01 April 2014. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. View Article OnlineFood & Function

Paper

Fig. 1 Phenotypes of mice groups fed on diﬀerent diets. (A) Average body weight, (B) liver weight (percentage of body weight) and (C) visceral
and subcutaneous adipose tissue weight (percentage of body weight). Values are means with their standard errors (n ¼ 8). Mean values were
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF
group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES.

Table 2 Serum biochemical analyses from CT and HF mice with or without RES treatment (mean values with their standard errors, n ¼ 8)a

(cid:4)1)
(cid:4)1)

Blood glucose (mmol l
Blood insulin (pmol l
Serum total cholesterol (mmol l
(cid:4)1)
Serum triglycerides (mmol l
HDL-C (mmol l
LDL-C (mmol l

(cid:4)1)
(cid:4)1)

(cid:4)1)

CT

Mean

5.54
110.50
3.30
1.13
1.68
1.58

SEM

0.31
9.18
0.11
0.12
0.09
0.40

HF

Mean

9.05**
468.18**
4.18*
1.30
1.12*
2.22*

SEM

0.42
20.91
0.11
0.13
0.09
0.18

HF-RES

Mean

5.75††
245.13**††
3.32†
1.18
1.61†
1.61†

SEM

0.22
15.11
0.23
0.16
0.14
0.13

a CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HFD supplemented with RES. HDL-C, high density lipoprotein
cholesterol; LDL-C, low density lipoprotein cholesterol. Mean values were signicantly diﬀerent compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05, **
P < 0.01. Mean values were signicantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF group: † P < 0.05, †† P < 0.01.

addition, in our study, a high-fat diet resulted in 2.2-fold lower
Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes ratios than those of CT mice,
whereas RES supplemented diets resulted in a higher abun-
dance of Bacteroidetes and a lower abundance of Firmicutes
.

Relationship between body weight and gut microbiota

The correlations between body weight and the colonic bacterial
content were calculated . Body weight was positively and
signicantly correlated with Enterococcus faecalis (P < 0.05)
, and body weight was negatively correlated with
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium . In addition, a
negative correlation was found between the body weight and the
ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes (r ¼ (cid:4)0.805, P ¼ 0.002)
.

The suppressive eﬀect of RES on Fiaf expression in the
intestine
Fiaf expression was signicantly decreased by 2.1-fold in the
intestines of HF mice compared with normal controls, and Lpl
(lipoprotein lipase) expression was signicantly increased by
1.9-fold . However, aer RES treatment, Fiaf
expression in the intestines of HF mice was signicantly
increased and even higher than the CT group, but had no
signicant change. Moreover, Lpl expression showed decreasing
tendency in HF-RES mice compared with normal controls, and
had a signicant change .

Eﬀect of RES on gene expressions in the liver

Glucose and insulin are known to induce the expression of
lipogenic enzymes in the liver.25 Oil Red O staining of liver
sections conrmed that there was severe steatosis seen in HF
mice compared with the CT group, which was well prevented in
RES treatment mice . QRT-PCR assays conrmed that
the HF diet was accompanied by 4.5-fold statistically signicant
elevations in the liver mRNAs encoding one key regulator of
fatty acid release from triglyceride rich lipoproteins, Lpl
signicantly
.
Intriguingly, Lpl expression was
decreased in the intestine . In addition, HF mice
showed a decrease in Cyp7a1 expression, which encodes
cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase and can catalyze the initial step in
cholesterol catabolism and bile acid synthesis. Although HF
diet feeding reduced hepatic Cyp7a1 expression, RES treatment
up regulates this expression . The biomarker of fatty
acid biosynthesis, Scd1, was signicantly increased under HF-
fed conditions, as compared to normal diet-fed mice .
In contrast, RES ingestion normalized the expression of Scd1
.

RES inhibits storage of triglycerides in adipocytes

Histochemical studies allowed us to conclude that the high-fat
diet-induced increase in the epididymal fat pad weight reect-
ing adipocyte hypertrophy . Moreover, qRT-PCR anal-
yses of epididymal fat pad RNA revealed that the expressions of
key genes responsible for adipogenesis (Ppar-g) and lipogenesis

1244 | Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Published on 01 April 2014. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. View Article OnlinePaper

Food & Function

(Acc1 and Fas) were signicantly increased by 3.2-fold, 2.6-fold,
and 2.1-fold, respectively, aer a high-fat diet
.
However, RES treatment signicantly suppressed the expres-
sion of Ppar-g, Acc1 and Fas, suggesting that RES inhibits
storage of triglycerides in the adipocytes .

Discussion

Although obesity arises from interactions of genetic and envi-
ronmental factors,26 a high-fat diet plays an important role in
the induction of visceral obesity in animal models.27 Most sets
of existing evidence on resveratrol suggest that this compound
has anti-obesity eﬀects.11,12,19 But the exact mechanisms of how
resveratrol shows anti-obesity eﬀects are not clear. Because of
very low systemic bioavailability but very high accumulation in
colon tissue,15,16 we hypothesize that resveratrol might have
anti-obesity eﬀects by targeting gut microbiota, and in turn,
improving fat storage and metabolism.

Gut microbes, as environmental factors, may regulate fat
storage and aﬀect energy metabolism homeostasis, by acceler-
ation of the processing of dietary polysaccharides and induction
of de novo lipogenesis.6,28 In the present study, both the relative
abundance of the major bacterial divisions and principal coor-
dinate analysis showed that, the HF diet induced the gut
microbiota dysbiosis. These ndings are in line with Cani et al.,29
who found that the high-fat diet disrupted gut microbiota by
promoting the growth of endotoxin producers. Resveratrol
treatment signicantly improved the gut microbiota dysbiosis
induced by the HF diet . Few studies have inves-
tigated the eﬀect of dietary resveratrol on the complex gut
microbiota, and they focused mainly on selected bacterial pop-
ulations. In addition, there was a decrease in the Lactobacillus
and Bidobacterium frequencies and an increase of Enterococcus
faecalis in HF mice compared with CT mice, which agree with
our previous studies that a high-fat diet signicantly decreases
the number of Lactobacillus and increases the number of
Enterococcus faecalis.30 Aer resveratrol intake, the numbers of
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium were signicantly increased. In
contrast, Enterococcus faecalis, an important, multidrug-resistant
nosocomial pathogen, was signicantly decreased in HF-RES
mice. Similar results were reported by Larrosa et al.,31 who
observed that the increase of Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium
counts in feces of the DSS-Res group became signicantly
increased aer 20 days of resveratrol intake.

Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes are two main communities
that aﬀect energy metabolism homeostasis.32 Previous studies
show that obese mice have more Firmicutes and less Bacter-
oidetes than lean controls.32–34 Similar results were found in the
present study that HF diet induced obesity mice have lower
Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes ratios than CT mice. We also found
that resveratrol altered colonic microbiota, and consequently
the Bacteroides/Firmicutes balance. Taken together, these nd-
ings could suggest a possible prebiotic eﬀect of resveratrol on
the microbiota, which may inuence the host metabolism. The
mechanism of how resveratrol aﬀects the gut microbiota
remains an important eld of future research. Recent studies
showed that polyphenols are associated with antimicrobial

Fig. 2 Microbial proﬁling analysis of the intestinal contents. (A) The
division-level composition of gut microbiome comparing CT, HF, and
HF-RES animals (n ¼ 6). (B) The principal component analysis (PCA) of
the ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization data from intestinal bacterial
communities (n ¼ 6). (C) Colonic bacterial content of the Lactobacillus
group, the Biﬁdobacterium group, and Enterococcus faecalis. Bacte-
rial quantities are expressed as a percentage of EUB338 (n ¼ 8). (D) The
Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes ratios contributed by the indicated target
bacterial populations (n ¼ 8). Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean values were
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF group: † P < 0.05.
CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES,
mice fed with HF supplemented with RES.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249 | 1245

Published on 01 April 2014. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. View Article OnlineFood & Function

Paper

Fig. 3 Correlation between the body weight and the colonic bacterial content of (A) the Lactobacillus group, (B) the Biﬁdobacterium group, (C)
Enterococcus faecalis, and (D) the ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes. Mice were fed either a control diet (CT) or a high-fat diet (HF), or a high-
fat diet supplemented with resveratrol (HF-RES). Bacterial quantities are expressed as relative abundance (%). Body weight values (g) are pre-
sented as means (n ¼ 8 animals per group), with standard errors represented by vertical bars.

and the Bacteroides phylum. These ndings are consistent with
previous studies. For instance, Vendrame et al.39 described that
wild blueberries, a rich source of polyphenols, signicantly
increased the number of Bidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus
acidophilus, and Neyrinck et al.40 demonstrated that a poly-
phenol-rich extract of pomegranate peel increased the caecal
content weight and caecal pool of Bidobacteria spp. and
Lactobacillus spp. The antimicrobial activity of resveratrol could
not explain these results. Therefore,
there are additional
mechanisms, by which resveratrol mediates the composition of
gut microbiota, which should be further elucidated.

Conventionalization of adult GF mice with a normal micro-
biota (CONV-D mice) produces a 60% increase in the body fat
content accompanied by increased Fiaf mRNA expression
within 14 days. Aer knockout of the Fiaf gene, the increased
total body fat content of CONV-D mice markedly attenuates.8 By
analysis of GF and conventionalized, normal and Fiaf knockout
mice, Backhed et al.8 showed that Fiaf is a circulating lipopro-
tein lipase inhibitor and that its suppression is essential for the
microbiota-induced deposition of triglycerides in adipocytes. In
our study, HF diet inhibited the mRNA expression of Fiaf in
the intestine. Conversely, resveratrol signicantly promoted
the expression of Fiaf in the intestines of HF mice, which may
be associated with the prebiotic eﬀect of resveratrol on the
microbiota. The increased Fiaf expression enhances energy
metabolism by inhibiting LPL in the intestine and liver, which
is a key regulator of fatty acid release from triglyceride rich
lipoproteins in the muscles and heart.41 Decreased adipocyte
LPL activity leads to decreased cellular uptake of fatty acids and

Fig. 4 Eﬀects of high-fat diet and RES supplementation on Fiaf (A) and
Lpl (B) mRNA expressions in ileum tissue (n ¼ 6 per group). Each
sample was assayed in triplicate; values are means, with their standard
errors represented by vertical bars; mean values were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean
values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF
group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-
fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES.

activity, exerting their inhibitory eﬀect on certain bacterial
groups by binding to bacterial membranes.35,36 Diﬀerences in
cell surface structures could explain why Gram-positive bacteria
are more sensitive to the bactericidal eﬀects of
these
compounds than are Gram-negative species.37 On one hand, in
our study, resveratrol has an inhibitory eﬀect on the growth of
these bacteria, which includes Enterococcus faecalis and the
Enterobacteriaceae group—an important pathogen closely
related to obesity and insulin resistance on a high-fat diet but
not on a normal chow diet.38 However, on the other hand, this
study showed that resveratrol intake positively aﬀected the
growth of the Lactobacillus group, the Bidobacterium group,

1246 | Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Published on 01 April 2014. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. View Article OnlinePaper

Food & Function

Fig. 5 Eﬀects of high-fat diet and RES supplementation on lipogenesis in visceral livers. (A) Oil red O stains of paraformaldehyde-ﬁxed liver
sections prepared from CT, HF, and HF-RES mice (bars: 100 mm). qRT-PCR assays of liver RNAs reveal signiﬁcant changes in the expression of
mediators or biomarkers of lipogenesis, such as LPL (B), Cyp7a1 (C), and Scd1 (D). Each relative mRNA expression was determined by the ratio of
intensity to b-actin production. Values are means, with their standard errors represented by vertical bars (n ¼ 6). Mean values were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF group: † P <
0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES.

Fig. 6 Eﬀects of high-fat diet and RES supplementation on adipocyte hypertrophy through the PPAR signaling pathway in OP mice. (A) The
corresponding hematoxylin- and eosin-stained epididymal fat sections are shown. (B) qRT-PCR assays for gene expression of the PPAR signaling
pathway in epididymal fat pads. Values are means, with their standard errors represented by vertical bars (n ¼ 6). Mean values were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF group: † P <
0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES.

adipocyte triglyceride accumulation. The stearoyl-CoA desatur-
ase 1 (Scd1) gene is involved in the synthesis and regulation of
unsaturated fatty acids from saturated fatty acids.42 The Cyp7a1
gene encodes the enzyme cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase, which
catalyzes the initial step in cholesterol catabolism subsequent

to the induction of SREBP-1 and lipogenesis.43 In the liver
tissue, resveratrol promoted the expression of Cyp7a1 and
normalized Scd1 expression to that of the control level, sug-
gesting that resveratrol mainly enhances energy metabolism
through the fatty acid and cholesterol catabolism pathways.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249 | 1247

Published on 01 April 2014. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. View Article OnlineFood & Function

Paper

Ppar-g, Acc1 (acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1), and Fas (fatty acid
synthase) are marker genes responsible for adipogenesis or
lipogenesis in visceral adipose tissues. Resveratrol suppressed
the expression of Ppar-g, Acc1 and Fas in HF mice. Ppar-g, Acc1,
and Fas play important roles in adipocyte diﬀerentiation,44 de
novo fatty acid biosynthesis45 and fatty acid synthesis,46
respectively. Activation of Ppar-g can increase insulin sensi-
tivity.47 Taken together, these may explain why resveratrol has
anti-hyperlipidemic and anti-obesity eﬀects.

Conclusion

The composition of gut microbiota regulated by resveratrol may
result in de novo lipogenesis, and systemically increasing
expression of the Fiaf gene in the intestine, in turn, suppressing
expressions of the lipoprotein lipase gene (Lpl) and the fatty
acid biosynthesis gene (Scd1)
in the liver, and inhibiting
expressions of adipogenesis or lipogenesis genes (Ppar-g, Acc1,
and Fas) in visceral adipose tissues. Taken together, these
activities may contribute to signicant anti-obesity eﬀects. In
this study, we show evidence that pharmacological regulation of
gut microbes by resveratrol can lead to development of an anti-
obesity strategy.

Non-conﬂict of interest statement
The authors conrm that there is no conict of interest with any
nancial organization regarding the results presented in this
research manuscript.

Abbreviations

CT
FISH
HF
HF-RES
qPCR
RES

Control diet
Fluorescence in situ hybridization
High-fat
High-fat diet supplemented with resveratrol
Quantitative PCR
Resveratrol

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by a grant from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (no. 31201805), the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities (no. JUDCF10058),
the 12th 5 Year Plan for Science and Technology Development
(no. 2012BAD33B05).
