Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Pregnancy and the Microbiome

that we are born germ free (Tissier, 1900) and is still the belief
of many physicians, numerous pieces of evidence now cast
doubt on this hypothesis, and suggest that a bacterial presence
already exists in the feto-placental unit (Hu et al., 2013; Aagaard
et al., 2014). The mode of birth, either vaginal or by cesarean
section, was also shown to have eﬀects on the newborn’s initial
microbiota, which then changes signiﬁcantly as a result of the
child’s nutrition and overall environment throughout the ﬁrst 2
years of life, until stabilization.

that occur

In this review, we describe the pronounced microbial
changes
female, as well as
in the pregnant
provide an overview of the initial exposure of the fetus to
microbiota—from the placenta,
through birth and infancy.
We hypothesize that an appropriate microbiota is essential
for healthy early development, pregnancy maintenance, and
the ﬁrst years of childhood. Moreover, we suggest that the
changes in the human microbiome are deeply connected to
the host’s physiological status, and that
these associations
have developed throughout co-evolution of microbiome and
host
to ensure improved ﬁtness. Therefore, understanding
the role of the microbiome throughout pregnancy and early
development, as well as its role in health and disease, is of
great importance for opening new research avenues, establishing
developmental concepts, and perhaps even suggesting new
therapeutic approaches.

THE MICROBIOME

The human body is home to a unique microbial population,
including bacteria, archaea, fungi, and viruses. The diﬀerences
in microbiota composition at each body site are shaped by the
varying environmental conditions such as pH, levels of oxygen,
availability of nutrients, humidity, and temperature, enabling
various populations to thrive and perform diﬀerent functions
while interacting with the human host (Ursell et al., 2012).
These microbial communities have a major impact on host
health, by aﬀecting host metabolism (Turnbaugh et al., 2006),
immunity (Naik et al., 2012), and hormones (Neuman et al.,
2015). The majority of microbes in the human body reside in
the gut, harboring hundreds of bacterial species (Lozupone et al.,
2012), of which the dominant bacterial phyla are Firmicutes and
Bacteroidetes (Rajilic-Stojanovic et al., 2009). Additionally, the
skin, vagina, and oral cavity provide important niches for distinct
bacterial communities, which contribute to the immune system
by defense against potential pathogens (Naik et al., 2012).

A wide range of factors can cause shifts in the composition
of
the microbiota (termed dysbiosis). Dysbiosis is usually
associated with harmful eﬀects and may have long-term
consequences leading to disease. Examples of disease states
associated with dysbiosis include obesity, inﬂammatory bowel
disease (IBD), diabetes, and metabolic syndrome (Spor et al.,
2011). Alternatively,
there are natural changes that occur
in host-associated microbial composition throughout host
development—from infancy to early childhood, from young to
elder adults, and during pregnancy. While some of these changes
may seem identical to changes seen in disease states, in their

precise developmental context, they do not lead to morbidity,
but rather promote ﬁtness and survival, and may therefore be
considered beneﬁcial.

Methods to analyze the bacterial communities include
culturing methods, which are limited to only a subset of species
easily culturable, and more commonly used next generation
sequencing techniques including 16S rRNA gene surveys and
metagenomics. Data analyses from these methods can provide
information on relative abundance of diﬀerent microbes in a
sample, as well as microbial diversity calculations both within
a single sample (alpha-diversity), and between diﬀerent samples
(beta-diversity). Additional methods to test the microbial roles
and functions include metatranscriptomics, metabolomics, and
use of germ-free animal models.

Most of the data embedded in this review is focused on
bacterial members of the microbiome, as they are the most
researched to date. Nonetheless, it is becoming more and more
evident that archaea, yeast, fungi, and viruses also aﬀect their
hosts, and we believe that future research will reveal their
importance and roles in pregnancy and early life as well.

PHYSIOLOGICAL CHANGES DURING
PREGNANCY

During gestation,
the female body undergoes hormonal,
immunological, and metabolic changes to support fetal growth
and development (Kumar and Magon, 2012). During this
period, levels of secreted hormones (especially progesterone and
estrogens) rise dramatically, and there are major alterations in
the immune response (Kumar and Magon, 2012). The immune
changes are complex, and may be referred to as immune
modulation, as on the one hand, some degree of immune
suppression is needed to accept the growing fetus bearing its
own developing immune system, whereas on the other hand,
strict immunity must remain in order to protect the mother and
fetus from infections. While many consider pregnancy to be an
anti-inﬂammatory state, others consider pregnancy to be a multi-
stage process including inﬂammatory stages at implantation
and parturition, and anti-inﬂammatory stages in mid-pregnancy,
when the fetus grows rapidly (Mor and Cardenas, 2010).

In many ways,

the metabolic changes associated with
pregnancy are similar to those that occur in the metabolic
including weight gain, elevated fasting blood-
syndrome,
low-
insulin resistance, glucose intolerance,
glucose levels,
grade inﬂammation, and changes in metabolic hormone levels
(Fuglsang, 2008; Newbern and Freemark, 2011; Emanuela et al.,
2012; Kumar and Magon, 2012).

Coinciding with the endocrine, metabolic, and immune
alterations, discussed above,
there are noticeable changes
in the microbiota at diﬀerent body sites during pregnancy.
this
These changes are discussed below, are the focus of
review and are summarized in Figure 1. However,
is
it
important to understand the microbiota changes in the full
context of all physiological changes occurring simultaneously,
since
regulation and cross-talk between pathways must
exist.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

2

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Pregnancy and the Microbiome

FIGURE 1 | Microbiome changes during pregnancy. Text and arrows refer to: general changes (pink), changes in speciﬁc taxonomy (green) and community
diversity (orange).

CHANGES IN GUT MICROBIOTA DURING
PREGNANCY

Healthy pregnancy is characterized by an increase in the
bacterial load and profound alterations in the composition of
gut microbiota (Collado et al., 2008; Koren et al., 2012). In the
ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy, the gut microbial composition is
similar to that of healthy, non-pregnant women. However, from

the ﬁrst to the third trimester, the gut microbiota composition
changes dramatically. These changes are characterized by
increased abundance of members of the Actinobacteria and
Proteobacteria phyla, as well as a reduction in individual richness
(alpha diversity; Koren et al., 2012). In addition,
levels of
Faecalibacterium, a butyrate-producing bacterium with anti-
inﬂammatory activities, which is depleted in metabolic syndrome
patients (Haro et al., 2015), are signiﬁcantly decreased in the

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

3

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Pregnancy and the Microbiome

third trimester of pregnancy. Between-subject diversity (beta
diversity), is increased in the third trimester, coupled with weight
gain, insulin insensitivity, and higher levels of fecal cytokines,
reﬂecting inﬂammation (Koren et al., 2012).

In an attempt to reveal the roles of the third trimester
microbial proﬁles, fecal transplantation was used to transfer
samples of ﬁrst- and third-trimester fecal microbiotas to germ-
free (GF) mice, and test
their physiological eﬀects. After
transferring third trimester gut-microbiota to GF mice, the mice
gained signiﬁcantly more weight, developed insulin resistance,
and had a greater inﬂammatory response compared to the
ﬁrst-trimester transplanted mice (Koren et al., 2012). These
ﬁndings demonstrate directly that the microbial components
actively contribute to changes in host immunology as well as
metabolism, resembling changes seen in the metabolic syndrome.
However, unlike metabolic syndrome, the bacterial composition
and physical parameters in the third trimester of pregnancy
have positive and essential eﬀects in the context of pregnancy,
and contribute to a healthy pregnancy, and appropriate fetal
development. Just as weight gain in pregnancy is necessary to
provide the needs of the growing fetus, so are the inﬂammatory
state and insulin insensitivity. Some of the proposed mechanisms
by which gut microbiota play a role in host weight gain
during pregnancy include enhanced absorption of glucose and
fatty acids, increased fasting-induced adipocyte factor secretion,
induction of catabolic pathways, and stimulation of the immune
system (Collado et al., 2008; Koren et al., 2012).

The gut microbiota during pregnancy is inﬂuenced not only
by internal cues, but also by environmental factors, primarily by
diet. In a recent study in mice, Gohir et al. demonstrated
that the maternal diet prior to and during pregnancy had an
eﬀect on gut microbiota. Female mice fed a high-fat diet in
the periconceptional period and during gestation demonstrated
changes in the gut microbiota later in pregnancy, in contrast to
those fed on a normal chow diet (Gohir et al., 2015). An obese
state was also correlated to microbial composition during human
gestation (Collado et al., 2008). Bacteroides and Staphylococcus
were shown to be signiﬁcantly higher in the feces of overweight
pregnant women, compared to those of normal weight (Collado
et al., 2008). Additionally, in overweight and obese pregnant
women, speciﬁc metabolic hormones including insulin, gastric
inhibitory polypeptide (GIP), and adipokines were found to be
correlated with alterations in bacterial abundance, reinforcing
a connection between the microbiota and metabolic hormones
in pregnancy (Gomez-Arango et al., 2016). Interestingly, it was
shown that pre-pregnancy maternal body mass index (BMI)
correlated to neonatal gut microbiota composition in vaginally
delivered, but not C-section delivered oﬀspring (Mueller et al.,
2016). Overall, most studies showed signiﬁcant alterations in gut
microbiota during pregnancy, with correlations to initial weight
and diet, weight gain, inﬂammation, and metabolic parameters.
An exception is a recent longitudinal study of 49 women sampled
weekly, during gestation and monthly post-partum. This study
found no dramatic changes during gestation or upon delivery in
gut microbiota composition or richness indexes (DiGiulio et al.,
2015). This strengthens the fact that more studies are needed to
understand the eﬀects of pregnancy on the gut microbiota.

The eﬀects of antibiotics administered during pregnancy on
the microbiome have been studied in rats (Khan et al., 2016).
Use of category B antibiotics (azithromycin, amoxicillin, and
cefaclor) during pregnancy was shown to increase the fecal
relative abundance of Proteobacteria and Enterobacter, while
reducing the relative abundance of Firmicutes and Lactobacillus.
Moreover, antibiotics during pregnancy signiﬁcantly reduced
bacterial diversity, and promoted weight gain. Another study
found that maternal antibiotic treatment during pregnancy and
lactation in mice reduced adaptive antiviral immune responses
in the infant mice, suggesting a broad immune eﬀect on
the oﬀspring (Gonzalez-Perez et al., 2016). Most strikingly,
non-absorbable antibiotics given to pregnant mice altered
oﬀspring behavior in a manner by which they exhibited low
locomotor activity at 4 weeks of age, and less exploratory
behavior in central regions at both 4 and 8 weeks of age.
However, these behavioral phenotypes were reversed when pups
were fostered by control mothers starting at postnatal day 1
(Tochitani et al., 2016).

it

is

Finally,

intriguing to understand what are the
consequences of maternal microbiome composition during
pregnancy on the oﬀspring in terms of weight gain, immunity,
and infant health. A study in diet-induced obese rats revealed
that oligofructose prebiotic treatment during pregnancy and
lactation alters the oﬀspring’s cecal microbiome as well as
prevents increased adiposity in both the dams and the oﬀspring
(Paul et al., 2016). However, it is diﬃcult to dissect whether
the main eﬀect in this case was during pregnancy or during
lactation. A study in which probiotics were administered to
pregnant women 14 days before C-section revealed modulation
of the infant microbiota, implying an early maternal eﬀect on the
oﬀspring’s microbiota (Rautava et al., 2012a). The same study
also demonstrated a correlation between maternal probiotics and
changes in expression of Toll-like receptor genes in the placenta
and infant meconium. Moreover,
it has been hypothesized
that microbial exposure during pregnancy may be of great
importance for preventing allergic disease in the oﬀspring. The
mechanisms suggested include immune-regulated epigenetic
imprinting and bacterial translocation during pregnancy from
the mother to the oﬀspring, training the immune system to
respond appropriately to pathogens and commensals after
birth (Abrahamsson et al., 2015). Accordingly, in a study in
which mothers with allergic disease and atopic sensitization
received probiotics during the last 2 months of pregnancy and
the ﬁrst 2 months of lactation, a reduced risk for eczema in
the oﬀspring was observed compared to placebo treatment
(Rautava et al., 2012b). In another study, maternal microbiota
was shown to shape the oﬀspring’s immune system. Mouse pups
born to GF mothers vs. GF mothers colonized with bacteria
during pregnancy were compared in terms of immune gene
expression and numbers of innate cells. Pups of colonized
GF mothers showed increased numbers of intestinal group
3 innate lymphoid cells, F4/80+CD11c+ mononuclear cells,
and increased epithelial antibacterial peptide gene expression
(Rautava et al., 2012b).

The postpartum period is also characterized by signiﬁcant
changes in the microbiota, and it has been reported that at least

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

4

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Pregnancy and the Microbiome

1 month after birth the mothers’ microbiotas do not yet return
to their baseline (Koren et al., 2012). Only a few studies have
studied this timeframe, and it would therefore be of interest
to investigate how long the postpartum transition period lasts,
and whether a return to baseline microbial populations ever
occurs. Since the postpartum period is also associated with
dramatic hormonal changes including a signiﬁcant decrease
in progesterone and estrogen levels, it would be interesting
to test the direct eﬀects of the hormonal changes on the
microbiome.

THE VAGINAL MICROBIOTA DURING
PREGNANCY

in
The human vaginal microbiota is a key component
the defense system against microbial and viral
infections,
conferring protection against disease (Turovskiy et al., 2011).
The vaginal microbiome is dominated by many species
including Lactobacillus and members of
the Clostridiales,
Bacteriodales, and Actinomycetales (Aagaard et al., 2012). Within
the Lactobacillus genus, the most frequently isolated species
are: Lactobacillus gasseri, Lactobacillus crispatus, Lactobacillus
jensenii, and Lactobacillus iners, which all promote various
aspects of vaginal health. Speciﬁcally, these lactic acid producing
bacteria can create a barrier against pathogen invasion by
maintaining a low pH (< 4.5) and by secreting metabolites
that play an important role in inhibition of bacterial and viral
infection in the urogenital tract (Martin et al., 1999; McLean and
Rosenstein, 2000). In contrast, pH-values around 5.0 were found
to correlate with vaginosis (Ravel et al., 2011).

As in the gut, the vaginal microbiome undergoes signiﬁcant
changes during pregnancy, including a signiﬁcant decrease in
overall diversity, increased stability (the community composition
changes over time), and enrichment with Lactobacillus species
(Aagaard et al., 2012). These correlate with a decrease in the
vaginal pH and an increase in vaginal secretions (Prince et al.,
2014a). Vaginal microbial compositions were found to diﬀer
according to gestational age, while the communities at the later
stages of pregnancy resembled those of the non-pregnant state
(Aagaard et al., 2012). The dominant Lactobacillus species in
pregnancy varies according to ethnic group; while L. jensenii
is predominantly observed in women of Asian and Caucasian
ethnicity, L. gasseri is absent in samples from Black women
(MacIntyre et al., 2015).

A study characterizing the vaginal microbiota of pregnant
and non-pregnant African-Americans reported that during
pregnancy, one of
the changes is dominance of a single
Lactobacillus species over others (Romero et al., 2014a). This may
be due to the fact that some Lactobacillus species have bactericidal
activities against other species, ensuring their predominance and
low variability, which may help in protection against infections
during pregnancy (Spurbeck and Arvidson, 2010).

Contrastingly, a recent study by DiGiulio et al. 
did not identify any signiﬁcant alteration in vaginal microbial
components
they found
throughout pregnancy. However,
in the post-partum period in which
distinct diﬀerences

vaginal communities were more similar to the gut microbiota
communities, with Lactobacillus being replaced by various
including Peptoniphilus, Prevotella, and
anaerobic bacteria,
Anaerococcus. These various alterations may persist
for as
long as a year after delivery (DiGiulio et al., 2015). The
postpartum vaginal microbiome was also characterized by
gradual depletion of Lactobacillus species,
increased alpha-
diversity, and enrichment of bacteria associated with vaginosis,
such as Actinobacteria, in 40% of the subjects at 6 weeks after
birth (as opposed to only 2% of the subjects during pregnancy;
MacIntyre et al., 2015).

THE ORAL MICROBIOTA DURING
PREGNANCY

The oral microbiome includes up to 600 diverse species including
Streptococci, Lactobacilli, Staphylococci, Corynebacteria, etc.,
residing in diﬀerent microenvironments within the oral cavity
(teeth,
tongue, palates, etc., Dewhirst et al., 2010). When
comparing the abundance of seven common bacterial species
in the oral cavity of non-pregnant women, early pregnancy,
mid-pregnancy, and late pregnancy, the total viable microbial
counts in all stages of pregnancy were higher than those of the
non-pregnant women, especially in early pregnancy (Fujiwara
et al., 2015), and levels of the pathogenic bacteria Porphyromonas
gingivalis and Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans in the
subgingival plaque, were signiﬁcantly higher during the early
and middle stages of pregnancy, compared to the non-pregnant
group (Fujiwara et al., 2015). These results were further
reinforced in an additional study, showing higher levels of
A. actinomycetemcomitans in the second and third trimesters
of pregnancy compared to non-pregnant women (Borgo
et al., 2014). Additionally, Candida levels were signiﬁcantly
higher during middle and late pregnancy compared to non-
pregnant women, further demonstrating a higher prevalence of
periodontal pathogens in pregnancy.

While some eﬀorts have been made to elucidate mechanisms
by which pregnancy leads to changes in the oral composition,
these pathways remain unclear. It has been suggested that
the microbiota during
progesterone and estrogen aﬀect
pregnancy, but these eﬀects have not been fully deciphered nor
directly proven, other than the ﬁnding that estrogens enhance
Candida infections (Kumar, 2013; Fujiwara et al., 2015). It is
likely that the overall immune state during pregnancy plays
a role leading to increased oral microbial load. Intriguingly,
numerous correlations have been suggested between oral disease
and pregnancy complications and outcomes, as described
below.

THE PLACENTAL MICROBIOTA

The placenta is one of the most poorly understood human organs,
particularly with regard to the presence of microbes within it.
Until recently, the dogma was that the fetus and the placenta
are germ free, and that such a sterile environment is essential
to protect the fetus from infections. It was believed that cases

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

5

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Pregnancy and the Microbiome

of placental contamination were caused by infection originating
from the lower genital tract (Goldenberg et al., 2000). However,
several lines of evidence suggest the presence of bacteria in the
normal placenta, itself.

In 1982, Kovalovszki et al. were the ﬁrst to describe the
presence of aerobic bacteria in 16% of tested placenta samples
using a culture-dependent approach, and concluded that bacteria
can be detected in the placenta without any histological evidence
of chorioamnionitis (Kovalovszki et al., 1982). Since then,
several additional reports described bacteria in the placenta
(Goldenberg et al., 2000; Dominguez-Bello et al., 2010; Hyman
et al., 2014; Romero et al., 2014a; MacIntyre et al., 2015).
Using whole genome shotgun sequencing (WGS) of samples
from 320 subjects, Aagaard et al. reported that the placenta
contains a unique microbiome (Aagaard et al., 2014). When
characterizing the placental microbial community, the major
phylum was Proteobacteria, and compared to all other organs, the
composition was most similar to the oral microbiota, including
species such as Prevotella tannerae and Neisseria (Aagaard
et al., 2014). The similarity between the oral and placental
microbiota suggests that bacteria may pass from the oral cavity
to the placenta, possibly explaining the many observations of
women with periodontal disease that have an increased risk of
pregnancy complications (Gibbs et al., 1992; Jeﬀerson, 2012;
Mysorekar and Cao, 2014; Prince et al., 2014b). Additionally,
several studies (Figure 1), using cultivation and PCR techniques,
found microbes in amniotic ﬂuid and umbilical cord blood in
healthy asymptomatic women, as well as in those with pregnancy
complications (DiGiulio et al., 2010a,b; Romero et al., 2014b).
It is important to note that the microbial density present in
the placenta is very low, requiring precise veriﬁcation in all
cases that research results are not due to contamination. This is
especially true with samples in which the placenta was collected
after vaginal delivery and is therefore prone to contaminations
from the birth canal, as opposed to samples in which the placenta
was collected during C-section in a sterile manner.

Nonetheless, these initial ﬁndings posit further questions
regarding the localization of the bacteria within the placenta, and
whether diﬀerent bacterial populations are present at diﬀerent
placental sites, as the placenta includes diﬀerent niches, both
in terms of interaction with the maternal vs. fetal circulation,
and oxygen levels. Another intriguing issue is whether microbial
components are necessary for healthy placental development and
function, and the underlying mechanisms of these eﬀects.

THE ROLE OF DYSBIOSIS AND
INFECTIONS IN PREGNANCY
COMPLICATIONS

Pregnancy complications such as preeclampsia, eclampsia,
intrauterine fetal death, intra-uterine growth restriction (IUGR),
placental abruption, and preterm birth, are observed in
approximately one in every six pregnancies, and can impact
both maternal and fetal health and survival (Kujovich, 2004).
Although these complications aﬀect many pregnant women
the etiology in most cases is unknown (Rizzo
worldwide,

and Arduini, 2009). It has long been suggested that bacterial
infections may be correlated with pregnancy complications,
and may even induce these states (Seong et al., 2008). With
the emergence of microbiome research and the realization that
changes in the maternal microbiome compositions occur during
pregnancy, it has been suggested that there may be correlations
between the microbial communities present, and the health of the
pregnancy (Mysorekar and Cao, 2014). Thus, the search began
for microbial markers associated with pregnancy complications.
In this regard, it is important to distinguish between the normal
and healthy microbial changes that occur during pregnancy,
vs. undesired changes, which may be linked to pregnancy
complication states.

When studying the vaginal microbiome, Romero et al. did
not ﬁnd any association between the degree of alpha diversity
and pregnancy outcomes (Romero et al., 2014a), while two
other studies did demonstrate a correlation between high alpha
diversity and preterm birth (Hyman et al., 2014). DiGiulio
and colleagues identiﬁed candidate vaginal communities in the
early stages of pregnancy that were signiﬁcantly associated
with an elevated rate of preterm birth (DiGiulio et al., 2015).
These communities include higher abundances of Gardnerella
lower abundances of Lactobacillus sp., and
and Ureaplasma,
higher alpha diversity. Mechanistically, abnormal changes in the
vaginal microbiota during pregnancy, such as decreased levels
of Lactobacillus sp., may lead to infections, and production
of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, and prostaglandins, which can
cause uterine contractions and weaken fetal membranes (Park
et al., 2005; Lajos et al., 2008). Additionally, presence of certain
fungi, such as vaginal colonization of Candida albicans even
when asymptomic, is correlated to higher rates of preterm birth
(Farr et al., 2015). Although the eﬀects are not direct, it was
suggested that beyond the healthy changes related to pregnancy,
gut dysbiosis may induce pregnancy complications by impairing
maternal adaptation (Zhang et al., 2015).

infections

Correlations

between oral

and pregnancy
complications have been shown in various studies (Zi et al.,
2014). Maternal periodontal disease has been shown to increase
risk of preterm birth (Oﬀenbacher et al., 2006). While at ﬁrst, the
connection between oral infections and pregnancy complications
may sound farfetched; there are several mechanisms by which
such a link may occur. One theory posits that lipopolysaccharides
(LPS) from Gram-negative periodontopathic bacteria such as
Porphyromonas gingivalis may increase inﬂammatory mediators
and prostaglandin production, leading to preterm birth (ElAttar,
1976; Kim and Amar, 2006). Alternatively, it was suggested that
hematogenous spread of oral microbes to the placenta might be
a driver of preterm birth (Aagaard et al., 2014).

as

for

Finally,

evidence

a placental microbiome

is
accumulating, one emerging question is whether these bacterial
communities are diﬀerent in cases of pregnancy complications
such as preterm births. When comparing placental bacterial
populations in preterm vs. term deliveries, higher abundance
of several taxa, such as Burkholderia, Streptosporangium, and
Anaeromyxobacter, were found in the placentas of pregnancies
delivered preterm, while Paenibacillus was enriched in placentas
term (Romero et al., 2014a). However, using
delivered at

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

6

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Pregnancy and the Microbiome

histologic stains, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were seen between
preterm and term placentas (Stout et al., 2013). While some
of these studies indicate changes in bacterial composition of
the placenta correlating to preterm deliveries, more research is
needed to validate microbial placental signatures associated with
preterm birth.

EARLY BACTERIAL COLONIZATION OF
THE FETUS

Until recently, it was assumed that newborns are born completely
germ free, and that the initial colonization of the newborn gut
occurs during birth. However, several studies suggest that the
colonization of the fetus begins prior to birth. In 2008, Jimenez
et al. orally inoculated pregnant mice with a genetically labeled
Enterococcus faecium strain and, afterward, were able to isolate
this bacterium from the meconium (ﬁrst stool) of oﬀspring
delivered by C-section (no labeled bacteria were found in the
uninoculated control group; Jimenez et al., 2008). This ﬁnding
implies that maternal bacteria can enter the GI tract of the
fetus. However, direct proof for microbial colonization of the
fetus, as well as the potential mechanisms by which bacteria pass
from the mother to the fetus are still unknown. In a human
study in which pregnant mothers received probiotics compared
to placebo controls, bacterial alterations were detected in the
infant meconium, and placenta (Rautava et al., 2012b) once
again alluding to a prenatal eﬀect on microbial composition.
The notion of early microbial colonization of the fetus suggests
that from the very beginning of development, there are dual
interactions between the developing host and microbiota, and
that there is some type of early inheritance of the maternal
microbial components.

THE MECONIUM MICROBIOME

Just like the placenta and fetus, the meconium was considered
in the past to be sterile (Koleva et al., 2015), however several
recent studies have shown using a variety of methods presence
of bacterial populations including Enterococcus, Escherichia,
Leuconostoc, Lactococcus, and Streptococcus (Dominguez-Bello
et al., 2010; Gosalbes et al., 2013; Hansen et al., 2015) Compared
to adult fecal samples, the infant meconium shows lower species
diversity, higher between-subject variation, and enrichment of
Proteobacteria at the expense of reduction of Bacteroidetes (Hu
et al., 2013). Ardissone et al. found a correlation between
newborn gestational age and meconium microbial compositions.
Speciﬁcally,
the Enterobacter, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus,
Photorhabdus, and Tannerela genera were more abundant in the
preterm infants’ meconium (Ardissone et al., 2014).

MODE OF DELIVERY AND THE NEWBORN
MICROBIOME

In 2013, Gosalbes et al. found no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between
the meconium microbiota of vaginal vs. Cesarean section (C-
section) delivered infants (Gosalbes et al., 2013). However,

the gut microbiota of

several additional studies have shown distinct eﬀects of delivery
mode on the gut microbiota composition of newborn babies.
Generally, the gut microbiota of vaginally born infants is ﬁrst
colonized by bacteria from the maternal vagina, characterized
by enrichment in the Prevotella, Sneathia, and Lactobacillus
genera, and also includes bacteria present in the maternal
gut (Mackie et al., 1999; Dominguez-Bello et al., 2010). In
contrast,
infants born by C-section
indicates a relative resemblance to maternal skin and oral
microbiota dominated by Propionibacterium, Corynebacterium,
and Streptococcus (Backhed et al., 2015; MacIntyre et al., 2015).
The infants born by C-section also exhibit delayed colonization
of the phylum Bacteroidetes, and lower alpha diversity during
the ﬁrst 2 years of life (Jakobsson et al., 2014). However, the
diﬀerences in species diversity between delivery modes are
decreased after 4 months, and almost disappear by 12 months
of age (Backhed et al., 2015). The microbiome of C-section
delivered infants was also found to contain a higher proportion
of bacterial antibiotic-resistance genes compared to vaginally
delivered infants. This, together with a higher abundance of
Staphylococcus in C-section newborns compared to vaginal
births, may explain why 64–82% of reported cases of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) skin infections in
newborns occur in C-section delivered infants (Centers for
Disease Prevention, 2006).

Interestingly, the mode of delivery has an eﬀect on the infant’s
oral microbiome, as well (Lif Holgerson et al., 2011). Immediately
after delivery, the oral microbial communities of C-section and
vaginally delivered newborns resemble that of the mother’s skin
or vagina, respectively (Dominguez-Bello et al., 2010). It was
further shown that the oral bacterial populations diﬀer at 3
months of age between C-section and vaginally delivered infants.
Generally, more bacterial taxa were detected in the infants
delivered vaginally compared with infants delivered by C-section,
with Slackia exigua detected only in infants delivered by C-
section. In a diﬀerent study of infants infected with S. mutans,
involved in dental caries, those delivered by C-section acquired
infection almost 1 year earlier than did vaginally delivered
infants, and the genotype of these bacteria, was similar to that
of their mothers (Li et al., 2005).

It has been suggested that disruption of vaginal bacteria
transmission via C-section can have
long-term medical
implications: a few studies reported that C-section delivery
increases
the incidence of celiac disease (Decker et al.,
2010; Marild et al., 2012), obesity and asthma (Kero et al.,
2002). Moreover, the administration of probiotics (including
Lactobacillus sp.) from birth until age 6 months reduced the
incidence of allergy at 5 years of age in C-section, but not
vaginally delivered children (Kuitunen et al., 2009). However,
none of
these studies directly tested the role of bacteria
colonizing the newborn in the development of disease. The
mode of delivery may also have an eﬀect on the maturation
of the immune system. Jakobsson et al. found lower levels of
the T helper cell-related chemokines CXCL10 and CXCL11
in the blood of
infants delivered by C-section compared
with vaginally born infants. Moreover, bacteria from the
genus Bacteroides (which are more abundant after vaginal

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

7

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Pregnancy and the Microbiome

distinct

between

diﬀerences

delivery) aﬀect the maturity of the immune system (Kelly
et al., 2004), suggesting that C-section may lead to immune
disorders.
The

the microbiome
compositions of C-section vs. vaginal delivered infants have
led scientists to expose C-section born infants to vaginal ﬂuids
containing microbiota at birth and test the eﬀects on the infant’s
microbial composition up to 30 days later (Dominguez-Bello
et al., 2016). When comparing the gut, oral, and skin bacterial
communities of the C-section delivered babies, those exposed
to vaginal ﬂuids revealed signiﬁcantly more vagina-associated
bacteria, making their compositions more similar to vaginally
born infants.

In summary,

it appears evident that the mode of birth
aﬀects the newborn’s microbiome composition (Figure 2). It
still remains unclear if these diﬀerent bacterial communities
in infancy have long-term eﬀects in terms of microbiome
composition, metabolism, and overall health.

GUT MICROBIOTA DURING THE FIRST 2
YEARS OF LIFE

From the time of birth, infants acquire microbes from their
environment, from their diet, and from people surrounding
them. The ﬁrst 2 years of life, which are characterized by
enormous dietary changes, new environmental exposures, and
maturation of the immune system therefore have a strong
inﬂuence on the infant’s microbiota. The two most important
factors found to shape the infant gut microbiota are mode of
birth and feeding (breastmilk vs. formula and then solid foods;
Figure 2). In the ﬁrst months of life, the gut microbiota is less
stable than later in childhood, and there are changes in the
phylogenetic diversity. Koenig et al. showed, by following an
infant over a 2.5-year period, that the alpha diversity of the
infant’s gut microbiota gradually increases over time (Koenig
et al., 2011). However, the high β-diversity observed at birth
(which is higher than that observed in adults) is reduced by
12 months of age (Backhed et al., 2015). In terms of function,
at 12 months of age there is more similarity to the mother’s
gut metagenome, compared to newborns, implying that the
microbiome matures during the ﬁrst year of life. Speciﬁcally,
as the nutrition and energy sources change throughout the ﬁrst
year, so do the microbial energy utilization components: while
microbial genes required for degradation of sugars from milk are
most abundant at 4 months, microbial genes degrading complex
sugars and starch are more abundant at 12 months (Backhed
et al., 2015).

Additionally, illness and environmental changes such as fever,
antibiotic treatment, and changes in diet can cause large shifts
in the bacterial compositions and abundance of some taxonomic
groups (Koenig et al., 2011). The diﬀerences in microbiota
throughout development of the healthy infant can be plotted
to show the gradual changes according to age. Malnutrition in
young children was shown to aﬀect their microbiome causing
it to resemble that of earlier developmental stages (Smith et al.,
2013).

THE HUMAN MILK MICROBIOME

Human milk is produced by the mother to promote the normal
and healthy development of her infant oﬀspring. This ﬂuid
is considered to be the optimal source for all the nutrition
factors that the infant needs, containing many proteins, lipids,
and 200 types of oligosaccharides (carbohydrates) that are not
found elsewhere (Kunz et al., 2000). Until recently, the prevailing
paradigm was that milk was sterile; however, recent studies have
proven otherwise by showing that human milk not only contains
bacteria, but is the predominant source for establishing a “healthy
microbiome” in the newborn (Heikkila and Saris, 2003; Martin
et al., 2007, 2009). In 2011, Hunt et al. found that the milk
microbiome is extremely diverse, and suggested a “core human
milk microbiome” after ﬁnding nine operational taxonomic
units (OTUs) consistently over samples from 16 subjects (Hunt
et al., 2011). Further characterization revealed that the microbial
composition changes over the course of the lactation period.
The most dominant bacteria in the colostrum (the ﬁrst milk
produced during late pregnancy, and contains antibodies)
included Weisella, Leuconostoc, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus,
and Lactococcus, whereas milk samples collected 1–6 months
post-partum harbored oral cavity related bacteria such as
Veillonella, Leptotrichia, and Prevotella, perhaps due to frequent
interaction with the infant’s oral microbiota (Cabrera-Rubio
et al., 2012).

Maternal weight was found to be a major inﬂuencing factor in
shaping milk bacterial composition. In obese pregnant women,
higher abundance of the genus Staphylococcus, namely S. aureus
was reported over the ﬁrst 6 months of lactation, as well as
higher abundance of Lactobacillus in the ﬁrst month, compared
with samples from mothers of normal weight (Cabrera-Rubio
et al., 2012). Interestingly, high levels of S. aureus are also
found in the gut microbiota of overweight children; however,
the source of this bacterium is, as yet, unclear (Kalliomaki et al.,
2008). Future research is needed to determine whether the milk
microbial populations associated with maternal obesity may have
implications on the oﬀspring’s weight.

The source of the milk microbial populations is considered
to be from the gut, and the mechanism by which bacteria
travel from the gut into the mammary glands is thought to
be facilitated by hormonal changes that occur during and
following gestation. More speciﬁcally, elevation of progesterone
may increase gut permeability, which could assist in bacterial
transmission into the bloodstream and subsequently into the
mother’s mammary glands (Jeurink et al., 2013). It will be
interesting to further test the function and importance of the
milk microbiome—whether these bacteria play roles in milk
metabolism or immunity, and to what extent they aﬀect the
infant’s microbial populations.

EFFECTS OF BREAST-FEEDING VS.
FORMULA ON INFANTS

are profound diﬀerences

There
in the gut microbiota
composition of breast-fed vs. formula-fed infants (summarized

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

8

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Pregnancy and the Microbiome

FIGURE 2 | Microbiome changes in the newborn. Text and arrows refer to: changes in speciﬁc taxonomy (green), general changes (pink), and community diversity
(orange). (A) Text refers to changes in vaginal birth vs. Caesarian section (B). Text refers to changes in breast milk vs. formula feeding.

the

in Figure 2B). Breast milk contains oligosaccharides, complex
carbohydrates that cannot be digested by the infant. However,
infant’s bacteria including Biﬁdobacterium,
some of
Lactobacillus, and Bacteroides have the ability to degrade these
oligosaccharides into small sugars that may be utilized as an
energy source (e.g., lactose), giving them an advantage over
competing bacteria (Sela et al., 2011; Manthey et al., 2014). The
remaining small sugars can be further metabolized by glycolytic
microbes present in the infant,
including lactate-producing
bacteria such as Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, and Enterococcus.

This amazing co-evolution of the maternal milk biosynthesis
and the infant’s microbiota components that can beneﬁcially
the young holobiont
utilize it, enhances the nutrition of
(Bode, 2012).

Studies in the last two decades revealed that Biﬁdobacteria
are the most abundant organisms in breast-fed infant guts,
whereas the gut microbiota of formula-fed infants is dominated
by Enterococci and Clostridia (Balmer and Wharton, 1989).
Furthermore, Bezirtzoglou et al. observed that the gut of formula-
fed infant contained fewer bacterial cells and more species

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

9

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Pregnancy and the Microbiome

diversity compared to that of breast-fed infants (Bezirtzoglou
et al., 2011).

Not surprisingly, the method of feeding (breast-feeding or
infant formula) aﬀects the infant’s oral microbiome as well.
Three-month old breast-fed infants contained oral lactobacilli
with antimicrobial properties that were not found in formula-fed
infants (Holgerson et al., 2013; Vestman et al., 2013).

The weaning period with transition to solid foods has
a signiﬁcant role in shaping the gut bacterial composition.
After weaning, the infant’s gut microbiota is enriched with
species that are prevalent in adults, including Bacteroidetes and
Firmicutes from the Clostridia class: Clostridium, Ruminococcus,
Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, and Anaerostipes (Valles et al., 2014;
Backhed et al., 2015). Additionally, levels of fecal short chain
fatty acids were shown to be higher after introducing solid
foods to infants (Koenig et al., 2011). The shift to solid food, as
well as increased exposure to xenobiotics, change the microbial
populations and enriches species which are able to utilize
nutrients such as carbohydrates, and are involved in vitamin
biosynthesis and xenobiotic degradation, thereby maturing the
gut microbiome (Backhed et al., 2015).

In summary, there appear to be signiﬁcant diﬀerences in
microbiota composition depending on diet and feeding mode.
However, further research is needed to fully understand the
meaning of these distinctions, and to test whether they have any
long-term eﬀects.

CONCLUSIONS

In this review, we discuss the microbiome compositions
during three crucial developmental stages: pregnancy, birth,
and infancy. These stages are accompanied by numerous
physiological changes, including changes in hormonal levels,
inﬂammation, and metabolic states. Pregnancy and infancy
are both times of growth and increased weight gain, changes
in diet, and alterations in immune system components. The
birth process itself includes many simultaneous environmental
and developmental changes, among them detachment from
initiation of breathing, exposure to air and
the placenta,
outer environment, and active use of the GI tract. Obviously,
these numerous events and changes must be synchronized in
order to achieve the healthy normal development enabling
life.

We describe signiﬁcant alterations in microbial compositions
in a variety of body sites (gut, vagina, placenta, breast milk, etc.)
throughout these developmental processes. However, much work
remains to decipher the meaning of these changes, and their role
within the overall process leading to healthy pregnancy, birth,
and early development. We believe that there is signiﬁcance to
the microbial changes seen throughout development, and that
additional research will allow this puzzle to be solved. However,
it may be impossible to decipher the meaning of the changes
without the full developmental context. For example, similar
characteristics and changes occur in pregnancy as in metabolic
syndrome, including dysbiosis, inﬂammation, and weight gain.
In both cases, the bacteria aﬀect host metabolism and immunity;

however the developmental context is crucial for diﬀerentiating
between the “beneﬁcial” nature of these changes in pregnancy, as
they promote energy storage in fat tissue and growth of the fetus,
as opposed to their “harmful” nature in the context of metabolic
syndrome.

The complex interactions between the host and the microbiota
during pregnancy and early development remains to be fully
understood. Most of
the studies presented in this review
are association studies, highlighting changes in microbiota
composition, richness, and diversity between groups. However,
few studies analyzed the actual eﬀects of microbial changes on
host development (e.g., by fecal transplant experiments), or even
the metabolomics and transcriptional aﬀects. It seems likely
that there is no simple answer to the question of whether the
microbiome aﬀects or is aﬀected by pregnancy, birth, and early
development, and it appears that the eﬀects are bidirectional.

When thinking of pregnancy, one of the ﬁrst and perhaps
most important changes that occur are hormonal changes. In
this regard, it has already been shown that the microbiome both
aﬀects and is aﬀected by the endocrine system. The microbiota
has the ability to produce and secrete hormones or hormone
analogs, and respond to and regulate host hormones. On the
other hand, host hormone levels can inﬂuence bacterial growth,
rendering the interplay between microbiota and hormones
bidirectional. Nonetheless, precise data on the eﬀects of female
hormones on the microbiota and vice versa are still needed.

the fetal

Another complex interconnection is found between the
microbiome and immune system. During pregnancy,
the
immune system must be modulated to allow for proper fetal
development (including development of
immune
system), as well as preventing fetal rejection by the maternal
immune system. The microbial components are greatly aﬀected
by immune modulation, but are also active players in the system.
there are dual eﬀects between the microbiome
and host metabolism. The microbiota is both aﬀected by the
host’s metabolic state (including dietary components and host
hormones), as well as aﬀecting host metabolism (in terms of
energy homeostasis, fat storage, and hormonal regulation). This
can be demonstrated by fecal transplantation to GF mice, leading
to phenotypes resembling metabolic syndrome (Harley and Karp,
2012; Koren et al., 2012).

Finally,

the

beneﬁcial

Identifying

and detrimental microbial
components and their roles during pregnancy, parturition,
post-partum, and in early development may have extremely
important implications in terms of diet, antibiotic treatments,
probiotics, and potential therapies for disease states throughout
all developmental stages. Therefore, the microbial interactions
during these times may have clinical relevance in the design of
the desired type of antibiotics and/or probiotics for pregnant
women or newborns. For instance, if speciﬁc microbial species
in human milk prove to have long-term health beneﬁts,
they may be administered to formula-fed newborns, as well.
Alternatively, probiotic or antibiotic treatments could be
designed to alleviate pregnancy complication states, or at least,
microbial biomarkers could be identiﬁed for the early diagnosis
of such conditions. We are therefore conﬁdent that future
research in these ﬁelds will provide useful clinical knowledge,

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

10

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Pregnancy and the Microbiome

as well as a broader understanding of healthy vs. abnormal
development.

FUNDING

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

MO, HN, and OK reviewed the literature and wrote the
manuscript.

The work by MO and OK was supported by the Marie
Curie International Reintegration Grant (FP7-PEOPLE-2013-
CIG-630956) and the Ministry of Health, State of Israel (3-0000-
10451). HN was supported by Ministry of Science, Technology &
Space, State of Israel. 
