H.E.  Blum  /  Advances  in  Medical  Sciences  62   414–420 

415

thousands  or  ten  thousands  of  single-stranded  DNA  species,
reverse  transcribed  RNA  (cDNA)  or  oligonucleotides  of  known
sequence  can  provide  a  global  gene  (genomics),  gene  expression
(transcriptomics,  proteomics)  or  metabolite 
(metabolomics)
proﬁle  (‘signature’)  that 
for  the  disease  of
individual  patients,  including  its  natural  course/prognosis  and
response  to  therapy.

is  characteristic 

(GWAS) 

In  2005  the  international  haplotype  map  (HapMap)  project
was  initiated  to  identify,  based  on  genome-wide  association
studies 
in  ethnically  different  populations,  single
nucleotide  polymorphisms  (SNPs)  and  their  association  with
speciﬁc  human  diseases  and  individual  phenotypic  character-
istics,  respectively    Through  GWAS  an  increasing  number  of
gene  loci  have  been  identiﬁed  that  are  associated  with  individual
(future)  phenotypic  traits,  such  as  hair  or  eye  color,  height,  body
mass  index  and  others  as  well  as  with  the  disposition  to  develop  a
speciﬁc  disease    Further,  genetic  variants  are  associated  with
the  individuals’
  response  to  drug  treatment,  e.g.,  to  lithium  
Overall,  GWAS  allow  an  increasingly  better  understanding  of
disease  pathogenesis  and  a  more  accurate  assessment  of  the
individual  risk  to  develop  a  speciﬁc  disease.  Clinically,  this  may
eventually  translate  into  clinical  advances  in  disease  prevention,
early  diagnosis  and  therapy.  It  should  be  cautioned,  however,  that
the  contribution  of  a  deﬁned  SNP  to  the  risk  assessment  for  a
given  disease  must  be  weighed  against  established  clinical
parameters  and  needs  to  be  carefully  evaluated  before  entering
clinical  practice.

2.  Review

2.1.  The  human  microbiome  project

The  human  microbiome  project  (HMP)  was  established  in  2007
as  another  global  consortium    The  HMP  and  the 
‘Meta-
genomics  of  the  Human  Intestinal  Tract  (Meta-HiT)  Consortium
Europe’
  aim  at  the  sequencing  of  all  microbes  (eukaryotes,  archaea,
bacteria,  viruses)  that  inhabit  speciﬁc  body  sites,  such  as  the
mouth,  throat  and  airways,  stomach  and  intestine,  the  urogenital
system  and  the  skin,  respectively  .  Recent  data  demon-
strate  that  speciﬁc  compositions  of  the  microbial  community  are
associated  with  health  and  disease   and  suggest  that  the
detailed  characterization,  function  and  variation  of  the  microbial
community  will  reveal  important  commensal  host-microbe  as  well
as  microbe-microbe  interactions  with  diagnostic,  therapeutic  and
preventive  implications  

While  the  HMP  has  meanwhile  developed  into  a  major 

ﬁeld  of
biomedical  research, 
in
particular  has  turned  out  to  play  a  major  role  in  human  health
and  disease  pathogenesis  as  will  be  discussed  in  more  detail  below


intestinal  microbial  community 

the 

2.2.  The  intestinal  microbial  community

In  recent  years  the  intestinal  microbial  community  has  been
It  represents  a  microbial  ecosystem

in  great  detail. 

studied 

Fig.  1.  (A)  Different  microbiomes  in  humans;  (B)  The  intestinal  microbiome  in  healthy  individuals  and  patients  

416 

H.E.  Blum  /  Advances  in  Medical  Sciences  62   414–420

identiﬁed  bacterial  species 

consisting  of  trillion  microbial  cells  with  an  aggregate  9.9  million
microbial  genes  across  the  fecal  microbiome    While  until
recently,  the  environment  in  utero  has  been  considered  sterile,
DNA-based  analyses 
in  maternal
ﬂuid  and  meconium.  The  colonization  of  the
placenta,  amniotic 
human  gut  begins  at  birth  with  a  rapid  expansion  of  bacterial
diversity  and  is  characterized  by  a  successively  changing  compo-
sition  that  eventually  becomes  relatively  stable  in  adulthood  
While  the  speciﬁc  microbial  species  and  subspecies  and  their
proportions  vary  greatly  from  person  to  person  the  individual
microbiome  is  unique  and  becomes  more  diverse  in  the  elderly.
intestinal
microbial  community  are  endogenous  and  exogenous  factors
  Examples  are  mode  of  delivery  of  the  neonates,  diet
(dietary  supplements,  breast-feeding,  formula-feeding),  xenobi-
including  antibiotics  and  other  drugs    Further,
otics, 
infections  and  exposure  to  environmental  microbial  agents  are
established  risk  factors  for  childhood  diseases,  such  as  obesity  and
allergy    Recent  evidence  further  suggests  that  human
the  abundance  of  speciﬁc
genetic  variation  also 
members  of  the  intestinal  microbial  community  

the  composition  of 

inﬂuences 

Important 

factors 

the 

for 

Taken  together,  the  emerging  data  suggest  that  the  detailed
characterization  of  the  human  intestinal  microbiome  composition,
function  and  variation  across  different  body  sites  will  reveal
important  commensal  host-microbe  as  well  as  microbe-,  microbe
interactions  that  may  play  a  role  in  human  health  and  disease.

In  view  of  the  numerous  and  diverse  physiological  functions  of
the  intestinal  microbiota  in  human  health  (Table  1)  it  is  not
surprising  that  it  is  also  involved  in  gastrointestinal  as  well  as  non-
gastrointestinal  diseases,  such  as  obesity/metabolic  syndrome,  and
atherosclerosis/cardiovascular  as  well  as  neurologic/psychiatric
diseases,  making  it  one  of  the  most  dynamic  current  topics  in
biomedical  research  (Table  2).  In  the  following,  a  few  examples  will
be  discussed  in  more  detail.

2.2.1.  Inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases  and  colon  cancer

The  inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases  (IBD)  in  humans  include
ulcerative  colitis 
(CD).  These  are
(UC)  and  Crohn  disease 
characterized  by  inﬂammation  limited  to  the  mucosal  layer  of
the  colon 
the
gastrointestinal  tract,  including  extraintestinal  sites  in  CD.  While
the  pathogenesis  of  IBD  is  not  fully  understood    it  is  clear  that
its  pathology  depends  among  others  on  the  intestinal  microbial
‘IBD-
community    Further,  a  case-control  study  identiﬁed 

involvement  of 

in  UC  and 

transmural 

the 

Table  1
Functions  of  the  intestinal  microbial  community  in  human  health  (examples).
