Zhou and Gallins

Host Trait Prediction

levels of taxonomy, with intriguing thoughts about the
of
interplay and use of molecular function descriptors vs. taxonomic
descriptors, the reader is referred to Knights et al. Existing studies often report disease-associated dysbiosis,
a microbial imbalance inside the host, but such associations can
have a wide range of interpretations. Individual studies have
also suﬀered from small sample sizes, inconsistent ﬁndings, and
a lack of standard processing and analysis methods (Duvallet
et al., The remainder of this paper is written in several sections. Experienced modelers can skip this section. Several methods have been proposed to reduce the number
of OTU features using correlation and taxonomy information,
including Fizzy (Ditzler et al., Aspects of the
approaches are supervised and thus must be handled inside a
cross-validation procedure. In particular,
neural networks have received considerable recent attention, but
it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd quantitative evidence for the additional
predictive ability in comparison to other methods. Here λ is a tuning parameter that can be optimized as part of
cross-validation. 2018), and to use these PC scores as trait predictors. Kernel-penalized regression, an extension of PCA, was utilized by
Randolph et al. For continuous traits, a weighted average of
the k nearest neighbors is used, sometimes weighted (e.g., by the
inverse of their distance from the new point). An ensemble of decision trees (or regression trees
for continuous y) is built by performing bootstrapping on the
dataset and averaging or taking the modal prediction from trees
(a process known as “bagging”)(Figure 1C), with subsampling
of features used to reduce generalization error (Ho, 1995). Paper

Dataset

Trait

Samples Cases Controls

Taxa

Level

Method

Metric

Value

Pasolli et al., 2014 Colorectal cancer

121

48

73

503

Species Random forest

Qin et al., 2017

141

42

99

1,171

Species Bayes net

Colorectal cancer
(CRC)

141

53

88

783

Species Bayes net

Wu et al., The size of each dataset (#
cases/controls ×# OTUs) is shown in the title. ( The output layer are predictions based on the
data from the input and hidden layers. In most cases, having
just one hidden layer with one neuron is reasonable to ﬁt
the model. The true-positive rate is also known as sensitivity, or a probability
of detection. Note that the AUC is invariant to monotone
transformations of ˆy. A Literature Review
We conducted a literature review of published host-trait
microbiome prediction studies that used cross-validation and
reported a measure of prediction accuracy. for each of

For our analyses, we analyzed four traits (three binary and
one continuous) from three datasets with varying sample sizes

FIGURE 3 | ROC curves after collapsing OTUs to the genus level (A) the Singh dataset, (B) the Vincent dataset, and (C) the Goodrich dataset. cases vs. 25 healthy controls and 763 OTUs. In this dataset, individuals came from
the TwinsUK population, so we included only one individual
from each twin-pair. Finally, we ran the
hierarchical feature engineering (HFE) algorithm introduced by
Oudah and Henschel which results fewer informative
features, including individual OTUs and aggregated elements of
the taxonomy. Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org

10

June 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 579

Zhou and Gallins

Host Trait Prediction

R code for the comparisons is available at https://sites. RESULTS

were presented as AUC, accuracy, or balanced accuracy, but in
all instances higher values reﬂect better performance. Most of the studies used some form of higher-level
OTU aggregation, sometimes as high as the phylum level. datasets, most
methods were improved and brought to similar AUC values. 2019), oﬀers potentially useful
information
for integrative analyses.