Zhou and Gallins

Host Trait Prediction

levels of taxonomy, with intriguing thoughts about the
of
interplay and use of molecular function descriptors vs. taxonomic
descriptors, the reader is referred to Knights et al. Several features of OTU tables present challenges. Existing studies often report disease-associated dysbiosis,
a microbial imbalance inside the host, but such associations can
have a wide range of interpretations. Such
external validation can in principle result
in more robust
and generalizable models for prediction than models that are
validated internally only. Such sampling considerations are beyond our scope, and we
refer the reader to Chawla  Here we consider our sample
dataset to be representative of the population of its intended
downstream use. Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org

2

June 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 579

Zhou and Gallins

Host Trait Prediction

2.2. For example, researchers sometimes use a simple
holdout method in which a fraction 1/k of the data are randomly
selected as a test set, the remainder as training, and repeat
the process randomly with enough rounds to provide a stable
estimate of accuracy. Several methods have been proposed to reduce the number
of OTU features using correlation and taxonomy information,
including Fizzy (Ditzler et al., 2016), and HFE (Oudah and Henschel, 2018). In particular,
neural networks have received considerable recent attention, but
it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd quantitative evidence for the additional
predictive ability in comparison to other methods. The prediction
value is the estimate of the posterior mean E(Y|x) = Pr(Y =
1|X), used because it minimizes mean-squared error. 2018), and to use these PC scores as trait predictors. Euclidean
distance or correlation coeﬃcients are the most commonly used
distance metrics. An ensemble of decision trees (or regression trees
for continuous y) is built by performing bootstrapping on the
dataset and averaging or taking the modal prediction from trees
(a process known as “bagging”)(Figure 1C), with subsampling
of features used to reduce generalization error (Ho, 1995). Hidden layers use backpropagation to optimize the weights of
the input variables in order to improve the predictive power of
the model. Paper

Dataset

Trait

Samples Cases Controls

Taxa

Level

Method

Metric

Value

Pasolli et al., 2014

Liver cirrhosis

232

118

114

542

Species Random forest

Zeller et al., 2014 Colorectal cancer

121

48

73

503

Species Random forest

Qin et al., A bias term is also added in each step,
which can be thought of as analogous to the intercept of a
linear model. In most cases, having
just one hidden layer with one neuron is reasonable to ﬁt
the model. Note that the AUC is invariant to monotone
transformations of ˆy. A Literature Review
We conducted a literature review of published host-trait
microbiome prediction studies that used cross-validation and
reported a measure of prediction accuracy. for each of

For our analyses, we analyzed four traits (three binary and
one continuous) from three datasets with varying sample sizes

FIGURE 3 | ROC curves after collapsing OTUs to the genus level (A) the Singh dataset, (B) the Vincent dataset, and (C) the Goodrich dataset. google.com/ncsu.edu/zhouslab/home/software?, In addition,
after such feature reduction most methods performed more
similarly. 2019), oﬀers potentially useful
information
for integrative analyses.