The aim of the present study was to utilize Illumina
sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene and inferred meta-
genomics by open source software PICRUSt (Phyloge-
netic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of
Unobserved States  to investigate differences in
microbiome composition and function in the fecal and
colonic mucosa of mice treated with 5% DSS for 5 days. DNA extraction
from colonic mucosa samples was done using ZR Tissue
and Insect DNA kit (Zymo Research Corp.). DNA was quantiﬁed
using a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo
Scientiﬁc, Wilmington, DE, USA). Principle coordinate analysis (PCoA) of weighted UniFrac distances, a measure of b-diversity of bacterial community. ( a) Fecal
samples clustered separately according to treatment status of the mice, suggesting that DSS and control mice samples are composed of
distinct bacterial communities; (b) colon mucosa samples have shared bacterial communities. DSS, dextran sulphate sodium..

Of the 86 taxa, 56 had abundance greater than or equal
to 0.01% of community, whereas 30 were below 0.01%. 5a, Bacteroides
ovatus, Clostridium perfrigens, Helicobacter hepaticus, and
Parabacteroides distasonis; g. Desulfovibrio, Escherichia,
Helicobacter, Clostridium,
Parabacteroides,
Bacilli, Allobaculum, Coprobacillus, Bacteroides, rc4-4; and
unclassiﬁed members of f. Enterobacteriaceae, Clostri-
diaceae, Bacteroidaceae; o. RF39, RF32, Bacteroidales,
and Erysipelotrichales were positively correlated with
the DSS group but negatively correlated with the
control group. Microbiota composition at the phylum and lower
taxonomic levels in colonic mucosa samples
A total of 199,057 sequences were generated after quality
ﬁltering steps with an average of 24,882 high-quality
sequences per sample, which resulted in identiﬁcation
of 14 phyla and 151 taxa. Results of the
relative abundances of various phyla are summarized
in Fig. Bacterial taxa with relative
abundance of (cid:5)0.01% of community were analysed
using PLS-DA to identify bacteria that were most
characteristic of DSS or control treatments. Percentage of relative abundances of bacterial phyla for: (a) fecal samples and (b) colon mucosa samples. colitis and may reveal bacterial shifts at lower taxonomic
levels that could otherwise be missed. In this regard, it
was worth noting that more taxa were signiﬁcantly
associated with the DSS treatment in fecal samples
compared to the colonic samples; however, several
taxa including: Bacteroides ovatus, g. Clostridium, rc4-4;
f. Clostridiaceae, Bacteroidaceae; and o. Bacteroidales,
RF39, and RF32 were positively associated with the DSS
treatment in both fecal and colonic mucosa samples. Some of these taxa have been reported to increase
as a result of DSS  and although they may have
different roles, their association with DSS in both colonic
mucosa and in feces may indicate that they may play
signiﬁcant roles in the potentiation of the abnormal
inﬂammatory response seen in DSS-treated animals, and
could therefore be important as intervention targets
against the disease. Lending support to these results,
Berry et al.