Even though they have limitations
like all other models, they present some important
immunological and histopathological aspects of IBD in
humans  The most widely used and characterized
experimental model of erosion and inﬂammation related
to UC in mice is the dextran sulphate sodium (DSS)-
induced colitis, which is developed by DSS administration
either in the drinking water or via intragastric
catheter  The DSS induces a reproducible
acute colitis  however, there is some controversy
regarding the type of inﬂammation that is induced. The aim of the present study was to utilize Illumina
sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene and inferred meta-
genomics by open source software PICRUSt (Phyloge-
netic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of
Unobserved States  to investigate differences in
microbiome composition and function in the fecal and
colonic mucosa of mice treated with 5% DSS for 5 days. Five
and four mice were included in the DSS and control
groups, respectively. Blood was assessed using the Hemoccult II test
(Beckman coulter, Oakville, ON, Canada). DNA extraction and quality control
Approximately 200 mg of each fecal sample was used
for DNA extraction using ZR fecal DNA extraction kit
(Zymo Research Corp., Irvine, CA, USA). PCR
products were then puriﬁed using ZR-96 DNA Clean-up
Kit (ZYMO Research) to remove primers, dNTPs and
reaction components. Finally,
15% of PhiX control library was spiked into the amplicon
pool
to improve the unbalanced and biased base
composition, a known characteristic of low diversity
16S rRNA libraries. for further comparisons between
microbial communities. Alpha- and beta-diversity analyses
Within community diversity (a-diversity) was calculated
by different indices of species richness and evenness
such as Observed Number of Species, Chao1, ACE
(abundance-based coverage estimators), Shannon, Simp-
son, InvSimpson, and Fisher using the open source R
software. Partial least square discriminant analysis
least square discriminant analysis (PLS-DA;
Partial
SIMCA Pþ 13.02, Umetrics, Umea, Sweden) was
performed on genus data to identify the effects of
DSS. Prediction of functional metagenome
The open source software PICRUSt (Phylogenetic Inves-
tigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unob-
served States; v. 1.0.0-dev) was used to predict the
functional capacity of microbiome using 16S rRNA
gene sequencing data and Greengenes (v. 13.5) reference
database  To make our open-reference picked
OTUs compatible with PICRUSt, all de-novo OTUs were
removed and only those that had matching Greengenes
identiﬁcations were retained. The differences between groups were
considered signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. These results conﬁrmed the
presence of colitis in our DSS model. Alpha-diversity of the fecal and colonic mucosa-
associated microbiota (MAM)
Based on the different diversity indices used, DSS
reduced bacterial species richness and evenness in the
fecal samples compared to the control samples . (cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. b) Colonic mucosal bacterial diversity is not different between
colitic and non-colitic samples, suggesting that both sample groups had similar bacterial species richness and evenness. Of the
11 phyla, six were abundant ((cid:5)1% of community),
including Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria,
Deferribacteres, Tenericutes, and Verrucomicrobia. Results of the relative abundances of
various phyla are summarized in Fig. Microbiota composition at the phylum and lower
taxonomic levels in colonic mucosa samples
A total of 199,057 sequences were generated after quality
ﬁltering steps with an average of 24,882 high-quality
sequences per sample, which resulted in identiﬁcation
of 14 phyla and 151 taxa. Of the 151 taxa, 68 had abundances greater than
or equal to 0.01% of community, whereas 83 were
below 0.01% of community. 2016, 56, 1–13

8

Peris Mumbi Munyaka et al. All taxa are colored based on the phyla to which they belong to. Functional metagenome of colonic MAM and fecal
microbiome
The analysis provided insights into functional shifts
in the murine intestinal microbiome. Subsystems
or pathways overrepresented in the DSS or (control) mice colon samples have a positive or (negative) difference between mean proportions
and are indicated by red or (blue) coloring, respectively. the pathogenesis of IBD including UC and CD. Lending support to these results,
Berry et al.