Even though they have limitations
like all other models, they present some important
immunological and histopathological aspects of IBD in
humans  The most widely used and characterized
experimental model of erosion and inﬂammation related
to UC in mice is the dextran sulphate sodium (DSS)-
induced colitis, which is developed by DSS administration
either in the drinking water or via intragastric
catheter  The DSS induces a reproducible
acute colitis  however, there is some controversy
regarding the type of inﬂammation that is induced. The aim of the present study was to utilize Illumina
sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene and inferred meta-
genomics by open source software PICRUSt (Phyloge-
netic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of
Unobserved States  to investigate differences in
microbiome composition and function in the fecal and
colonic mucosa of mice treated with 5% DSS for 5 days. Five
and four mice were included in the DSS and control
groups, respectively. Blood was assessed using the Hemoccult II test
(Beckman coulter, Oakville, ON, Canada). Bioinformatic analyses
The PANDAseq assembler was used to merge
overlapping paired-end Illumina fastq ﬁles. for further comparisons between
microbial communities. Partial least square discriminant analysis
least square discriminant analysis (PLS-DA;
Partial
SIMCA Pþ 13.02, Umetrics, Umea, Sweden) was
performed on genus data to identify the effects of
DSS. Prediction of functional metagenome
The open source software PICRUSt (Phylogenetic Inves-
tigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unob-
served States; v. 1.0.0-dev) was used to predict the
functional capacity of microbiome using 16S rRNA
gene sequencing data and Greengenes (v. 13.5) reference
database  To make our open-reference picked
OTUs compatible with PICRUSt, all de-novo OTUs were
removed and only those that had matching Greengenes
identiﬁcations were retained. Phylum percentage data were also used to evaluate
statistical differences between the DSS and control
treatments. 2016, 56, 1–13

followed by the Tukey–Kramer multiple comparison
post hoc analysis, using prism (Prism 5, GraphPad,
La jolla, CA, USA). The differences between groups were
considered signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. These results conﬁrmed the
presence of colitis in our DSS model. (cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. Alpha-diversity analysis, a measure of species richness and evenness based on different diversity indices, from dextran sulfate
sodium-induced colitis and the control group studied at fecal and colon levels. ( The p values shown
on top of each bar were calculated using SAS. Of the
11 phyla, six were abundant ((cid:5)1% of community),
including Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria,
Deferribacteres, Tenericutes, and Verrucomicrobia. Results of the relative abundances of
various phyla are summarized in Fig. In addition, g. Dessulfovibrio, Oscillospira,
Odoribacter, Coprococcus, Dehalobacterium, Adlercreutzia,
Lactobacillus, Prevotella, Biﬁdobacterium; unclassiﬁed mem-
f. Lachnospiraceae, Lactobacillaceae, S24-7;
bers of

Turicibacter,

Dextran sulfate sodium and mice gut microbiota

7

and o. Lactobacillales were positively associated with
the control group but negatively associated with the DSS
group. Microbiota composition at the phylum and lower
taxonomic levels in colonic mucosa samples
A total of 199,057 sequences were generated after quality
ﬁltering steps with an average of 24,882 high-quality
sequences per sample, which resulted in identiﬁcation
of 14 phyla and 151 taxa. No signiﬁcant
difference was observed among the abundant phyla
between DSS and control mice (p > 0.05). Of the 151 taxa, 68 had abundances greater than
or equal to 0.01% of community, whereas 83 were
below 0.01% of community. 2016, 56, 1–13

8

Peris Mumbi Munyaka et al. All taxa are colored based on the phyla to which they belong to. associated with DSS, but negatively associated with
the control. Functional metagenome of colonic MAM and fecal
microbiome
The analysis provided insights into functional shifts
in the murine intestinal microbiome. Corrected p values were calculated using the Storey FDR correction. Subsystems or pathways overrepresented in the DSS or (control) fecal
samples have a positive or (negative) difference between mean proportions and are indicated by red or (blue) coloring, respectively. the pathogenesis of IBD including UC and CD. However,
this was only limited to diversity and community
composition at phylum level as bacterial differences
were observed at lower taxonomical levels in both fecal
and colon samples. This indicates that proﬁling of
fecal and colonic bacteria by Illumina sequencing may
be sensitive for investigating changes associated with

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. Some of these taxa have been reported to increase
as a result of DSS  and although they may have
different roles, their association with DSS in both colonic
mucosa and in feces may indicate that they may play
signiﬁcant roles in the potentiation of the abnormal
inﬂammatory response seen in DSS-treated animals, and
could therefore be important as intervention targets
against the disease.