the dysbiosis of host gut microbiota and modulating of gut microbiota may be beneficial for
PCOS treatment. In this experiment, 32 female SD rats were randomly assigned into 4
groups of 8 rats each, including a control group that received a gavage of normal saline, and
three treatment groups (PCOS, PCOS FMT and PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation groups)
administered a gavage of letrozole (Novartis Pharma Schweiz AG, Switzerland) at a concentra-
tion of 1 mg/kg once daily for 21 consecutive days. Twenty four hours after the last dose of letrozole
(on day 22), PCOS FMT rats were administered a gavage of fecal supernatant with 2×109 fecal
microbiota, PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation rats were administered a gavage of 2×109 Lac-
tobacillus, the control rats and PCOS rats were administered a gavage of normal saline for 14
consecutive days. On day 36, all rat fecal samples were collected for real-time PCR analysis. On day 21, the copy number of Lactobacillus, Rumi-
nococcus and Clostridium were lower and Prevotella was higher in PCOS group when com-
pared with the control group. The abundance of Prevo-
tella was decreased in both treated groups and the changes in FMT group were more significant. Lactobacillus treatment group
(Mean±sem). The estrous cycle changes occurred twice in 5 rats, once in 3 rats. In addition, many large cysts with virtually no granu-
losa layer or scant granulosa were observed. Estrous cycle changes in three representative rats from each group. Cycle stages are as follows: 1, diestrus; 2, proestrus; 3, estrus and 4,
metestrus. Morphological changes of ovarian tissues. ( C) PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation group showed increased granulosa layers. ( D) PCOS FMT group
showed increased granulosa layers and formation of corpora lutea. There is a limi-
tation of our study: ELISA sensitivity can fail to detect low levels of sex steroids and could not
analyze the serum steroids in female rodents according to estrus cycle stage  However, the
available data indicated that sex steroids concentrations could be regulated by microbiota inter-
ventions in PCOS rat model..

Gut microbiota such as Bifidobacteria and Lactobacillus are often referred to as “good bacte-. In addition,
compared with Lactobacillus transplantation group, FMT group had better recovery effects on
sex hormone levels and estrus cycles.