Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist. In order to quantify the differences of microbita for all rats on
day 21, real-time PCR analysis was applied. Twenty four hours after the last dose of letrozole
(on day 22), PCOS FMT rats were administered a gavage of fecal supernatant with 2×109 fecal
microbiota, PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation rats were administered a gavage of 2×109 Lac-
tobacillus, the control rats and PCOS rats were administered a gavage of normal saline for 14
consecutive days. On day 36, all rat fecal samples were collected for real-time PCR analysis. Then all rats were sacrificed by decapitation. On day
21, all rat fecal samples were collected. The specific primers were
showed in S1 Table. Fecal microbial transplantation

Ten gram fresh fecal samples from the control group were collected using sterile tubes every
morning. Lactobacillus transplantation
Lactobacillus were separated from healthy rat’s cecum contents and cultured in facultative
anaerobic culture for 48 h, then the bacterial solution was collected and OD value was tested at
620 nm. Morphological observation

On day 36  all rats were sacri-
ficed. Blood sampling for sex steroids

After all rats were sacrificed, Trunk blood samples were obtained and sera were kept at -80°C
for subsequent experiments. Genetic fingerprints of the gut bacterial communities generated by
DGGE analysis showed shifts of the bacterial composition and diversity in feces. B) Cluster analysis of the DGGE profiles. Sequence identities of PCR amplicons derived from DGGE gels. The estrous cycle changes occurred twice in 2 rats, once in 4 rats,
and not at all in 2 rats (Fig 3). Ovarian morphological changes

Under light microscopy, the control rat ovaries exhibited follicles in various stages of develop-
ment including secondary follicles, graafian follicles, and fresh corpora lutea. In addition, many large cysts with virtually no granu-
losa layer or scant granulosa were observed. When PCOS rats were treated with FMT or Lactobacillus, the estradiol
and estrone levels were increased significantly compared with those in PCOS rats (Fig 5A and
5B). Cycle stages are as follows: 1, diestrus; 2, proestrus; 3, estrus and 4,
metestrus. Letrozole is a nonste-
roidal aromatase inhibitor that reduces conversion of androgens to estrogens in the ovary,
resulting in increased testosterone and decreased estrone production  Decreased aroma-
tase activity in the ovary is one of the pathophysiologic hypotheses of PCOS development [31,

PLOS ONE |  April 19, 2016

9 / 15

Gut Microbiota for Polycystic Ovary Syndrome

Fig 4. Morphological changes of ovarian tissues. ( There is a limi-
tation of our study: ELISA sensitivity can fail to detect low levels of sex steroids and could not
analyze the serum steroids in female rodents according to estrus cycle stage  However, the
available data indicated that sex steroids concentrations could be regulated by microbiota inter-
ventions in PCOS rat model. In addition,
compared with Lactobacillus transplantation group, FMT group had better recovery effects on
sex hormone levels and estrus cycles. PLOS ONE |  April 19, 2016

12 / 15

Gut Microbiota for Polycystic Ovary Syndrome

Supporting Information

S1 Table. Quantity analysis of the sequenced bands.