Downloaded from 

http://mbio.asm.org/

 on September 9, 2020 by guest

Oliver et al. Postpartum,
irrespective of the mode of delivery, the vaginal
microbiota resembled that of a gastrointestinal microbiome, likely due to microbial
mixing during the birthing process  suggesting that both vaginal and gastrointes-
tinal microbial seeding of the neonate occurs. RESULTS

Description of the cohort and data obtained from samples. Saliva, urine, and
cervical vaginal ﬂuid (CVF) were collected from 18 women at early, middle, and late
pregnancy with the gestational age range of the included women at each time point
. Vaginal microbiota support high abundances of Lactobacillus and Biﬁdobacte-
riaceae throughout pregnancy. Twelve samples from seven subjects produced ITS2 sequences ; we do not
have quantitative data characterizing the abundance of bacterial or fungal biomass. B) Some participants 
experienced large, signiﬁcant shifts (LME; P (cid:2) 0.0219) in their microbiomes throughout the trimesters of pregnancy. The ﬁve subjects with Candida detected in at least one of two longitudinally paired
samples displayed a signiﬁcant increase in intersample Bray-Curtis dissimilarity in their
bacterial proﬁles over that interval (e.g., the intervals between trimester 1 to 2, 2 to 3,
or 1 to 3), suggesting the presence of Candida may be associated with greater shifts in
bacterial composition than those who had no Candida detected . The CVF metabolome as
assessed by both mass spectrometry methods did not signiﬁcantly differ across trimes-
ters (LME; P (cid:2) 0.6378 for GC-TOF MS; P (cid:2) 0.3942 for liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry [LC-MS/MS]). Metagenomics and functional potential of communities. Maternal and infant saliva and urine metabolomes were assessed with both GC-TOF MS
and LC-MS/MS (lipidomics) in order to study the relationship between maternal and
infant metabolomic compositions during early life (see Fig. The infant metabolome for saliva and urine
had little variance attributed to which subject donated the sample, but GC-TOF MS was
able to detect a signiﬁcant change between the infant urine metabolome at birth
versus 6 and 12 months of age (PERMANOVA; R2 (cid:2) 34%; P (cid:2) 0.0007; Table S2). We aim to establish
how the metabolome develops in the ﬁrst year of life and how maternal-infant saliva
and urine metabolomes relate. The largest differences between functional
capacity appeared to be between communities where L. crispatus or G. vaginalis were
the most abundant bacterial taxon. Further, metabolomic analysis of
our CVF samples failed to capture signiﬁcant levels of the mannitol precursor fructose;
however, previous studies have indicated an appreciable amount of fructose within the
cervical mucus of humans and the capability of L. crispatus to utilize fructose as a
carbon source  We speculate that this high extracellular mannitol abundance
phenotype may underlie the cell’s need to regenerate NAD(cid:5) for use in glycolysis. Our data showed that metabolite intensities obtained by GC-TOF MS were more tightly
correlated with microbial community composition than those obtained by lipidomics,
perhaps indicating that GC-TOF MS is more effective at detecting microbial metabolites
than lipidomics, especially during pregnancy. Strikingly, the ability of lipidomics to differentiate mothers from

July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20

mbio.asm.org 11

Downloaded from 

http://mbio.asm.org/

 on September 9, 2020 by guest

Oliver et al. Generally, these 18 women and their children
represented healthy subjects with the most complete sample sets. Samples were collected at each trimester of pregnancy for women and through-
out the ﬁrst year of life for infants. A minimum of 2 ml of urine was collected. Prior to processing, samples were thawed from (cid:7)80°C storage. Surface rasterization was oversampled using a 75-(cid:2)m step size. Although DNA was extracted from
CVF, attempts to extract DNA from saliva were unsuccessful, potentially due to the storage swabs
trapping the biomaterial. Paired sequencing reads with a minimum overlap of 25 bp were merged using FLASH v1.2.11. The speciﬁc programs used in PRIMER-e were permutational multivariate analysis of variance
(PERMANOVA) and distance-based linear models (DISTLM), the former of which calculates the signiﬁ-
cance and variance explained by a given factor and the latter determines which environmental variables
correlate with the biological (microbiome) data. Traditional R2
values were also calculated by dividing the sum of squares by total sum of squares. LMEs were carried
out as described above; R2 values for linear mixed models were calculated using the MuMIn package in
R were used to compare GC-MS and LC-MS data. Bray-Curtis
distances were used for all distance-based analyses. Ethics approval and consent to participate. Metabolomics data for all samples can be found in Table S1. We declare that we have no competing ﬁnancial interests.