Downloaded from 

http://mbio.asm.org/

 on September 9, 2020 by guest

Oliver et al. RESULTS

Description of the cohort and data obtained from samples. Saliva, urine, and
cervical vaginal ﬂuid (CVF) were collected from 18 women at early, middle, and late
pregnancy with the gestational age range of the included women at each time point
. Saliva, urine, and CVF samples were subjected to metabolomics
analysis, whereas only CVF was used for sequence analysis. Vaginal microbiota support high abundances of Lactobacillus and Biﬁdobacte-
riaceae throughout pregnancy. B) Some participants 
experienced large, signiﬁcant shifts (LME; P (cid:2) 0.0219) in their microbiomes throughout the trimesters of pregnancy. The CVF metabolome as
assessed by both mass spectrometry methods did not signiﬁcantly differ across trimes-
ters (LME; P (cid:2) 0.6378 for GC-TOF MS; P (cid:2) 0.3942 for liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry [LC-MS/MS]). Metagenomics and functional potential of communities. Maternal and infant saliva and urine metabolomes were assessed with both GC-TOF MS
and LC-MS/MS (lipidomics) in order to study the relationship between maternal and
infant metabolomic compositions during early life (see Fig. The infant metabolome for saliva and urine
had little variance attributed to which subject donated the sample, but GC-TOF MS was
able to detect a signiﬁcant change between the infant urine metabolome at birth
versus 6 and 12 months of age (PERMANOVA; R2 (cid:2) 34%; P (cid:2) 0.0007; Table S2). In
this study, we followed the vaginal microbiome through the trimesters of pregnancy for
18 women, tracking changes in the bacterial communities with longitudinal samples
and capturing their functional potential with metagenomic sequencing and multiple
platforms to assess metabolomic proﬁles. We aim to establish
how the metabolome develops in the ﬁrst year of life and how maternal-infant saliva
and urine metabolomes relate. Lastly, vaginal microbiota com-
position predicted which metabolites were present in the CVF samples but not urine or
saliva samples from the mothers or infants, suggesting that local microbial metabolism
may represent the dominant contributor to the metabolic milieu of the vaginal tract
during pregnancy. The largest differences between functional
capacity appeared to be between communities where L. crispatus or G. vaginalis were
the most abundant bacterial taxon. Further, metabolomic analysis of
our CVF samples failed to capture signiﬁcant levels of the mannitol precursor fructose;
however, previous studies have indicated an appreciable amount of fructose within the
cervical mucus of humans and the capability of L. crispatus to utilize fructose as a
carbon source  We speculate that this high extracellular mannitol abundance
phenotype may underlie the cell’s need to regenerate NAD(cid:5) for use in glycolysis. Strikingly, the ability of lipidomics to differentiate mothers from

July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20

mbio.asm.org 11

Downloaded from 

http://mbio.asm.org/

 on September 9, 2020 by guest

Oliver et al. Generally, these 18 women and their children
represented healthy subjects with the most complete sample sets. Samples were collected at each trimester of pregnancy for women and through-
out the ﬁrst year of life for infants. A minimum of 2 ml of urine was collected. Prior to processing, samples were thawed from (cid:7)80°C storage. Surface rasterization was oversampled using a 75-(cid:2)m step size. Paired sequencing reads with a minimum overlap of 25 bp were merged using FLASH v1.2.11. The speciﬁc programs used in PRIMER-e were permutational multivariate analysis of variance
(PERMANOVA) and distance-based linear models (DISTLM), the former of which calculates the signiﬁ-
cance and variance explained by a given factor and the latter determines which environmental variables
correlate with the biological (microbiome) data. LMEs were carried
out as described above; R2 values for linear mixed models were calculated using the MuMIn package in
R were used to compare GC-MS and LC-MS data. Ethics approval and consent to participate. We declare that we have no competing ﬁnancial interests.