Page 2

MICROBES AND NUTRITION DURING CRITICAL ILLNESS

It has been known for decades that intestinal bacteria make important contributions to
human metabolism and physiology. The implications of this research for
assessing and meeting the nutritional needs of critically ill patients are substantial. Uncertainty remains regarding the precise number of bacteria in the human body, but it is
generally agreed that there at least 10 bacterial cells for every 1 human cell  This has led
authorities in the field to describe humans as “superorganisms” composed of both human
and microbial cells  Although clinicians have not historically thought about their patients
in this way, it is easy to recognize the evolutionary logic of a symbiotic relationship between
humans and microbes. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Morowitz et al. Page 4

Utilization of complex polysaccharides via fermentation by anaerobic bacteria in the large
intestine results in the accumulation of short chain fatty acids (SCFA)  The principal
SCFAs seen in the colon, acetate, propionate, and butyrate, have inherent nutritional value,
but also impact gut epithelial physiology in other ways. Butyrate is metabolized primarily in the gut
epithelium to yield ketone bodies or CO2  Interestingly, the colonic epithelium derives
up to 70% of its energy needs directly from butyrate. Mechanistic studies in gnotobiotic animals further demonstrated that, when B.
thetaiotaomicron senses a scarcity of fucose in the intestinal lumen, it actually induces the
gut epithelium to upregulate expression of fucosylated glycans that can be used by the
bacteria as an energy source without harming the host  This body of work illustrates
how the remarkable host-microbe symbiosis can be teased apart by pairing genomic
sequencing efforts with creative in vivo laboratory studies. Some of the ammonia
can be utilized for microbial synthesis of amino acids. Even more between group differences were detected in the liver lipid profiles. In fact, several specialized epithelial
transporters have been recognized to participate specifically in the absorption of vitamins
derived from gut bacteria  Perhaps the relative ease in replenishing vitamin stores in
ICU patients has minimized enthusiasm for aggressive investigation of how bacterial
vitamin biosynthesis is altered in hospitalized patients. Recent work
has suggested that the microbiota of obese individuals has an increased capacity to harvest
energy from the diet  Landmark papers, utilizing high-throughput metagenomic
sequencing platforms to identify as many genes as possible from all members of a mixed
population of bacteria, from Gordon, Turnbaugh, Ley and colleagues, have conclusively
demonstrated that the metabolic potential of the gut microbiome varies according to the

Surg Clin North Am. have advanced these ideas even further by demonstrating that the
microbiome associated with diet-induced obesity (DIO) (in contrast to the ob/ob mutant
model) is also rich in Firmicutes species and is similarly efficient at extracting energy from
the diet  This set of experiments utilized a mouse model of DIO in which conversion to
a high fat/high sugar (Western) diet reliably produces increased total body weight and
increased epididymal fat content. Page 8

WHAT HAPPENS TO THE MICROBIOME DURING CRITICAL ILLNESS? receiving either enteral or parenteral nutrition. However, several clinical trials
have evaluated strategies to manipulate the gut flora without thoroughly assessing the
microbiome before or after therapy. For this reason, a trial with prospective monitoring of the microbiome in ICU
patients with comprehensive culture-independent techniques is needed. In theory, manipulation of the gut microbiota could be used to improve energy
balance and decrease the incidence of infectious complications. As a result, interventions in this
field have been introduced with a limited scientific foundation. Others with obvious relevance to nutrition are discussed. Nevertheless, enthusiasm for
decontamination protocols has diminished due to unacceptable increases in drug-resistant
bacterial strains within the ICU. Gut decontamination

Probiotics

The administration of probiotics and prebiotics represents an increasingly popular
alternative to gut decontamination protocols. Interestingly, this led
almost instantly to commercial attempts to capitalize upon these ideas, hence the
development of probiotics. However, there is little understanding of how to
approach these issues in the ICU. CONCLUSIONS

The intersection between the microbiome, nutrition, and critical illness will undoubtedly
grow more interesting in the coming years. First, it is apparent that future
evaluations of human nutritional status during critical illness should include consideration of
the gut microbiota.