Page 2

MICROBES AND NUTRITION DURING CRITICAL ILLNESS

It has been known for decades that intestinal bacteria make important contributions to
human metabolism and physiology. Perhaps the example best known to clinicians is the
microbial synthesis of the essential nutrient vitamin B12 — the enzymes required for B12
synthesis are possessed by bacteria but not by plants or animals  However, research from
the past decade has conclusively established that the host-microbe relationship in humans is
far more complex than previously appreciated. Over 25 years ago, microbial ecologists conclusively demonstrated that bacterial DNA can
be used to identify which organisms are present in a complex biological sample without
dependence on cultivating those organisms in the laboratory  Until recently, these
culture-independent techniques to characterize microbial diversity were relatively restricted
to studies of ocean and soil samples. Over the past decade, concerted efforts have been made
to use these techniques to undertake comprehensive molecular surveys of the organisms
associated with humans. As will be discussed in subsequent sections, the impact of critical illness on
this symbiotic relationship remains poorly understood. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Morowitz et al. Microbiota and carbohydrates

The sophisticated relationship that has evolved between the human GI tract and gut
microbiota allows for efficient utilization of dietary carbohydrates. They are absorbed by passive
diffusion across the colonic epithelium, and are subsequently utilized by different organs. Mechanistic studies in gnotobiotic animals further demonstrated that, when B.
thetaiotaomicron senses a scarcity of fucose in the intestinal lumen, it actually induces the
gut epithelium to upregulate expression of fucosylated glycans that can be used by the
bacteria as an energy source without harming the host  This body of work illustrates
how the remarkable host-microbe symbiosis can be teased apart by pairing genomic
sequencing efforts with creative in vivo laboratory studies. Some of the ammonia
can be utilized for microbial synthesis of amino acids. Even more between group differences were detected in the liver lipid profiles. The
translational relevance of these findings must still be defined, but these results provide clues
to the role of microbes in lipid metabolism. However, it has long been recognized that gut
microbes also contribute to vitamin synthesis. It has been known for nearly a century that ruminants have no dietary requirement for water-
soluble vitamins as a consequence of the dense microbial populations in the rumen, and that
GF laboratory animals require dietary supplements of vitamins that are not needed by their
WT counterparts  Several bacterial genera that are common in the distal intestine (e.g.,
Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, and Enterococcus) are known to synthesize vitamins. Thiamine, folate, biotin, riboflavin, and panthothenic acid are water-soluble vitamins that
are plentiful in the diet, but that are also synthesized by gut bacteria. have advanced these ideas even further by demonstrating that the
microbiome associated with diet-induced obesity (DIO) (in contrast to the ob/ob mutant
model) is also rich in Firmicutes species and is similarly efficient at extracting energy from
the diet  This set of experiments utilized a mouse model of DIO in which conversion to
a high fat/high sugar (Western) diet reliably produces increased total body weight and
increased epididymal fat content. Page 8

WHAT HAPPENS TO THE MICROBIOME DURING CRITICAL ILLNESS? receiving either enteral or parenteral nutrition. performed a
fascinating study of myocardial ketone body metabolism by the intestinal microbiota during
nutrient deprivation  After a 24 hour fast, the authors observed a significant increase in
the abundance of Bacteroidetes species and a corresponding decrease in Firmicutes; this is
the converse of what was observed in models of caloric excess. These innovative studies
serve as a foundation to study gut microbes in hospitalized patients that are not candidates
for enteral nutrition. However, several clinical trials
have evaluated strategies to manipulate the gut flora without thoroughly assessing the
microbiome before or after therapy. For this reason, a trial with prospective monitoring of the microbiome in ICU
patients with comprehensive culture-independent techniques is needed. Although we lack a comprehensive molecular readout of gut microbes in the ICU, several
human and animal studies provide clues about how the microbiota is altered by common
ICU exposures. Clinical interventions that can preserve gut microbial communities such that a
benefit in overall recovery is realized will require more in-depth analysis of the direct
impact of these interventions on the gut flora. Others with obvious relevance to nutrition are discussed. As a result, a precise understanding of
how decontamination protocols work is lacking. CONCLUSIONS

The intersection between the microbiome, nutrition, and critical illness will undoubtedly
grow more interesting in the coming years. At present, a few concluding points can be safely made. First, it is apparent that future
evaluations of human nutritional status during critical illness should include consideration of
the gut microbiota. Second, it will be important to conduct the necessary studies to
understand how the microbial ecology of the human body is altered during critical illness.