Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

2 of 13

The crucial role of the intestinal microbiota in modulating insulin resistance and the inﬂammatory
response in GDM pregnancies has been reported by a few studies  It is well known that diet is
able to modulate the microbiota composition rapidly, within a few days  Emerging evidence
has shown a differential role of speciﬁc nutrients on metabolic outcomes, based on the individual
microbial pattern. This is an intriguing and very important ﬁnding, suggesting that a food is not
necessarily universally healthy per se but instead more suitable for speciﬁc individuals or conditions,
thus strongly supporting a personalized approach to human nutrition. At present, very few and controversial data
are available. Herein, we examine the updated evidence about this emerging topic. Furthermore, we discuss the possible modulation
of the gut microbiota composition by speciﬁc nutrients and foods, and the impact on the metabolic
pattern of pregnant dysmetabolic women. Hand searching the references of the studies and reviews
on the ﬁeld was employed to augment the search strategy. Gut microbiota changes during the course of normoglycemic pregnancies and GDM
pregnancies. upward arrows mean an increased abundance,
downward arrows mean a decreased abundance. Diet-Microbiota Interactions in Pregnancy

Diet is one of the most important factors that modulate the intestinal microbiota 
Foods inﬂuence the microbiota composition through direct and indirect mechanisms. Nutrients
are able to interact directly with microbes by promoting or inhibiting their growth. Higher intakes of vitamin
D were associated with reduced microbial α-diversity. Adherents showed a signiﬁcant
decrease in Bacteroides  which is a genus that has been associated with high-fat animal-based
diets  Moreover, at enrolment, total fat intake was associated with higher abundance of Alistipes
and protein intake with Faecalibacterium genus, while, at the end of the pregnancy, ﬁber intake was
associated with the genus Roseburia  However, none of these bacteria were associated with the
changes in metabolic variables occurring during pregnancy in patients with GDM 

Therefore, the meaning of these associations remains unclear. Microbiota: A Novel Potential Therapeutic Target in GDM? First of all, the terminology used needs to be clariﬁed. Limitations and Future Perspectives

The key points of this review are reported in Table 1. However, the limitations of the current
knowledge should be recognized. At present, we are still far from ﬁnding a personalized dietary
treatment for GDM patients. First of all, our knowledge about gut microbiota and diet response in
pregnancy complicated by GDM is limited. Finally, doubts have recently been raised about the beneﬁt of probiotics in preventing
GDM, thus questioning the role of microbiota in pregnancy hyperglycemia 

Table 1. However, it
generally reverts to the
original status with
short-term dietary changes. Weight change or glycemic
responses to ﬁber-containing
foods vary according to the
predominant individual
microbial pattern. Uncertainty about the causal
relationship between gut
dysbiosis and GDM. Randomized controlled trials
are lacking. Author Contributions: V.P. participated in the conception of the paper, collection and interpretation of the
references, manuscript writing and revision. D.F., I.G., F.L., A.L., C.M., C.F., and E.G. participated in the collection
and interpretation of the references, manuscript writing and revision. All authors have read and
approved the ﬁnal manuscript. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.