Moreover, inverse relationships between Blautia and insulin
values; Faecalibacterium/Fusobacterium ratios and blood glucose; Odoribacter and arterial blood pressure;
Ruminococcaceae and GIP, and Prevotellaceae and ghrelin have been reported  Therefore,
gut microbiota might contribute to gestational metabolic changes through different mechanisms,
although further studies on this topic are necessary..

ratio and a reduced abundance of butyrate-producing bacteria such as Roseburia and Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii . Klebsiella variicola  Collinsella, Rothia, Desulfovibrio,
Actinobacteria and reduced gut richness of Methanobrevibacter smithii, Alistipes
species, Biﬁdobacterium species, Eubacterium species Akkermansia, Bacteroides, Parabacteroides,
Roseburia, and Dialister were reported in GDM patients compared to normoglycemic controls
(Figure 1). Some of the changes in the bacterial species related to GDM have been reported also in
T2DM patients, such as the reduction in Roseburia and Akkermansia muciniphila, and the increase in
Proteobacteria . A few studies described a different microbiota within 3–16 months after delivery in women with
a previous GDM (GDM+) compared to those with a previous normoglycemic pregnancy (GDM−). The impact of diet on the microbiota of GDM patients was recently addressed by an observational
study  Forty-one overweight women with GDM diagnosed at 24–28 weeks of gestation
received dietary recommendation from a registered dietitian, and their nutritional intakes and
microbiota were evaluated after the diagnosis of GDM (enrolment) and at the 38th week of gestation. Women were considered as adherents to the given dietary recommendations if their intakes of
rapidly absorbed sugars and ﬁber were respectively <10% of total energy and at least 20 g/day,
and if they abolished alcohol intake at the end of the pregnancy. Adherents showed a signiﬁcant
decrease in Bacteroides  which is a genus that has been associated with high-fat animal-based
diets  Moreover, at enrolment, total fat intake was associated with higher abundance of Alistipes
and protein intake with Faecalibacterium genus, while, at the end of the pregnancy, ﬁber intake was
associated with the genus Roseburia  However, none of these bacteria were associated with the
changes in metabolic variables occurring during pregnancy in patients with GDM . We do not eat alone, but also feed our microbiota, therefore we should also consider the effects
of food and nutrients on the composition of our intestinal microorganisms. From a “microbiota
point of view”, the high fat intake could potentially increase pro-inﬂammatory bacteria, resulting in
enhanced insulin resistance. The intakes of different MACs were associated with different microbe growth: prebiotic ﬁbers,
such as fructans, polydextrose, fructooligosaccharides (FOS), and galactooligosaccharides (GOS) were
linked to the growth of intestinal Biﬁdobacteri and Lactobacilli  resistant starch was reported to
increase the abundance of Ruminococcus, E. rectale, and Roseburia  In animal studies, low-MAC
diets resulted in over-grazing the mucus layer by the gut microbiota, potentially compromising the. The “one-size-ﬁts-all” diet approach has been called into question for most metabolic disorders. In a recent study, 3 days of barley kernel-based bread supplementation improved the
glucose metabolism only in subjects with higher Prevotella/Bacteroides ratios  conﬁrming the role
of arabinoxylans and β-glucans in the P-type individuals. On the other hand, the B-type individuals
could lose weight and improve their glucose metabolism with biﬁdobacteria-increasing interventions,
including prebiotics, such as inulin and oligosaccharides, or symbiotic treatment . A Prevotellaceae-dominated intestinal microbiome has been observed after 3–16 months
from delivery in women with previous GDM when compared to women after a normoglycemic
pregnancy  Other studies conﬁrmed an increased abundance of the genus Prevotella in GDM in
the second trimester of gestation compared to normoglycemic subjects. Therefore,
overall, in GDM patients it could be hypothesized that there is a beneﬁcial effect resulting from the
increased consumption of foods containing arabinoxylans and β-glucans, such as rye, wheat, barley,
oats, sorghum, maize, millet, psyllium, and ﬂaxseed.