THE JOURNAL OF PEDIATRICS (cid:129) www.jpeds.com

Volume ■■ • ■■ 2018

Trial enrolled 881 pregnant women at 3 clinical sites in the US
(Boston, Massachusetts; St. Louis, Missouri; and San Diego,
California). The only exclusion criterion
for stool collection was antibiotic use by the infant in the prior
7 days. Questions regarding the child diet were asked beginning at
age 6 months. To ﬁt model
assumptions, read counts were used in multivariable regres-
sion models. Operational taxonomic units identiﬁed at least
10 times in at least 10 subjects were used in microbiome-
wide analyses. Statistical Analyses
We chose 4 genera to evaluate in detail based on prior infant
feeding studies and associations with health outcomes7-10,22-25:
Bacteroides, Lactobacillus, Biﬁdobacterium, and Clostridium. House-
hold income was not included because 22% of subjects did not
know or preferred not to report household income. P values of .05 or less indicated signiﬁ-
cance. *Numbers do not add to 323 because of missing infant diet data. †P value for comparison of breastfed only vs formula fed only infants. T test was used for analysis of age at stool sample collection and c2 tests were used for all other comparisons. However, after adjusting
for demographic variables (mode of delivery, age, treatment,
maternal education, and race/ethnicity), breastfeeding vs
formula feeding and solid food introduction, the only asso-
ciation between the maternal diet and taxa selected a priori
for analysis was a positive association with Lactobacillus spp
(mean difference = 0.48; P = .02). In analyses of genera
selected a priori for analysis, adjusted for demographic factors,
we observed signiﬁcantly higher relative abundances of
Biﬁdobacterium spp (mean difference 0.51; P = .02), Lactoba-
cillus spp (mean difference 3.87; P < .001), and Clostridium spp
(mean difference 0.75; P = .05) among breastfed vs formula-
fed infants. We next asked whether race/ethnicity inﬂuenced the
association between the infant’s diet and the intestinal
microbiome by including an interaction term between race/
ethnicity and breast milk vs formula in models adjusted for
demographic and other dietary variables. The PC 1 of maternal diet during pregnancy was dichotomized at its mean for comparisons of low and high groups, and used as a continuous variable in regression models. Mean, SD for normally distributed variables (Shannon index, Richness). *Demographic variables: treatment, mode of delivery, age, maternal education, and race/ethnicity of child. †Dietary variables: infant breastfeeding vs formula feeding and infant solid food. ‡Dietary variables: infant solid food and first principal component of maternal diet (high in vegetables and low in processed meats and deep fried foods). When maternal education was added as a covariate,
the strengths of interactions between breastfeeding vs
formula feeding status and race/ethnicity were weakened
(Biﬁdobacterium spp P = .12; Lactobacillus spp P = .21). We note overlap and heterogeneity in the response
to breastfeeding among the top associations among taxa and
diet. Results shown for negative binomial regression analyses. However, this was
also observed in a smaller study of 9 infants10 and suggests that
diversity may not necessarily relate to health in all clinical
settings. Given that we used an abbreviated

6

assessment tool for maternal diet and that our use of princi-
pal components only captured some of its variability, future
work using a more detailed dietary assessment tool may better
identify associations between the maternal diet during preg-
nancy and the child microbiome. Racial/ethnic differences could
be explained by differences in maternal education; however,
given the strong association between race/ethnicity and maternal

Savage et al

FLA 5.5.0 DTD ■ YMPD10154_proof ■ August 30, 2018

■■ 2018

ORIGINAL ARTICLES

education in our sample, this cannot be deﬁnitively con-
cluded.