THE JOURNAL OF PEDIATRICS (cid:129) www.jpeds.com

Volume ■■ • ■■ 2018

Trial enrolled 881 pregnant women at 3 clinical sites in the US
(Boston, Massachusetts; St. Louis, Missouri; and San Diego,
California). The only exclusion criterion
for stool collection was antibiotic use by the infant in the prior
7 days. The top principal component was used
in regression models. Questions regarding the child diet were asked beginning at
age 6 months. For details on the determination of breastfeeding, formula
feeding, or solid food status (Appendix; available at
www.jpeds.com). A ﬂow diagram is provided in (Figure 1; avail-
able at www.jpeds.com). To ﬁt model
assumptions, read counts were used in multivariable regres-
sion models. Operational taxonomic units identiﬁed at least
10 times in at least 10 subjects were used in microbiome-
wide analyses. Statistical Analyses
We chose 4 genera to evaluate in detail based on prior infant
feeding studies and associations with health outcomes7-10,22-25:
Bacteroides, Lactobacillus, Biﬁdobacterium, and Clostridium. House-
hold income was not included because 22% of subjects did not
know or preferred not to report household income. P values of .05 or less indicated signiﬁ-
cance. *Numbers do not add to 323 because of missing infant diet data. †P value for comparison of breastfed only vs formula fed only infants. T test was used for analysis of age at stool sample collection and c2 tests were used for all other comparisons. However, after adjusting
for demographic variables (mode of delivery, age, treatment,
maternal education, and race/ethnicity), breastfeeding vs
formula feeding and solid food introduction, the only asso-
ciation between the maternal diet and taxa selected a priori
for analysis was a positive association with Lactobacillus spp
(mean difference = 0.48; P = .02). We did not ﬁnd associations between the second principal
component of the maternal diet (representing high pasta, rice,
and noodle intake) and diversity or these 4 genera. In analyses of genera
selected a priori for analysis, adjusted for demographic factors,
we observed signiﬁcantly higher relative abundances of
Biﬁdobacterium spp (mean difference 0.51; P = .02), Lactoba-
cillus spp (mean difference 3.87; P < .001), and Clostridium spp
(mean difference 0.75; P = .05) among breastfed vs formula-
fed infants. Mean, SD for normally distributed variables (Shannon index, Richness). Linear regression was used in analyses of Shannon Index, and richness and negative binomial regression was used in analysis of bacterial counts. *Demographic variables: treatment, mode of delivery, age, maternal education, and race/ethnicity of child. ‡Dietary variables: infant solid food and first principal component of maternal diet (high in vegetables and low in processed meats and deep fried foods). American mean difference = 0.38 log counts, Hispanic mean
difference = 0.52, White mean difference 0.50; Table V and
Figure 2). Conversely, Lactobacillus spp counts tended to be
higher among breastfed African American infants compared
with breastfed Hispanic and White infants (African Ameri-
can mean difference = 6.34 log counts, Hispanic mean
difference = 2.53, White mean difference 3.08; Table V and
Figure 2). We note overlap and heterogeneity in the response
to breastfeeding among the top associations among taxa and
diet. With ma-
ternal education included as a covariate, these results are largely
unchanged (Table VII; available at www.jpeds.com). However, this was
also observed in a smaller study of 9 infants10 and suggests that
diversity may not necessarily relate to health in all clinical
settings. Given that we used an abbreviated

6

assessment tool for maternal diet and that our use of princi-
pal components only captured some of its variability, future
work using a more detailed dietary assessment tool may better
identify associations between the maternal diet during preg-
nancy and the child microbiome. Comparison of our ﬁndings with those of other studies is
not straightforward due to different ages studied, variable mi-
crobial proﬁling methods, and heterogenous analytic tech-
niques. In an ethnically homogeneous population using targeted
quantitative polymerase chain reaction on stool samples col-
lected at age 1 month, Penders et al showed breastfed infants
had less Clostridia difﬁcile compared with formula-fed infants.7,30
This contrasts with our ﬁnding of a positive association between
breastfeeding and overall Clostridia spp, though we expect that
the inﬂuence of breastfeeding differs among individual species
within this genus. Because infant diet was in-
ferred from questionnaires administered after stool sample
collection, misclassiﬁcation of the exposure may have oc-
curred; however, this would have introduced a null bias. As knowledge of microbiome-associated
disease pathogenesis continues to accumulate, the associa-
tion between diet and the child intestinal microbiome may
have implications for disease modiﬁcation through nutri-
tional interventions.