of intravaginal nonoxyl-9 (an ingredient in spermicide and a commonly used cytotoxic control) and univer-
sal placebo gel (isotonic) found that both have inflammatory effects on cells of the cervix and endometrium12. L. crispatus growth was stimulated by Replens Silky Smooth (p < 0.01). We then repeated these experiments in the presence of the immortalized human vaginal epithelial cells, using 
the same 1:100 dilution described above. b) Final change in growth of L. crispatus, as measured in CFU (simple 
co-culture, without vaginal epithelial cells), demonstrating inhibition by Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer 
and Trimo-San (p < 0.01). b) Final change in growth of 
L. crispatus, as measured in CFU (in 1:100 diluted product and MRS/KSF cell culture media as control), 
demonstrating a lack of inhibition by KY Jelly, Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer and Trimo-San, regardless of 
the presence of human vaginal epithelial cells (p > 0.05)..

Our results expand on previous in vitro studies which showed that KY Jelly is bactericidal to L. crispatus and 
L. jensenii15. www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/Lactobacillus spp.16. Both formulations of 
Replens, and all products except coconut oil inhibited E. coli, suggesting that L. crispatus may be less susceptible 
than E. coli to antimicrobial effects of these products..

When we added cultured, immortalized vaginal epithelial cells to the model, we demonstrated less inhibition 
of E. coli by the products that had been most inhibitory in the co-culture without vaginal cells. While the co-culture experiments that do not include human cells use a 
concentration of products that is more akin to what might be seen in actual use, the more dilute concentrations 
necessary to maintain human cells do inhibit E. coli when human cells are not present. This suggests factors in 
addition to concentration of product may contribute to bacterial survival or growth. In addition, the negative 
impact of some vaginal products on Lactobacillus spp. The bacterial species used in these experiments include a laboratory strain 
of E. coli (ATCC 8739) and 6 clinical strains of E. coli provided by the Massachusetts General Hospital microbi-
ology lab, which had been isolated from women with cystitis. Plates were incubated at 37 °C 
with agitation for 6 hours. The plates were incubated anaerobically at 37 °C without agitation 
for 12 hours. All 
ingredients were plated on agar to confirm viability of the broth pre-cultures and sterility of test materials. Bacterial broths 
were prepared as described previously, and then centrifuged at 1000 RPM for 5 minutes. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.