in

use

symptomatic

including preterm birth (PTB).1–4 Antibiotics are effective
in eradicating BV during pregnancy5 and are recommended
The
for
consequences of antibiotic use during pregnancy have been
poorly studied,7 but
there are concerns that antibiotic-
related changes in the vaginal microbiota8 are associated
with short- and long-term morbidity in infancy and later
years.9

pregnant women.6

Probiotics might be a safe and effective alternative to
antibiotics in restoring the imbalance of the vaginal micro-
biota found in BV. There were no other exclu-
sion criteria. score

A pragmatic randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial with microbiome analysis was carried out to determine
the biological effects of oral probiotics on the vaginal
microbiota and the feasibility of conducting a full-scale
trial of oral probiotic supplementation of women from
early pregnancy to delivery in preventing PTB. After conﬁrming eligibility,
informed consent was
obtained and baseline data recorded. inter-
vention.26

Randomisation
The random allocation sequence was generated based on
permuted blocks of random block sizes of four, six, and
eight, stratiﬁed by participating site and without adaptive
or minimisation strategies. Microbiology methodology
The double-headed swab was separated in the laboratory. speciﬁc

primers

template

Vaginal bacterial community proﬁling
DNA was extracted from thawed samples by means of the
(Sigma-Aldrich,
GenElute Bacterial Genomic DNA kit
Poole, UK), modiﬁed to optimise lysis of Gram-positive
bacteria, following the manufacturer’s instructions. to the SOP available

taxonomic units

according

Statistical analysis
We used descriptive analysis to report baseline characteris-
tics of trial participants by allocated group. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

3

Husain et al. All analysis was carried out using STATA software ver-

sion 14.31

Patient and public involvement
Patient representatives provided input into the design, pro-
tocol development, and conduct of the study. A
total of 997 women were excluded from the trial either
because they did not meet the inclusion criteria 
or they declined to participate. Self-reported compliance to the intervention at
18–20 weeks’ was 93% in the probiotic group
and 98% in the placebo group. No serious
adverse events related to the study interventions were
reported. The 16S rRNA genes were successfully
ampliﬁed and sequenced from these, and 6714 sequence
reads were sub-sampled from each sample. The stability of the microbiota within subjects
assessed by determining the theta-YC distance between the
baseline and 18–20 weeks’ gestation samples was not signif-
icantly different between the probiotic and placebo groups
(Wilcoxon). Discussion

The aim of this trail was to compare the effects on the
vaginal microbiota of oral probiotic capsules containing
L. rhamnosus GR-1 and L. reuteri RC-14 versus placebo
taken orally from early pregnancy until delivery. Fourthly, we had a
to follow up, which
higher than expected number lost
tends to affect the ability to detect a difference. However, it
has been shown that self-reported compliance is a reliable
substitute for capsule count, particularly in trials where
there is regular in-person follow up.25

Comparison with other studies
Results of clinical
trials in non-pregnant women have
reported positive effects of probiotics on BV.43 However,

01234567

Nugent Score

Husain et al. We did not take account of vaginal

6

ª 2019 The Authors. PTB is the major determinant of adverse new-
born outcome. The rate of PTB is rising globally45 and cur-
rent strategies to stem its growth are ineffective.46 The
association between BV and PTB, and the reported beneﬁts
of probiotic therapy on BV, mainly in non-pregnant
women, have raised interest in the role of probiotics in the
prevention of PTB.47 The observed beneﬁt of dietary probi-
otic intake on the risk of spontaneous PTB48 supports this
concept. Completed disclosure of interests forms
are available to view online as supporting information. ZD coordinated the trial with supervision
from JA and JD. JZ and BMF generated the randomisation
sequence and analysed the results. ST, CC, and BMT provided overall support to the conduct
and delivery of the trial. All participants provided
informed consent to take part in the trial.