Brief Reviews

  e
Th

Journal of

Immunology

The Impact of Maternal Microbes and Microbial
Colonization in Early Life on Hematopoiesis

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

function of the immune system at distal tissues, including
primary lymphoid organs, such as the bone marrow (BM) and
thymus. Not only can these processes alter the
type of leukocytes produced and released from the BM, some
microbial signals may even act at the epigenetic level, thereby
inducing semipermanent changes in individual lineages. Impact of maternal microbiota and microbial colonization in early life
on hematopoiesis in the neonate

Current dogma suggests that microbial colonization begins at
birth via vertical microbial transmission from mother to infant. However, whether this
occurs in normal fetal development remains controversial. 2

Copyright (cid:1) 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc. 0022-1767/18/$35.00

Kathy D. McCoy and Carolyn A. Thomson

All body surfaces are colonized by microbes, which oc-
curs through a dynamic process over the ﬁrst few years
of life. Initial colonizing microbes are transferred from
the maternal microbiota to the newborn through ver-
tical transmission. The Journal of Immunol-
ogy, 2018, 200: 2519–2526. F rom the moment we are born, every surface of our body

becomes colonized with a vast array of microbial
species, collectively known as the microbiota. The precise
composition of our microbiota is shaped by environmental
factors that result in microbial repertoires that are as unique to
the individual as our ﬁngerprints. Our commensal microbes
are more than mere silent passengers that inhabit our body
surfaces; they play essential roles in immune development and
function, metabolism, physiology, and even brain function. Received for publication December 22, 2017. IAP treat-
ment was shown to have more of an impact on the developing
microbiome than direct exposure to antibiotics  This study
reported higher proportions of Leuconostaceae 
and Micrococcaceae and Propionibacteriaceae 
in infants born to antibiotic-treated mothers. This has been shown to impact the immune cell repertoire in the intestine and may affect susceptibil-
ity to intestinal pathogens. ( These data highlight a novel pathway whereby the
maternal microbiome inﬂuences the neonatal immune system. Nevertheless, recognition of
microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) is likely to be
important; indeed, intestinal colonization of germ-free mice
with a combination of E. coli, Staphylococcus xylosus, and
Enterococcus faecalis stimulates myelopoiesis in a MyD88 and
TRIF–dependent manner  Although it was unclear what
cell types mediated this response, one possibility is that it
reﬂects regulation of secondary mediator production by in-
testinal enterocytes stimulated by MAMPs from the com-
mensal bacteria. Microbial components, such as SCFAs and MAMPs, including LPS and peptidoglycan (PGN), can also
enter the circulation from intestinal lumen. These effects of
hematopoiesis have functional consequences on host immune responses, reducing susceptibility to intestinal pathogens and modulating inﬂammatory responses, such as
to allergic airway challenge. Future work will unravel the impact that microbe-driven effects on BM homeostasis have on other tissues or immunopathologies. Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

The Journal of Immunology

2523

levels of circulating G-CSF and neutrophil numbers in the
BM by controlling the production of IL-17A from ILCs in
the intestine 

The identity of the organisms mediating the effects of the
steady-state microbiota on hematopoiesis is largely unknown,
as are many of the mechanisms that might alter these processes
during pathogenic infection or after treatment with antibiotics. As a result, the host mice were less able to
regenerate leukocytes following BM ablation with 5-ﬂuoro-
uracil. Allergic
airway inﬂammation could be suppressed in mice receiving a
normal diet by the administration of propionate or acetate
alone, prompting the investigators to look for changes in
immune cells. Microbial infection drives changes to the HSC pool

The capacity for hematopoietic cells within the BM to respond
to microbial signals has been best characterized in response to
infection. G-CSF stimulates neutrophil release from the BM via
a two-pronged approach. Such rapid increases in these
immune-mediated diseases have been attributed to changes in
the environment and a reduction in the biodiversity of the
human microbiome, which may be particularly important
early in life. Disclosures
The authors have no ﬁnancial conﬂicts of interest.