Following screening, participants were admitted and placed on a WMD. Dye marker for stool collection was given on the mornings of days 5, 8, 11 and 14. Following the UF/OF phase, participants were on WMD for 2 d then on 
consecutive days underwent OGTT (day 16) measurement of 24-h energy expenditure in a whole-room indirect calorimeter (day 17) and measurement of 
fasting ANGPLT4 and heparin-induced measurement of LPL (day 18). On days 23–25 while on WMD, meals were again made in duplicate for bomb calorimetry. Oral  vancomycin  also  has  minimal  absorption  and 
thus nearly no local or systemic side effects in healthy individuals20. Results
UF  and  antibiotics  both  impair  nutrient  absorption. In total, 
we screened 51 potential participants, of which 27 initiated and 25 
completed the study (Extended Data Fig. 2 | Dietary interventions impact nutrient absorption. Two participants did not have available stool measurements during UF. d, Mean transit time, expressed in hours, during OF (n = 25) and UF (n = 23). Δ indicates the mean difference between groups (UF versus OF). Participants who started the dietary phase with OF are represented by red dots, while those who started 
with UF are represented by white dots. a, Mean of 3-d food intake (kcal d−1) in the vancomycin (n = 11) and placebo 
(n = 13) groups. Metagenomic sequencing confirmed the broad and reproducible 
differences between the vancomycin and placebo groups. 4), which revealed modest perturbation of gut microbial commu-
nity structure with UF versus OF, functional profiling of the micro-
biome  datasets  did  not  reveal  any  significant  differences  in  gene 
family  or  metabolic  pathway  abundance  between  the  diet  arms. In  contrast,  we  found  significant  differences  in  the  abundance  of 
760 of a total of 3,553 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG)  functional  orthologs  (KEGG  Orthology)  (FDR < 0.1, 
Supplementary  Table  9)  between  vancomycin  and  placebo,  con-
sistent  with  the  widespread  changes  in  gut  microbial  community 
structure . Interestingly, two of the three 
significant  pathways  (pyruvate  fermentation  to  butanoate  and  the 
superpathway of Clostridium acetobutylicum acidogenic fermenta-
tion) were related to the fermentation of sugars to the major short-
chain  fatty  acid  butyrate  (aka  butanoate),  suggesting  that  there 
could  be  reduced  butyrate  production  or  bacterial  metabolism  by 
the gut microbiota during vancomycin treatment. These mea-
surements were performed before and following each intervention. Deoxycholic acid, a secondary bile acid, also significantly 
decreased following both interventions . 7);  or  
glucose tolerance or insulin concentrations (Extended Data Fig. Discussion
In  this  two-phase  study  we  directly  measured  ingested  and  stool 
calories, demonstrating an increased and comparable stool calorie 
loss relative to ingested calories during two states: UF versus OF and 
oral vancomycin versus placebo. Given  this,  our  results  indicate  that  either 
decreased calorie delivery to the microbiome, as in the case of UF, 
or widespread changes in its structure, due to oral vancomycin, limit 
microbiome nutrient harvesting capacity, resulting in increased stool 
calorie loss. 4 | changes in gut microbiome in response to dietary interventions. Colors indicate diet; each point represents a single sample (n = 156 samples). Subjects are split by diet order with  
OF (purple) and UF (yellow) periods shaded. Diet order  
in panels a, g and h is indicated by color: red, OF first; gray, UF first. P values in panels b and c from Adonis tests. Each data point represents the mean value 
of samples from each subject (n = 63 samples from 23 subjects). b, Shannon diversity in microbial communities of vancomycin and placebo groups 
(P < 0.0001, two-sided unpaired Wilcoxon test). Δ indicates the difference (log expressed) between pre- and postdietary intervention measurements (c) and 
the difference (log expressed) between pre- and postrandomization measurements in vancomycin and placebo groups (d). In our study, both calorie restriction and oral vancomycin 
led to increased stool calorie loss and lower levels of plasma butyr-
ate.