Following screening, participants were admitted and placed on a WMD. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan was 
performed on day 2 and OGTT on day 4 of admission. Following the UF/OF phase, participants were on WMD for 2 d then on 
consecutive days underwent OGTT (day 16) measurement of 24-h energy expenditure in a whole-room indirect calorimeter (day 17) and measurement of 
fasting ANGPLT4 and heparin-induced measurement of LPL (day 18). Taken together, the causal evidence from multiple animal model 
studies  and  largely  correlative  or  retrospective  data  from  human 
cohorts  led  us  to  further  investigate  the  role  of  the  human  gut 
microbiome  in  nutrient  absorption. In total, 
we screened 51 potential participants, of which 27 initiated and 25 
completed the study (Extended Data Fig. d, Mean transit time, expressed in hours, during OF (n = 25) and UF (n = 23). Δ indicates the mean difference between groups (UF versus OF). Participants who started the dietary phase with OF are represented by red dots, while those who started 
with UF are represented by white dots. Overall 
microbial diversity was also relatively stable throughout the 16 d of 
phase I ; however, there was significant increase in diver-
sity on the final day of UF relative to the final day of OF (P = 0.04, 
paired  Wilcoxon  test). a, Mean of 3-d food intake (kcal d−1) in the vancomycin (n = 11) and placebo 
(n = 13) groups. Taken 
together,  these  results  indicate  the  overall  resiliency  of  the  gut 
microbiota faced with differences in caloric intake while also high-
lighting  a  small  number  of  diet-responsive  bacterial  species  that 
could contribute to the observed differences in nutrient absorption. Finer-level  analysis  of  sequence  variants 
demonstrated  several  discrete  clusters  of  bacteria  across  different 
phyla that were altered in the vancomycin-treated group (Extended 
Data Fig. In  contrast,  we  found  significant  differences  in  the  abundance  of 
760 of a total of 3,553 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG)  functional  orthologs  (KEGG  Orthology)  (FDR < 0.1, 
Supplementary  Table  9)  between  vancomycin  and  placebo,  con-
sistent  with  the  widespread  changes  in  gut  microbial  community 
structure . These mea-
surements were performed before and following each intervention. Deoxycholic acid, a secondary bile acid, also significantly 
decreased following both interventions . Plasma  LPS  and  zonulin  concentrations  did  not  change 
during  vancomycin  or  placebo  administration. 7);  or  
glucose tolerance or insulin concentrations (Extended Data Fig. This increase in stool calorie loss 
during UF and vancomycin administration occurred despite differ-
ent effects on the gut microbiota. Based on our results, we would estimate 
that the gut microbiome harvested an additional ~2.5% of absolute 
ingested calories under the conditions used for our study cohort. Subjects are split by diet order (n = 11 OF → UF and n = 9 UF → OF). Colors indicate diet; each point represents a single sample (n = 156 samples). Diet order  
in panels a, g and h is indicated by color: red, OF first; gray, UF first. Each data point represents the mean value 
of samples from each subject (n = 63 samples from 23 subjects). The sample size for each intervention refers to the volunteers who had available 
measurements of butyrate and/or deoxycholic acid concentrations. In vitro studies show that 
butyrate and other short-chain fatty acids stimulate intestinal barrier 
formation, inducing protection against disruption from LPSs47. We  do  acknowledge  several  limitations.