Food & Function

Paper

total resveratrol administered was recovered in the form of
resveratrol, dihydroresveratrol and derived metabolites (65.1%
along the gastrointestinal tract, and 0.5% in other tissues).17 So,
it may be very diﬃcult to reach eﬀective concentrations in
metabolism regulating tissues in vivo, e.g. visceral adipose
tissues. Few studies have investigated the eﬀect of dietary resveratrol
on the complex gut microbiota in vivo, and they focused mainly
on a single bacterial population and polyphenols in red wine,
tea, and coﬀee. Mice were killed by cervical
dislocation aer a 6 h period of fasting. The EUB338 probe
used to determine total counts was labeled with uorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC), while the group- or genus-specic probes
were labeled at the 50-end with indocyanine (Cy3; Sangon
Biotech, Shanghai, China). Aliquots of 200 ml
were added to 500 ml of PBS for ow cytometry with a FACS
Calibur device (Becton Dickinson and Co, Franklin Lakes, NJ) as
previously described.23 The ow rate of events was generally
200–300 events per s. A total of 20 000 events were recorded for
each sample. 2014, 5, 1241–1249

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Published on 01 April 2014. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. View Article OnlinePaper

Food & Function

Table 1 Gene-speciﬁc primers used in qRT-PCR assaysa

Gene name

Abbreviation

Primer sequences 

Amplicon size (bp)

Fasting-induced adipose factor

Lipoprotein lipase

Cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1

Peroxisome proliferator activated
receptor g
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1

Fatty acid synthase

a F, forward; R, reverse. b-Actin was
chosen as the housekeeping gene. All assays were performed in tripli-
cate with an ABI PRISM 7900HT Sequence Detection System
(Applied Biosystems). However, RES
treatment signicantly inhibited increases in body and fat

weights in HF mice, which suggests that it exerts anti-obesity
eﬀects. View Article OnlineFood & Function

Paper

Fig. A) Average body weight, (B) liver weight (percentage of body weight) and (C) visceral
and subcutaneous adipose tissue weight (percentage of body weight). Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF
group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES. The suppressive eﬀect of RES on Fiaf expression in the
intestine
Fiaf expression was signicantly decreased by 2.1-fold in the
intestines of HF mice compared with normal controls, and Lpl
(lipoprotein lipase) expression was signicantly increased by
1.9-fold . The
mechanism of how resveratrol aﬀects the gut microbiota
remains an important eld of future research. 2 Microbial proﬁling analysis of the intestinal contents. ( This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249 | 1245

Published on 01 April 2014. These ndings are consistent with
previous studies. In
our study, HF diet inhibited the mRNA expression of Fiaf in
the intestine. 4 Eﬀects of high-fat diet and RES supplementation on Fiaf (A) and
Lpl (B) mRNA expressions in ileum tissue (n ¼ 6 per group). View Article OnlinePaper

Food & Function

Fig. Values are means, with their standard errors represented by vertical bars (n ¼ 6). Conclusion

The composition of gut microbiota regulated by resveratrol may
result in de novo lipogenesis, and systemically increasing
expression of the Fiaf gene in the intestine, in turn, suppressing
expressions of the lipoprotein lipase gene (Lpl) and the fatty
acid biosynthesis gene (Scd1)
in the liver, and inhibiting
expressions of adipogenesis or lipogenesis genes (Ppar-g, Acc1,
and Fas) in visceral adipose tissues.