The EUB338 probe
used to determine total counts was labeled with uorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC), while the group- or genus-specic probes
were labeled at the 50-end with indocyanine (Cy3; Sangon
Biotech, Shanghai, China)..

FISH analysis, as a quantitative molecular-based technique, was
applied to assess the microbiota composition. Moreover, the principal coordinate analysis scores plot
in Fig. Aer RES treatment, Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium
were signicantly increased, whereas Enterococcus faecalis was
signicantly decreased to that of control levels . The correlations between body weight and the colonic bacterial
content were calculated . These ndings are in line with Cani et al. ,29
who found that the high-fat diet disrupted gut microbiota by
promoting the growth of endotoxin producers. Few studies have inves-
tigated the eﬀect of dietary resveratrol on the complex gut
microbiota, and they focused mainly on selected bacterial pop-
ulations. In addition, there was a decrease in the Lactobacillus
and Bidobacterium frequencies and an increase of Enterococcus
faecalis in HF mice compared with CT mice, which agree with
our previous studies that a high-fat diet signicantly decreases
the number of Lactobacillus and increases the number of
Enterococcus faecalis.30 Aer resveratrol intake, the numbers of
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium were signicantly increased. 2 Microbial proﬁling analysis of the intestinal contents. ( A) The
division-level composition of gut microbiome comparing CT, HF, and
HF-RES animals (n ¼ 6). ( C) Colonic bacterial content of the Lactobacillus
group, the Biﬁdobacterium group, and Enterococcus faecalis. D) The
Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes ratios contributed by the indicated target
bacterial populations (n ¼ 8). Mean values were
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES,
mice fed with HF supplemented with RES..

Fig. These ndings are consistent with
previous studies. The antimicrobial activity of resveratrol could
not explain these results.