Brief Reviews

  e
Th

Journal of

Immunology

The Impact of Maternal Microbes and Microbial
Colonization in Early Life on Hematopoiesis

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

function of the immune system at distal tissues, including
primary lymphoid organs, such as the bone marrow (BM) and
thymus. In this capacity,
intestinal microbes can regulate
immune function via effects on the differentiation of hema-
topoietic progenitor cells. Impact of maternal microbiota and microbial colonization in early life
on hematopoiesis in the neonate

Current dogma suggests that microbial colonization begins at
birth via vertical microbial transmission from mother to infant. However, recent evidence suggests that coloni-
zation may, in fact, precede birth. However, whether this
occurs in normal fetal development remains controversial. 2

Copyright (cid:1) 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc. 0022-1767/18/$35.00

Kathy D. McCoy and Carolyn A. Thomson

All body surfaces are colonized by microbes, which oc-
curs through a dynamic process over the ﬁrst few years
of life. Initial colonizing microbes are transferred from
the maternal microbiota to the newborn through ver-
tical transmission. Although microbial-
mediated education of the immune system is better
understood at mucosal sites, recent data indicate that
the systemic immune system is also shaped by the
microbiota. This review outlines our
current knowledge of how the microbiota can impact
hematopoiesis, with a focus on the effects of maternal
and early-life microbiota. The Journal of Immunol-
ogy, 2018, 200: 2519–2526. F rom the moment we are born, every surface of our body

becomes colonized with a vast array of microbial
species, collectively known as the microbiota. Microbes
are passed vertically from mother to child during birth and are
subsequently obtained via horizontal transfer from the envi-
ronment. The precise
composition of our microbiota is shaped by environmental
factors that result in microbial repertoires that are as unique to
the individual as our ﬁngerprints. Our commensal microbes
are more than mere silent passengers that inhabit our body
surfaces; they play essential roles in immune development and
function, metabolism, physiology, and even brain function. Although it is now well accepted that our microbiota inﬂuences
immune responses within mucosal tissues, it is also becoming
apparent that the microbiota can shape development and

Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases,
Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1,
Canada

ORCIDs: 0000-0002-3900-9227 (K.D.M.); 0000-0003-3906-7539 (C.A.T.). Received for publication December 22, 2017. IAP treat-
ment was shown to have more of an impact on the developing
microbiome than direct exposure to antibiotics  This study
reported higher proportions of Leuconostaceae 
and Micrococcaceae and Propionibacteriaceae 
in infants born to antibiotic-treated mothers. Further, maternally derived SCFAs have been suggested to
play a role in Foxp3+ regulatory T cell generation in the
neonatal thymus  Although these are the only studies
directly linking maternal SCFAs to neonatal immune system
education, maternal transfer of retinoic acid (RA), a metab-
olite of dietary vitamin A, may also play an important role. These data highlight a novel pathway whereby the
maternal microbiome inﬂuences the neonatal immune system. Current work supports the presence of a critical
developmental window early in life when the immune system is
highly susceptible to microbial inﬂuence  In humans, this
window may encompass the ﬁrst 3 y of a child’s life and marks
a period of intense variability in the microbiome. Nevertheless, recognition of
microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) is likely to be
important; indeed, intestinal colonization of germ-free mice
with a combination of E. coli, Staphylococcus xylosus, and
Enterococcus faecalis stimulates myelopoiesis in a MyD88 and
TRIF–dependent manner  Although it was unclear what
cell types mediated this response, one possibility is that it
reﬂects regulation of secondary mediator production by in-
testinal enterocytes stimulated by MAMPs from the com-
mensal bacteria. Microbial components, such as SCFAs and MAMPs, including LPS and peptidoglycan (PGN), can also
enter the circulation from intestinal lumen. Future work will unravel the impact that microbe-driven effects on BM homeostasis have on other tissues or immunopathologies. Similarly, Ver-
rucomicrobia are Gram-negative and increased during van-
comycin treatment; in contrast to Proteobacteria, members of
this phylum, such as Akkermansia muciniphila, promote a
healthy gut, possibly through colonizing the outer mucous
layer and producing SCFAs  In contrast, Actinobacteria
are Gram-positive and depleted by vancomycin treatment. Allergic
airway inﬂammation could be suppressed in mice receiving a
normal diet by the administration of propionate or acetate
alone, prompting the investigators to look for changes in
immune cells. Thus, deﬁned changes in the microbiota,
resulting from antibiotic use or changes in our diet, may have
drastic effects on how our immune system tackles challenges
as a result of effects on hematopoiesis. Microbial infection drives changes to the HSC pool

The capacity for hematopoietic cells within the BM to respond
to microbial signals has been best characterized in response to
infection. The age-prolonging effect of NOD1 li-
gation could be reversed by blocking IL-17A, highlighting a
potential role for this cytokine in mediating the effects of the
microbiota on myeloid cell development and behavior. Disclosures
The authors have no ﬁnancial conﬂicts of interest.