IAP treat-
ment was shown to have more of an impact on the developing
microbiome than direct exposure to antibiotics  This study
reported higher proportions of Leuconostaceae 
and Micrococcaceae and Propionibacteriaceae 
in infants born to antibiotic-treated mothers. Microbial signals in early life shape the repertoire of immune cell development in the BM. A child’s immune system can be modulated by microbial
signals at various stages in development. This has been shown to impact the immune cell repertoire in the intestine and may affect susceptibil-
ity to intestinal pathogens. ( Although the factors mediating emergency myelopoiesis
have been characterized in some detail (see below), the reg-
ulation of steady-state hematopoiesis by the normal microbiota
remains less well understood. Nevertheless, recognition of
microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) is likely to be
important; indeed, intestinal colonization of germ-free mice
with a combination of E. coli, Staphylococcus xylosus, and
Enterococcus faecalis stimulates myelopoiesis in a MyD88 and
TRIF–dependent manner  Although it was unclear what
cell types mediated this response, one possibility is that it
reﬂects regulation of secondary mediator production by in-
testinal enterocytes stimulated by MAMPs from the com-
mensal bacteria. This would be consistent with experiments
showing that epithelial cell–derived CXCL5 can regulate the. The identity of the organisms mediating the effects of the
steady-state microbiota on hematopoiesis is largely unknown,
as are many of the mechanisms that might alter these processes
during pathogenic infection or after treatment with antibiotics. As a result, the host mice were less able to
regenerate leukocytes following BM ablation with 5-ﬂuoro-
uracil. Importantly, the BM phenotype could be rescued by treat-
ment with the antibiotic vancomycin, suggesting the in-
volvement of Gram-positive organisms, and it could be
phenocopied by transferring microbiota from mice fed the
high-fat diet to normal mice, suggesting a causative role for
the microbiota in mediating the hematopoietic changes. Similarly, Ver-
rucomicrobia are Gram-negative and increased during van-
comycin treatment; in contrast to Proteobacteria, members of
this phylum, such as Akkermansia muciniphila, promote a
healthy gut, possibly through colonizing the outer mucous
layer and producing SCFAs  In contrast, Actinobacteria
are Gram-positive and depleted by vancomycin treatment. Exactly which bacteria may be playing a role is not clear,
because Actinobacteria are the third most dominant bacterial
phylum in humans and can be pathogens, like Mycobacterium,
or commensals, such as Biﬁdobacterium. Allergic
airway inﬂammation could be suppressed in mice receiving a
normal diet by the administration of propionate or acetate
alone, prompting the investigators to look for changes in
immune cells. They found that exogenous administration of
the microbial metabolite propionate led to alterations in he-
matopoiesis, with a reduction in macrophage and dendritic
cell (DC) precursors in the BM. In addition, newly differ-
entiated DCs expressed lower levels of MHC class II and
costimulatory molecules and were less effective at reactivating
effector Th2 cells.