in  phylum-  or  genus-level  relative  abundance  between  diet  arms, 
with the exception of the Verrucomicrobia phylum which was sig-
nificantly  increased  during  UF  (Extended  Data  Fig. Taken 
together,  these  results  indicate  the  overall  resiliency  of  the  gut 
microbiota faced with differences in caloric intake while also high-
lighting  a  small  number  of  diet-responsive  bacterial  species  that 
could contribute to the observed differences in nutrient absorption. Next, we used metagenomic sequencing to confirm and extend 
the  observed  shifts  in  gut  bacterial  relative  abundance. Samples 
were  selected  from  18  individuals  at  four  key  time  points  includ-
ing a baseline  sample,  midpoint samples  during  each 3-d UF and 
OF period, a sample during the washout period in between and a 
sample during the vancomycin or placebo arm. Differentially  abundant 
bacteria  on  each  diet  arm  (independent  of  order)  were  identified 
using  a  paired  Wilcoxon  test. This  analysis  revealed  nine  bacte-
rial  species  that  were  significantly  different  between  the  two  diet 
arms , including an enrichment 
for A. muciniphila during UF, consistent with our 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing-based  analysis  . Analysis 
using unpaired Wilcoxon tests revealed 41 bacterial species with a 
significant difference (false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05) in relative 
abundance  ,  with  a  skew  towards  decreased  abundance 
in the vancomycin group  Consistent 
with  our  16S  rRNA  gene  sequencing  data,  these  vancomycin-
depleted  bacteria  spanned  multiple  gram-positive  (Actinobacteria 
and  Firmicutes)  and  gram-negative  (Bacteroidetes)  phyla. ArticlesNature MediciNefunction24–26,  which  was  enriched  during  UF  and  in  the  vancomy-
cin group, and an unidentified species belonging to Lachnospiraceae 
NK4A136 group, which decreased during UF and vancomycin inter-
ventions. Consistent with our taxonomic analyses (Fig. Lactobacillus phage Lc_Nu
Lactobacillus salivarius
Klebsiella oxytoca
Megasphaera micronuciformis
Odoribacter splanchnicus
Parabacteroides merdae
Alistipes putredinis
Erysipelotrichaceae bacterium 21_3
Lachnospiraceae bacterium 7_1_58FAA
Ruminococcus sp 5_1_39BFAA
Clostridium leptum
Oscillibacter sp. Collinsella aerofaciens
Eubacterium rectale
Lachnospiraceae bacterium 3_1_46FAA
Ruminococcus obeum
Ruminococcus torques
Clostridium symbiosum
Gordonibacter pamelaeae
Flavonifractor plautii
Clostridium bolteae
Clostridium hathewayi
Lachnospiraceae bacterium 1_4_56FAA
Ruminococcaceae bacterium D16
Alistipes onderdonkii
Alistipes senegalensis
Eubacterium eligens
Roseburia hominis
Ruminococcus lactaris
Eubacterium ramulus
Holdemania filiformis
Dorea formicigenerans
Coprococcus comes
Anaerostipes hadrus
Lachnospiraceae bacterium 5_1_63FAA. b, Shannon diversity in microbial communities of vancomycin and placebo groups 
(P < 0.0001, two-sided unpaired Wilcoxon test). Each data point represents the mean value of samples from each subject (n = 70 samples from 24 
subjects). c, Principal coordinate analysis of Bray–Curtis dissimilarity for 
ordination of microbial communities of subjects on vancomycin or placebo. In  humans,  a  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  pilot 
study revealed a trend towards decreased body weight and fat mass . in  response  to  A.  muciniphila  supplementation45.