were  housed  individually  in  plastic  cages 
equipped with a running wheel (Coulbourn 
Instruments,  Whitehall,  PA);  however, 
wheels  were  locked  in  cages  of  seden­
tary mice. Exercised mice had 30% lower body weight 
on average than sedentary mice. A diagram of the study design is shown 
in Figure 1. Feces were collected for 2 days 
(allowing collection of a sufficient amount of 
sample), and samples were analyzed for con­
trol/background microbiome data. Mice were 
then treated with the PCB mixture, and feces 
were again collected for 2 days. Bacterial 
16S rRNAs were amplified with the primer 
sets 27F.1 (5´­AGRG TTTG ATCM TGGC 
TCAG­3´) and 1492R.jgi (5´­GGTT ACCT 
TGTT ACGA CTT­3´). Each scan 
was captured using the GeneChip Microarray 
Analysis Suite (Affymetrix). Data  processing 
and  multi variate  statistical  analyses  were 
performed  using  the  PhyCA­Stats  analysis 
software  package  (Second  Genome  Inc.). Probe  intensities  were  background  sub­
tracted and scaled to values for PhyloChip 
Control  Mix. 2006) and weighted Unifrac distance metric, 
respectively; the weighted Unifrac metric con­
siders OTU abundance in addition to phylo­
genetic  distance  between  OTUs. 2002) as implemented in 
Prediction  Analysis  of  Microarrays  (PAM; 
http://www­stat.stanford.edu/~tibs/PAM/) 
was  used  to  identify  OTUs  with  the  most 
significant differences in abundance between 
comparison groups. We first analyzed the effects 
of PCB exposure on the gut microbiome in 
sedentary  mice. The  Welch’s  test  revealed 
that  exposure  to  the  PCB  mixture  signifi­
cantly (p < 0.05 by Student’s t­test) altered 
the abundance of 1,223 bacterial taxa in these 
mice (1,133 taxa had decreased abundance 
and 90 taxa had increased abundance). After PCB exposure, 
the number of taxa dropped to 10,798, but 
the change was not statistically significant. Experimental design indicating treatment and sampling times. Among detected bacterial taxa, 93 were 
present exclusively in either exercised or sed­
entary mice. A group of 2,510 taxa showed differences 
in abundance between the exercised and seden­
tary mice. These taxa were then analyzed by 

PCoA with weighted Unifrac distance, which 
indicated significant differences in the compo­
sition of the microbial communities between 
the exercised and sedentary mice (Figure 2B). Exercise attenuates PCB-induced altera-
tions  of  gut  microbiome  composition. Thus, exer­
cise provided protection against PCB­induced 
changes in the gut microbiome. In particular, 
exercise prevented a PCB­induced decrease 
in abundance of Proteobacteria, which was 
observed in seden tary mice. Although the data we reported here are 
novel, effects of physical activity on several 

Table 3. 2012) and pathology have 
been  reported. For  example,  exercise  was 
demonstrated to decrease the risk of develop­ 
ing several intestinal diseases, including colon 
cancer  (Friedenreich  et  al. 2001), and other dis­ 
orders that are accompanied by changes in 
the gut microbiome (De Hertogh et al. The  mechanisms  of  exercise­mediated 
changes  in  gut  ecology  are  not  known; 
however, they are likely to be mediated by 
altering the host factors that influence the 
intestinal micro environment. Thus, the antimicrobial activity of the bile 
acids may elicit selective pressure on the bacte­ 
rial communities in exercised mice, leading 
to a shift of the gut microbiome structure as 
observed in the present study. showed that rats that 
participated in voluntary running exercise had 
increased butyrate concentration in the cecum 
compared with sedentary rats. SCFAs  (e.g.  butyrate  and  acetate)  increase 
colonic epithelial cell proliferation and decrease 
the risk of colo rectal cancer. In 
another study, overweight pregnant patients 
had  reduced  abundance  of  Bifidobacteria 
and Bacteroidetes and increased abundance 
of selected Firmicutes (e.g., Staphylococcus) 
and Proteobacteria (e.g., Enterobacteriaceae) 
(Santacruz et al. Nevertheless, E. faecium isolates from 
clinical outbreaks are different strains than 
E. faecium from animals, food, and humans 
in  the  community  (Franz  et  al.