were  housed  individually  in  plastic  cages 
equipped with a running wheel (Coulbourn 
Instruments,  Whitehall,  PA);  however, 
wheels  were  locked  in  cages  of  seden­
tary mice. Running activity was monitored 
24 hr/day, 7 days/week and analyzed using 
Clocklab  (Actimetrics,  Wilmette,  IL)  and 
Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, MA) software. A diagram of the study design is shown 
in Figure 1. Each scan 
was captured using the GeneChip Microarray 
Analysis Suite (Affymetrix). Probe  intensities  were  background  sub­
tracted and scaled to values for PhyloChip 
Control  Mix. Before  classification 
analy sis,  we  performed  data  reduction  via 
multiple filtering steps as described by Hazen 
et al. 2002) as implemented in 
Prediction  Analysis  of  Microarrays  (PAM; 
http://www­stat.stanford.edu/~tibs/PAM/) 
was  used  to  identify  OTUs  with  the  most 
significant differences in abundance between 
comparison groups. We first analyzed the effects 
of PCB exposure on the gut microbiome in 
sedentary  mice. The  Welch’s  test  revealed 
that  exposure  to  the  PCB  mixture  signifi­
cantly (p < 0.05 by Student’s t­test) altered 
the abundance of 1,223 bacterial taxa in these 
mice (1,133 taxa had decreased abundance 
and 90 taxa had increased abundance). Exposure  to  the  PCB  mixture  did  not 
alter bio diversity of the gut microbiome; all 
11,229 taxa were detected in at least one sam­
ple from sedentary mice. After PCB exposure, 
the number of taxa dropped to 10,798, but 
the change was not statistically significant. Exercise alters the composition of the gut 
microbiome. Experimental design indicating treatment and sampling times. 726 

volume 121 | number 6 | June 2013  •  Environmental Health Perspectives

Choi et al. Among detected bacterial taxa, 93 were 
present exclusively in either exercised or sed­
entary mice. These taxa were then analyzed by 

PCoA with weighted Unifrac distance, which 
indicated significant differences in the compo­
sition of the microbial communities between 
the exercised and sedentary mice (Figure 2B). 2011), the gut micro­
biome has been proposed to play a role in 
the  assessment  of  health  risks  associated 
with environ mental chemicals (Betts 2011; 
Snedeker  and  Hay  2012). Although these results are the 
first to show effects of PCBs on the gut micro­
biome, the decrease in bacterial abundance we 
observed corresponds with the finding that 
PCB­contaminated soil is characterized by a 
shift in structure and abundance of bacterial 
community (Petric et al. Thus, exer­
cise provided protection against PCB­induced 
changes in the gut microbiome. In particular, 
exercise prevented a PCB­induced decrease 
in abundance of Proteobacteria, which was 
observed in seden tary mice. other aspects of gut physiology (e.g., peri­ 
stalsis; Song et al. 2012) and pathology have 
been  reported. 2001), and other dis­ 
orders that are accompanied by changes in 
the gut microbiome (De Hertogh et al. The  mechanisms  of  exercise­mediated 
changes  in  gut  ecology  are  not  known; 
however, they are likely to be mediated by 
altering the host factors that influence the 
intestinal micro environment. SCFAs  (e.g.  butyrate  and  acetate)  increase 
colonic epithelial cell proliferation and decrease 
the risk of colo rectal cancer. observed that physical activity increased expres­ 
sion of IgA and cytokines such as interleukin­6 
and tumor necrosis factor­α.