Pregnancy and the Microbiome

that we are born germ free (Tissier, 1900) and is still the belief
of many physicians, numerous pieces of evidence now cast
doubt on this hypothesis, and suggest that a bacterial presence
already exists in the feto-placental unit (Hu et al., Additional methods to test the microbial roles
and functions include metatranscriptomics, metabolomics, and
use of germ-free animal models. However, from

the ﬁrst to the third trimester, the gut microbiota composition
changes dramatically. Pregnancy and the Microbiome

third trimester of pregnancy. After
transferring third trimester gut-microbiota to GF mice, the mice
gained signiﬁcantly more weight, developed insulin resistance,
and had a greater inﬂammatory response compared to the
ﬁrst-trimester transplanted mice (Koren et al., Moreover, antibiotics during pregnancy signiﬁcantly reduced
bacterial diversity, and promoted weight gain. Accordingly, in a study in
which mothers with allergic disease and atopic sensitization
received probiotics during the last 2 months of pregnancy and
the ﬁrst 2 months of lactation, a reduced risk for eczema in
the oﬀspring was observed compared to placebo treatment
(Rautava et al., In another study, maternal microbiota
was shown to shape the oﬀspring’s immune system. However,
several lines of evidence suggest the presence of bacteria in the
normal placenta, itself. With
the emergence of microbiome research and the realization that
changes in the maternal microbiome compositions occur during
pregnancy, it has been suggested that there may be correlations
between the microbial communities present, and the health of the
pregnancy (Mysorekar and Cao, 2014). and
and Ureaplasma,
higher alpha diversity. EARLY BACTERIAL COLONIZATION OF
THE FETUS

Until recently, it was assumed that newborns are born completely
germ free, and that the initial colonization of the newborn gut
occurs during birth. found a correlation between
newborn gestational age and meconium microbial compositions. found no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between
the meconium microbiota of vaginal vs. Cesarean section (C-
section) delivered infants (Gosalbes et al., found lower levels of
the T helper cell-related chemokines CXCL10 and CXCL11
in the blood of
infants delivered by C-section compared
with vaginally born infants. The ﬁrst 2 years of life, which are characterized by
enormous dietary changes, new environmental exposures, and
maturation of the immune system therefore have a strong
inﬂuence on the infant’s microbiota. In the ﬁrst months of life, the gut microbiota is less
stable than later in childhood, and there are changes in the
phylogenetic diversity. Malnutrition in
young children was shown to aﬀect their microbiome causing
it to resemble that of earlier developmental stages (Smith et al., The most dominant bacteria in the colostrum (the ﬁrst milk
produced during late pregnancy, and contains antibodies)
included Weisella, Leuconostoc, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus,
and Lactococcus, whereas milk samples collected 1–6 months
post-partum harbored oral cavity related bacteria such as
Veillonella, Leptotrichia, and Prevotella, perhaps due to frequent
interaction with the infant’s oral microbiota (Cabrera-Rubio
et al., The source of the milk microbial populations is considered
to be from the gut, and the mechanism by which bacteria
travel from the gut into the mammary glands is thought to
be facilitated by hormonal changes that occur during and
following gestation. Text refers to changes in breast milk vs. formula feeding. observed that the gut of formula-
fed infant contained fewer bacterial cells and more species

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

9

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al. Pregnancy and infancy
are both times of growth and increased weight gain, changes
in diet, and alterations in immune system components. Obviously,
these numerous events and changes must be synchronized in
order to achieve the healthy normal development enabling
life. In
this regard, it has already been shown that the microbiome both
aﬀects and is aﬀected by the endocrine system. The microbiota
has the ability to produce and secrete hormones or hormone
analogs, and respond to and regulate host hormones. During pregnancy,
the
immune system must be modulated to allow for proper fetal
development (including development of
immune
system), as well as preventing fetal rejection by the maternal
immune system. there are dual eﬀects between the microbiome
and host metabolism. Therefore, the microbial interactions
during these times may have clinical relevance in the design of
the desired type of antibiotics and/or probiotics for pregnant
women or newborns. We are therefore conﬁdent that future
research in these ﬁelds will provide useful clinical knowledge,

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

10

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al. FUNDING

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

MO, HN, and OK reviewed the literature and wrote the
manuscript.