Pregnancy and the Microbiome

that we are born germ free (Tissier, 1900) and is still the belief
of many physicians, numerous pieces of evidence now cast
doubt on this hypothesis, and suggest that a bacterial presence
already exists in the feto-placental unit (Hu et al., We hypothesize that an appropriate microbiota is essential
for healthy early development, pregnancy maintenance, and
the ﬁrst years of childhood. Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

2

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al. However, from

the ﬁrst to the third trimester, the gut microbiota composition
changes dramatically. Pregnancy and the Microbiome

third trimester of pregnancy. Just as weight gain in pregnancy is necessary to
provide the needs of the growing fetus, so are the inﬂammatory
state and insulin insensitivity. The dominant Lactobacillus species in
pregnancy varies according to ethnic group; while L. jensenii
is predominantly observed in women of Asian and Caucasian
ethnicity, L. gasseri is absent in samples from Black women
(MacIntyre et al., A study characterizing the vaginal microbiota of pregnant
and non-pregnant African-Americans reported that during
pregnancy, one of
the changes is dominance of a single
Lactobacillus species over others (Romero et al., However,
several lines of evidence suggest the presence of bacteria in the
normal placenta, itself. It is important to note that the microbial density present in
the placenta is very low, requiring precise veriﬁcation in all
cases that research results are not due to contamination. With
the emergence of microbiome research and the realization that
changes in the maternal microbiome compositions occur during
pregnancy, it has been suggested that there may be correlations
between the microbial communities present, and the health of the
pregnancy (Mysorekar and Cao, 2014). EARLY BACTERIAL COLONIZATION OF
THE FETUS

Until recently, it was assumed that newborns are born completely
germ free, and that the initial colonization of the newborn gut
occurs during birth. found a correlation between
newborn gestational age and meconium microbial compositions. found no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between
the meconium microbiota of vaginal vs. Cesarean section (C-
section) delivered infants (Gosalbes et al., found lower levels of
the T helper cell-related chemokines CXCL10 and CXCL11
in the blood of
infants delivered by C-section compared
with vaginally born infants. However, the high β-diversity observed at birth
(which is higher than that observed in adults) is reduced by
12 months of age (Backhed et al., THE HUMAN MILK MICROBIOME

Human milk is produced by the mother to promote the normal
and healthy development of her infant oﬀspring. The most dominant bacteria in the colostrum (the ﬁrst milk
produced during late pregnancy, and contains antibodies)
included Weisella, Leuconostoc, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus,
and Lactococcus, whereas milk samples collected 1–6 months
post-partum harbored oral cavity related bacteria such as
Veillonella, Leptotrichia, and Prevotella, perhaps due to frequent
interaction with the infant’s oral microbiota (Cabrera-Rubio
et al., Future research is needed to determine whether the milk
microbial populations associated with maternal obesity may have
implications on the oﬀspring’s weight. The source of the milk microbial populations is considered
to be from the gut, and the mechanism by which bacteria
travel from the gut into the mammary glands is thought to
be facilitated by hormonal changes that occur during and
following gestation. Pregnancy and infancy
are both times of growth and increased weight gain, changes
in diet, and alterations in immune system components. Obviously,
these numerous events and changes must be synchronized in
order to achieve the healthy normal development enabling
life. However, much work
remains to decipher the meaning of these changes, and their role
within the overall process leading to healthy pregnancy, birth,
and early development. there are dual eﬀects between the microbiome
and host metabolism. We are therefore conﬁdent that future
research in these ﬁelds will provide useful clinical knowledge,

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

10

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al. FUNDING

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

MO, HN, and OK reviewed the literature and wrote the
manuscript.