Hullar and Fu

Page 2

Here, we present below examples of the role of the microbiome in dietary metabolism, an 
overview of eukaryotic epigenetic mechanisms, and microbially-derived metabolites that are 
relevant to eukaryotic epigenetic changes in gene expression that may be linked to colon 
cancer. Diet shapes the microbiome

Diet helps shape the composition of the intestinal microbiota. Epigenetics refers to heritable changes in gene activity that are not caused by changes in the 
DNA sequence.19 Regulation of gene expression can occur through post translation 
modification of the amino acids in histone proteins, by methylation of DNA, and at the post-
transcriptional level by miRNAs.20

Histone proteins are involved in tightly packing chromosomes into chromatin in the nucleus. Epigenetics

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 3

of acetyl groups to the lysine residues of histones that activates normally repressed genes. In cancer cells, patterns of histone 
modifications and methylation differ from normal cells. DNA 
methylation patterns change in response to environmental factors through DNA 
methyltransferases (DNMT1, DNMT2 DNMT3A, and DNMT3B) in the presence of S-
adenoysl-L-methionine.27, 28 Hypermethylation of these CpG dinucleotides or CpG islands, 
if they are in the promoter regions of a gene, result in transcriptional gene silencing and gene 
inactivation.20 Methylation has been linked to many diseases, including cancer.29-32

MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small, non-coding RNAs, which inhibit gene expression at the 
posttranscriptional level. miRNAs regulate post-transcriptional expression by either 
imperfect base-pairing to mRNA or by affecting mRNA stability. Each miRNA controls 
several genes in related pathways. showed 
that while F. prausnitizii and Roseburia spp derived about 85% of butyrate carbon from 
external pools of acetate, Coporcoccus spp. only derived 28%.41 In addition, different 
sources of carbohydrates produce different amounts of butyrate ranging from 56% with 
pectin to 90% for xylan. In normal homeostasis, butyrate plays a role in 
promoting cell turnover of the colonic epithelium. Butyrate can then accumulate in the nucleus where it functions as an HDAC inhibitor and 
inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis. This may be due to 
differences in response among eukaryotic cell lines or effects of other SCFA. Cooking cruciferous vegetables deactivates the plant 
myrosinases, and given that most cruciferous vegetables consumed by humans are cooked, 
gut bacteria play a critical role in converting glucosinolates to ITC. Previous studies have 
shown that certain species of bacteria, such as Escherichia coli, Bacteroides 
thetaiotaomicron, Enterococcus faecalis, Enterococcus faecium, Peptostreptococcus sp. and 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. Further studies in wild-type and APC 
Min/+ mice showed that a single dose of SFN reduced HDAC activity and increase histone 
acetylation in colonic mucosa.63 Additionally, SFN has been identified as a DNA 
demethylating agent in breast cancer cell lines although this has not been verified in colon 
tissue.64

Polyphenols represent a wide variety of phytochemicals that are divided into several classes 
according to their chemical structures. In parallel, Kemperman et al found that there were dramatic shifts in the 
composition of the microbiome with continual polyphenol dosing, although it is difficult to 
directly link the disappearance of valerolactones to specific bacteria.75 These studies suggest 
that diet may alter the microbiome, which in turn alters dietary exposure and down-stream 
host response. Several studies have shown that EGCG 
inhibits both bacterial and eukaryotic DNMT and alters DNA methylation patterns.76, 77 
This mechanism is mediated by altering the availability of methyl groups that are used to 
methylate catechol groups on polyphenols by catecohol-O-methyltransferase (EC 2.1.16). Ingested ellagitannins are 
hydrolyzed in the stomach and small intestine to ellagic acid. Enterohepatic circulation of urolithins and ellagic acids alters 
host exposure to these compounds, and there is large between person variation in urolithin 
production.83 Recent studies suggest that bacteria from the C. coccoides group and 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. Most of the bile acids are absorbed in the ileum and delivered back 
to the liver. Listed below are two examples of microbial metabolism of fats 
that may influence epigenetics. Azoxymethane (AOM) tumor 
induction in rats fed either fish showed that the 
fish oil intervention produced fewer tumors and the lowest number of differentially express 
miRNAs.95 The anaerobic bacteria, Roseburia, Bifidobacteria, and Lactobacillus, found in 
the distal gut, metabolize 3ω LC-PUFA from dietary intake to conjugated linolenic (CLnA) 
acids.96, 97 Although 3ω LC-PUFA are not produced by bacteria, the availability of 3ω LC-

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. Functional genes measured in the gut 
microbiome suggest that there are basic metabolic pathways that are conserved across all 
healthy individuals114, 115 which have the core capacity to generate compounds that 
influence epigenetic pathways of gene expression.109, 110 While colonic epithelium may 
have immediate exposure to microbial metabolites, many microbial products are absorbed 
into systemic circulation and may alter gene expression in regions distal to the gut. Summary and Future Directions

Acknowledgments