Hullar and Fu

Page 2

Here, we present below examples of the role of the microbiome in dietary metabolism, an 
overview of eukaryotic epigenetic mechanisms, and microbially-derived metabolites that are 
relevant to eukaryotic epigenetic changes in gene expression that may be linked to colon 
cancer. Diet shapes the microbiome

Diet helps shape the composition of the intestinal microbiota. The children in Burkina Faso consumed a diet high in fiber and 
non-animal protein whereas the European children consumed a diet higher in refined 
carbohydrates and animal protein. Epigenetics refers to heritable changes in gene activity that are not caused by changes in the 
DNA sequence.19 Regulation of gene expression can occur through post translation 
modification of the amino acids in histone proteins, by methylation of DNA, and at the post-
transcriptional level by miRNAs.20

Histone proteins are involved in tightly packing chromosomes into chromatin in the nucleus. Post-translational modifications of the N-termini of histone 3 or histone 4, 
occur by acetylation, methylation, ubiquitination, phosphorylation, or sumoylation. HATs catalyze the addition 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. In cancer cells, patterns of histone 
modifications and methylation differ from normal cells. Hypermethylation of genes involved 
in pathways identified as the hallmarks of cancer: cell cycle regulation, DNA repair, 
apoptosis, hormone response, carcinogen metabolism, angiogenesis and metastases are 
found in several human cancers 2, 23-26

Methylation of DNA in the coding region of a gene, especially the conversion of cytosine to 
5-methylcytosine, leads to CpG dinucleotides that affect expression of target genes. miRNAs regulate post-transcriptional expression by either 
imperfect base-pairing to mRNA or by affecting mRNA stability. Each miRNA controls 
several genes in related pathways. Microbial metabolism of dietary fiber to SCFA

The main types of dietary carbohydrate that escape digestion in the small intestine are 
resistant starches, non-starch polysaccharides, and oligosaccharides primarily from plants. only derived 28%.41 In addition, different 
sources of carbohydrates produce different amounts of butyrate ranging from 56% with 
pectin to 90% for xylan. Butyrate 
is present in high concentrations in the lumen and is transported into eukaryotic gut 
epithelial cells.47 In the colon crypts, there is a decreasing concentration gradient of butyrate 
from the lumen to the bottom of the crypt. Butyrate can then accumulate in the nucleus where it functions as an HDAC inhibitor and 
inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis. This may be due to 
differences in response among eukaryotic cell lines or effects of other SCFA. Previous studies have 
shown that certain species of bacteria, such as Escherichia coli, Bacteroides 
thetaiotaomicron, Enterococcus faecalis, Enterococcus faecium, Peptostreptococcus sp. and 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 5

Bifidobacterium sp., Further studies in wild-type and APC 
Min/+ mice showed that a single dose of SFN reduced HDAC activity and increase histone 
acetylation in colonic mucosa.63 Additionally, SFN has been identified as a DNA 
demethylating agent in breast cancer cell lines although this has not been verified in colon 
tissue.64

Polyphenols represent a wide variety of phytochemicals that are divided into several classes 
according to their chemical structures. However, epidemiologic studies show inconsistent results 
when evaluating green tea consumption in relation to colon cancer risk.66-70 This is in part 
due to differences in tea consumption habits and failure to account for other factors, such as 
alcohol consumption or tobacco smoke, which may modify the effect of green tea 
consumption on health.71, 72 A recent study found that green tea consumed at least three 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. In parallel, Kemperman et al found that there were dramatic shifts in the 
composition of the microbiome with continual polyphenol dosing, although it is difficult to 
directly link the disappearance of valerolactones to specific bacteria.75 These studies suggest 
that diet may alter the microbiome, which in turn alters dietary exposure and down-stream 
host response. Enterohepatic circulation of urolithins and ellagic acids alters 
host exposure to these compounds, and there is large between person variation in urolithin 
production.83 Recent studies suggest that bacteria from the C. coccoides group and 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. Ellagitannins

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 7

Dietary fats

Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids

Actinobacteria are involved in the production of urolithins.83, 84 Specifically, urolithin D 
was produced followed by urolithin C and urolithin B, and was associated with an increase 
in Bifidobacteria spp and Lactobacillus spp. Bile is secreted from the gall bladder into the small intestine to help emulsify fats 
during digestion. Most of the bile acids are absorbed in the ileum and delivered back 
to the liver. Listed below are two examples of microbial metabolism of fats 
that may influence epigenetics. Azoxymethane (AOM) tumor 
induction in rats fed either fish showed that the 
fish oil intervention produced fewer tumors and the lowest number of differentially express 
miRNAs.95 The anaerobic bacteria, Roseburia, Bifidobacteria, and Lactobacillus, found in 
the distal gut, metabolize 3ω LC-PUFA from dietary intake to conjugated linolenic (CLnA) 
acids.96, 97 Although 3ω LC-PUFA are not produced by bacteria, the availability of 3ω LC-

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. Summary and Future Directions

Acknowledgments