Cultured human gastrointestinal microbiota

997

cus, and Peptococcus (Moore & Holdeman, 1974a). FEMS Microbiology Reviews
published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Federation of European Microbiological Societies. GenBank
Accession Numbers of the SSU rRNA gene sequence are provided for each species and the family names are indicated. 2009;
Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., Both cultivation- and
molecular-based studies show that Collinsella aerofaciens
is a prevalent and an abundant gastrointestinal microor-
ganism (Moore & Holdeman, 1974a; Benno et al., These bacteria
produce formate and lactate. FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 996–1047

ª 2014 The Authors. Currently, only four gas-
trointestinal Bacteroides spp. form deep branches in the
phylogenetic tree , suggesting that these bacteria
and
(B. ureolyticus, B. galacturonicus, B. pectinophilus,
B. coagulans) still should be reclassiﬁed to other phyloge-
netic groups. There is no data about
the role of these bacteria in the gastrointestinal microbi-
ota, but it is noteworthy that several of these bacteria
were detected only in the SSU rRNA gene clone libraries
of the microbiota of inﬂammatory bowel disease patients
(Frank et al., Although highly important for the health, Lac-
tobacilli are rarely detected as markers of the gastrointes-
tinal microbiota dysbiosis, but such reports exist and

include a reduced abundance in patients suffering from
inﬂammatory bowel disease (Keighley et al., other related,

lactic
acid bacteria can be detected in the gastrointestinal tract. The species indicated in bold are
based on the SSU rRNA gene sequence clustering within the families that are designated on the ﬁgure in contrast to their ofﬁcial classiﬁcation. 1974), and
up 107 cells g
intestinal content of healthy infants
(Mevissen-Verhage et al., However, Eubacte-
rium, similar to Clostridium,
is very
rod-shaped,
vaguely described. Two of
these gastrointestinal bacteria,
namely Catabacter hongkongensis and C. minuta, form a
the
separate cluster within the Clostridiales order of
Clostridia class and are the only cultured representatives
of a phylogenetic group that was previously detected only
in various molecular studies and was in a previous review
designated as uncultured Clostridiales II (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojano-
vi(cid:1)c et al., Not much is known about the role of this
group of strictly anaerobic bacteria in the human gastro-
intestinal tract, but it is noteworthy that bacteria that
belong to the Christensenella/Catabacter group were
reported to be dramatically depleted in fecal
samples of ulcerative patients relative to controls (Rajili(cid:1)c-
Stojanovi(cid:1)c
(ﬁvefold)
depleted in fecal samples of patients with postinfectious
irritable bowel syndrome (Jalanka-Tuovinen et al., Phylogenetic tree the human gastrointestinal species that belong to the class of the Alphaproteobacteria class. The role of these bacteria in human
health has been a subject of a long-lasting debate result-
ing in a conclusion that at least four gastrointestinal spe-
cies (A. caviae, A. hydrophila, A. jandaei, and A. veronii),
are pathogenic (Janda & Abbott, 1998). Their presence
in the gastrointestinal tract is termed intestinal spirochet-
osis, which in clinical cases is associated with abdominal
pain and diarrhea. However, a retrospective review of cases
diagnosed as intestinal spirochetosis revealed that the pres-
ence of Spirochetes in the gastrointestinal biopsies is often
asymptomatic and may not have pathological signiﬁcance
(Carr et al., The presence of the Planctomycetes in the human gas-
trointestinal tract was reported only in molecular-based
studies (Wilson & Blitchington, 1996; De Filippo et al., Phylogenetic tree the human
gastrointestinal Fungi. 2013), or molecular-based methods
(Scanlan & Marchesi, 2008). Having in mind their source, and
instability (as illustrated in the results of longitudinal fol-
low up of fungal microbiota; Scanlan & Marchesi, 2008),
it is likely that these fungi are not a constant and func-
tionally relevant part of the gastrointestinal microbiota. According to the current convention, all
Blastocystis isolated from humans are identiﬁed as Blasto-
cystis hominis, although their SSU rRNA gene sequence
analysis showed that nine different phylotypes of these
organisms can be detected in the human gastrointestinal
tract (Arisue et al.,