Diseases 2018, 6, 56

2 of 10

between the gut microbiome and CVDs to promote an understanding of the latest perspectives of the
role of the gut microbiome in CVDs. TMAO can be measured by liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry. These metabolites have
also been reported to have a link to CVDs. Furthermore, recent reports have shown that indole and indoxyl sulfate affect the arterial blood pressure
via peripheral and central mechanisms that depend on serotonin signaling in rats 

Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), produced by the colonic bacterial fermentation of dietary ﬁber,
contribute a signiﬁcant proportion of the daily energy requirement  SCFAs, especially butyrate
and propionate, play an important role in regulatory T cell differentiation and intestinal tract immune
regulation. Hydrogen sulﬁde is an important biological mediator that is involved in various physiological
processes, including the regulation of arterial blood pressure  Moreover, phenylacetylglutamine
is a product that is formed by the conjugation of phenylacetate and glutamine. was also signiﬁcantly higher in the patients
with CAD than in the healthy subjects. This may be due to the use of proton pump inhibitors in
CAD patients  Consistent with our results, Bacteroides spp. may
have the potential to regulate atherosclerosis progression. Moreover, older HF patients had a lower abundance of Bacteroidetes and
a higher abundance of Proteobacteria compared to the younger HF patients. In line with the previous report,
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii decreased in the HF patients compared to the controls. The results of
these studies suggest that an altered gut microbiome may have an impact on the development and
progression of heart failure. Clinical reports demonstrating the gut microbiome in patients with CVD. Year

Study Population

Country

Analysis

Results

2012 Nat. 12 patients with symptomatic atherosclerosis
(myocardial infarction or cerebrovascular events)
and 13 age- and sex-matched healthy individuals. China

Gut metagenome

Enterobacteriaceae (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., and Enterobacter aerogenes),
Streptococcus spp., ↓, Prevotella copri ↓, Alistipes shahii ↓ in ACVD. These disease-dependent unique features in the functional capacity may give us clues for
novel therapeutic approaches. Administration of medication has a substantial effect on the gut microbiome, and medication-matched
controls are required to elucidate the impact of the gut microbiome on disease progression. Moreover,
the studies mentioned above have provided useful characterization of the fecal microbial proﬁle
in patients with CVD; however, we are still struggling with these descriptive data. In such cases, an in vitro fermentation
system simulating the human intestinal tract may help to evaluate the functionality or safety of these
interventions under highly reproducible conditions without the ethical issues  Speciﬁcally, we can
culture feces from patients with prebiotics or probiotics in an in vitro fermentation system and analyze
how the gut microbiome, and its metabolites and functions, are changed after the intervention. These may be due to

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

8 of 10

the differences in the natural gut microbiome. Author Contributions: T.Y. conceived and wrote the manuscript and made critical revisions. K.H. searched the bibliography and made critical revisions. Article Processing Charges was sponsored by MDPI. Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.