Microbiome  5:158 

Page 2 of 19

infant nutrition, and common clinical practices in neonatal
care  We hypothesize that assembly and function
of the preterm infants’ gut microbiota is associated with
postnatal growth patterns and represents a yet unexplored
personalized therapeutic potential for optimizing infant
development. Microbiome  5:158 

Page 3 of 19

Consequently, we used gestational age at birth and PMA
for our analyses. Testing the median dissimilarity revealed that it
is significantly higher when the phase changed between
consecutive samples than when it remained the same
(p < 0.0001), suggesting discrete periods of community
restructuring corresponding to phase transition. c Bar charts representing the average weighted UniFrac distance
between consecutive samples of each individual infant. Samples for preterm infants
include those collected weekly from birth through discharge. Phases 1
and 2 are considered as binary outcome variables (yes/no) and are analyzed separately. For clarity, only significant associations are reported in this table. Full results are reported in Additional file 9: Table S8B

Grier et al. While progression through the phases depends largely on
PMA, we identified significant associations with nutri-
tional factors, diuretics, and antibiotics. Increased protein and lipids during P1 are
strongly associated with a higher growth rate. This may be due to our reliance on a clinical obser-
vation of meconium clearance to more solid fecal
material. Third, in both the phase- and period-based
models, the abundance of several dominant infant gut
microbiota taxa (e.g., Bifidobacterium) were signifi-
cantly affected by gestational age at birth, PMA at sam-
pling, total calories and proportions of macronutrients
consumed at the week of sampling, and multiple clinical
variables. Infants included in the study were from
the multicenter Prematurity and Respiratory Outcomes
Program (PROP) and the Respiratory Pathogens Research
Center (RPRC) at the University of Rochester School of
Medicine and were cared for in a single-center Newborn
Intensive Care Unit (NICU). First, weight percentile was
computed as the percentage of weight measures of a
population of the same sex and age that fall below the
observed weight value. If the resulting value is less than or equal to two,
the gut microbiota is defined as being in phase two; other-
wise, it is defined as being in phase one (P1). Microbiome  5:158 

Page 15 of 19

assessed at each taxonomic level using the metagen-
omicsSeq zero-inflated Gaussian test  and the re-
sults are summarized in Additional file 5: Tables S4A–C.
Testing for differential functional capacity between the
phases was performed using LEfSe with per-sample
normalization to 1 M total counts, minimum effect size
of 2.0, alpha of 0.1, an all-against-all strategy, and other-
wise default parameters. The results are summarized in
Additional file 6: Table S5. The
DOL of the first phase 3 sample observed for each sub-
ject and their gestational age at birth were used as covar-
iates, and the total change in weight Z-score from birth
to discharge was used as the outcome variable. Microbiome  5:158 

Page 16 of 19

their possible confounding effects. Number of Dirichlet components vs.
model fit. Linear
regression analysis of meconium samples and Phase 1 rectal samples. XLSX 109 kb)

Additional file 5: Table S4. DOCX 14 kb)

Additional file 10: Table S9. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Ethics approval and consent to participate
Written informed consent was obtained from a parent or guardian of all
participating infants. 7Department of Pediatrics, Medical University
of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.