Diseases 2018, 6, 56

2 of 10

between the gut microbiome and CVDs to promote an understanding of the latest perspectives of the
role of the gut microbiome in CVDs. TMAO can be measured by liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry. These ﬁndings support the idea that prevention of CVD is feasible through gut microbial
modulation. These metabolites have
also been reported to have a link to CVDs. Furthermore, recent reports have shown that indole and indoxyl sulfate affect the arterial blood pressure
via peripheral and central mechanisms that depend on serotonin signaling in rats 

Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), produced by the colonic bacterial fermentation of dietary ﬁber,
contribute a signiﬁcant proportion of the daily energy requirement  SCFAs, especially butyrate
and propionate, play an important role in regulatory T cell differentiation and intestinal tract immune
regulation. Hydrogen sulﬁde is an important biological mediator that is involved in various physiological
processes, including the regulation of arterial blood pressure  Moreover, phenylacetylglutamine
is a product that is formed by the conjugation of phenylacetate and glutamine. Increased levels of
p-cresyl sulfate are associated with worse outcomes in patients with chronic kidney disease 

These results suggest that gut microbial metabolites may play an important role in the
development of CVD. Further studies are warranted to elucidate the causal relationship between these
metabolites and CVD. was also signiﬁcantly higher in the patients
with CAD than in the healthy subjects. may
have the potential to regulate atherosclerosis progression. Although
the richness and diversity of the gut microbiota were not signiﬁcantly different between the HF
patients and healthy subjects, Dorea and Clostridium were less abundant in the HF patients than
in the healthy subjects. There is also a report
from China that shows a metagenomic analysis of fecal samples from patients with chronic HF 
They enrolled 53 HF patients and 41 controls with risk factors and compared the compositions of
their gut microbiomes. Ruminococcus, Acinetobacter, and Veillonella increased in the HF patients,
whereas Alistipes, Faecalibacterium, and Oscillibacter decreased. In line with the previous report,
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii decreased in the HF patients compared to the controls. Clinical reports demonstrating the gut microbiome in patients with CVD. Year

Study Population

Country

Analysis

Results

2012 Nat. 12 patients with symptomatic atherosclerosis
(myocardial infarction or cerebrovascular events)
and 13 age- and sex-matched healthy individuals. China

16S rRNA V4 region

Enterobacteriaceae ↑, Proteobacteria ↑, Escherichia/Shigella ↑, Bacteroidetes ↓,
Bacteroidales ↓, Bacteroidaceae ↓, Bacteroides ↓ in stroke/TIA patients. and Enterobacter aerogenes),
Streptococcus spp., ↓, Prevotella copri ↓, Alistipes shahii ↓ in ACVD. Alternations in Gut Microbial Function Associated with CVD

In addition to the compositional characteristics, the functional characteristics of the gut
microbiome have been investigated in order to delineate the mechanisms related to the development
of CVD. Although metagenomic shotgun sequencing analysis is the main method to examine the
functional characteristics, methods are being developed to predict functional proﬁles from taxonomic
proﬁles. have investigated the metabolic patterns of the gut microbiome
in patients with chronic HF to provide direct evidence and a comprehensive understanding of
gut microbial dysbiosis  Fifty-three chronic HF patients (ischemic cardiomyopathy, n = 29;
dilated cardiomyopathy, n = 24) and 41 controls with risk factors were enrolled. Issues to Be Considered When Interpreting the Studies

Most clinical studies compare the gut microbial composition between patients and healthy controls. Moreover,
the studies mentioned above have provided useful characterization of the fecal microbial proﬁle
in patients with CVD; however, we are still struggling with these descriptive data. A speciﬁc gut
microbiome-based target to prevent CVD has yet to emerge, which is the greatest challenge that we
are currently facing. Of note,
we have observed some discrepancies between the ﬁndings in humans and mice. These may be due to

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

8 of 10

the differences in the natural gut microbiome. Author Contributions: T.Y. conceived and wrote the manuscript and made critical revisions. K.H. searched the bibliography and made critical revisions. Article Processing Charges was sponsored by MDPI.