Microbiome  5:158 

Page 2 of 19

infant nutrition, and common clinical practices in neonatal
care  We hypothesize that assembly and function
of the preterm infants’ gut microbiota is associated with
postnatal growth patterns and represents a yet unexplored
personalized therapeutic potential for optimizing infant
development. Sample collection occurred approximately weekly throughout the majority of
the hospitalization as clinically permitted. To select nutritional and clinical variables for our
study, we first used an initial linear mixed effect regres-
sion that associates gestational age at birth, PMA, one
main covariate (see Additional file 1: Table S1 for the full
list of covariates), and its interaction with PMA, with
microbiota taxa abundance. Green, gray, orange, and blue
represent Bacilli, Gammaproteobacteria, Clostridia, and Bacteroidia, respectively. c Bar charts representing the average weighted UniFrac distance
between consecutive samples of each individual infant. The height of the bar indicates the average dissimilarity between consecutive samples of the corresponding phases, with exact values included in
the table below the graph. Compos-
itional differences across the phases at all taxonomic levels
were characterized and pairwise comparisons were made
between phases. Effect of microbiota phase on infant growth, nutrient
intake, and medication
These observations prompted us to explore the potential
relationship between microbiota phase, parenteral and
enteral nutrient intake, medication and infant growth. 3a) in subjects (i.e., JE573,
J5028, J1B12) who remain in phase 1 or 2 for prolonged
periods. Microbiome  5:158 

Page 9 of 19

(See figure on previous page.) Samples for preterm infants
include those collected weekly from birth through discharge. For clarity, only significant associations are reported in this table. Full results are reported in Additional file 9: Table S8A
bResults of mixed-effects logistic regression analysis between nutrition/medication and microbiome phases during the LATE period (≥ 34 weeks PMA). While progression through the phases depends largely on
PMA, we identified significant associations with nutri-
tional factors, diuretics, and antibiotics. Microbiome  5:158 

Page 11 of 19

guided by daily infant growth rates and clinical evaluation. Conclusion
To our knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate an
association between gut microbiota phase, nutritional in-
take, and growth of preterm infants. Third, in both the phase- and period-based
models, the abundance of several dominant infant gut
microbiota taxa (e.g., Bifidobacterium) were signifi-
cantly affected by gestational age at birth, PMA at sam-
pling, total calories and proportions of macronutrients
consumed at the week of sampling, and multiple clinical
variables. Derived medication and nutrition variables
For all medications considered, binary variables were
derived for each sample that indicate whether or not a
given medication was administered in the week 
prior to sample collection. We applied Cole’s LMS method
as used by CDC and WHO  The standard growth
chart is based on sex-matched premature infant popula-
tion weight data collected by Fenton and Kim 
Weight Z-scores were computed based on the corre-
sponding weight percentiles. If this value is less than or equal

to two, the gut microbiota is defined as being in phase 3. For each functional pathway from the
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) that
was putatively identified, comparisons were made be-
tween the phases using LEfSe, which identifies features
that are statistically differentially abundant among bio-
logical classes (in this case phases) and then performs
comparative tests between pairs of biological classes to
identify where these features are significantly enriched
or diminished. Microbiome  5:158 

Page 15 of 19

assessed at each taxonomic level using the metagen-
omicsSeq zero-inflated Gaussian test  and the re-
sults are summarized in Additional file 5: Tables S4A–C.
Testing for differential functional capacity between the
phases was performed using LEfSe with per-sample
normalization to 1 M total counts, minimum effect size
of 2.0, alpha of 0.1, an all-against-all strategy, and other-
wise default parameters. The results are summarized in
Additional file 6: Table S5. The significance of associations is de-
test with Satterthwaite’s
termined by regression t
approximation. Listed
in this table are the numbers of taxa that are significantly associated with
each regressors in these initial regression analyses. ( Weighted UniFrac Principal Coordinate Analyses of
phase and Dirichlet component. ( XLSX 34 kb)

Additional file 8: Table S7. DOCX 14 kb)

Additional file 10: Table S9. All authors reviewed the
final manuscript. 5Division of Infectious Disease, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Rochester, NY, USA. 7Department of Pediatrics, Medical University
of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.