Defects in host genes controlling bacterial homeostasis or al-
terations of the gut microbiota composition have been associ-
ated with complex diseases, including inflammatory bowel dis-
ease (IBD), diabetes mellitus (Pflughoeft and Versalovic 2012)
and asthma (Maslowski et al. 2013)..

light on bacterial functionality. Finally, since immune struc-
tures in GF mice remain immature, much of our understanding
of host–microbe interactions involved in the development of the
immune system arose from the study of GF animals and is dis-
cussed in more detail later in this review..

An important limitation in murine microbial studies is the dif-
ference in bacterial composition between mice and humans. However,
microbial species seem to be critically adapted to specific hosts. Importantly, mice with mouse mi-
crobiota conferred better protection against Salmonella infection
than those with human microbiota. 2007)..

Although considerable literature exists about microbiota
transfer into GF animals, little is known about transferring mi-
crobiota into animals with non-GF intestines. In fact, antibiotic pretreatment even worsened the ef-
ficiency of engraftment. Transplantation has also been used in
mouse models of enteric infections. We
demonstrated that cohousing of mice from the age of 4 weeks
determines the sensitivity towards DSS-induced colitis, inde-
pendent of the specific genotype (Brinkman et al. As in-
nate sensors, they respond and divide rapidly upon stimulation. This methodology requires
sufficient backcrossing in a particular mouse strain to reduce
the mixed genetic background. These studies have demonstrated that deletion of a single
gene can cause substantial alterations in the microbiota (Vijay-
Kumar et al. Taken together, microbiota composition in genetically modified
mice may superimpose on the genetic effect causing a change
in host physiology..

Variation in the microbiological environment between research
institutions or commercial breeding facilities is a confounding
factor; however. For example, variations in airway responsiveness in
C57BL6 mice obtained from five different vendors were reported
(Chang, Mitzner and Watson 2012). The most convincing difference between cages is driven
by Helicobacter spp., 2002); however,
it is difficult to establish which is cause or consequence.