118

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 2012), modify the nervous system (Hsiao et al. 2013) and metabolize therapeutics into active compounds (Claus et al. Adjacent to the
mucosa, facultative anaerobes are able to grow because of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

120

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. The age at which the treatment is adminis-
trated is important since antibiotic treatment of mice at the age
of weaning results in long-term alteration of their gut microbial
communities, which does not occur in adult animals (Cho et al. During cohousing, animals may feed on feces
(also known as coprophagy) or more likely ingest feces by self-
grooming. This idea
is supported by the observation that microbial colonization of
neonate GF mice resulted in normal numbers of iNKT cells in
lungs and colon, while they are typically elevated in GF mice. Transplantation has also been used in
mouse models of enteric infections. The development of the murine microbiota and the immune system over time. ILCs: innate lymphoid cells; Treg: regulatory T cells. The microbiota on day 17 closely
resembles the microbiota one year after weaning when mice are
kept under similar conditions. Why the establish-
ment of this equilibrium in the ileum, which contains far less
bacteria compared to the colon, takes more time is speculative,
but indicates a higher complexity of the host–microbiome inter-
face in the ileal environment. GENETICS AND THE COMPOSITION OF THE
MURINE GUT MICROBIOME

Many inbred and outbred mouse strains with different genetic
backgrounds are available for animal studies. The origin of the mice is extremely
important because laboratory mice are available as both outbred
stocks and inbred strains from various vendors. Conventional housing vs. SPF and cage effects

The SPF concept was introduced in response to the increased
awareness of the effect of microorganisms on animal experi-
ments (Schaedler and Dubos 1962). To maintain the
SPF status, an increasing number of rodents are housed in indi-
vidually ventilated cages with limited shared environmental ex-
posure. Taken together, these examples urge us to use standardized
experimental conditions and to explicitly describe the animal
housing conditions in publications. When comparing different types of lactation, e.g. ar-
tificial vs. mother’s milk, significant differences in the develop-
ment of the gut microbiota were observed in the lactating pups
(Carlisle et al. Therefore, susceptibility to obesity requires an
intact mucosal immunity that guides diet-induced changes to
the microbiota. Diet-induced changes in bile acid composition can also be
an important cause of modifications to the gut bacterial com-
munity. 2002); however,
it is difficult to establish which is cause or consequence. (Konturek, Brzozowski and Konturek 2011). It is important to harmonize the exposure of the animals to
stressors such as noise and handling and minimize cage effects. In case the effect is more subtle,
it is recommended to separate littermate controls according to
their genotype right after weaning for at least 30 days before
the experiment so that the mice can develop their inherent mi-
crobiota; however, they should be divided over several cages. PV is senior full professor at Ghent
University and holder of a Methusalem grant [BOF09/01M00709],
from which BB is paid.