Cho and Blaser

Page 2

Characterizing the microbiome

Tools for studying the metagenome

individuals, and possibly, their disease risks. However, the subject is vast, and the implications for human health and disease are
wide-ranging. Cooperative interactions between microbes and their hosts typically involve microbial
participation in host functions such as defence, metabolism, and reproduction10. As sequencing and bioinformatics technologies continue to evolve (see ref 21 for a review of
the state-of-the-art technologies), scientific priorities will include elucidating the ‘core’
metagenome that occupies a specific human niche, and discerning the differences between
normal and diseased hosts.. As an example of the latter, Greenblum et al. By categorizing metagenomic sequences based on

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 3

Taxonomic and functional variation

gene function, they constructed community-level metabolic networks varying in gene
abundance, and examined the topological features of these networks in relation to host
phenotype. Such topological tools can be applied to explore differences in
other host disease states. The substantial non-linear interactions in complex co-evolved
systems ensure that ecological networks are robust against random removals49. Considering the importance of guilds of bacteria

Nat Rev Genet. All are subject to perturbation in the course of
normal development and aging, and especially with disease. However, changes are also evident across the human
lifespan. In mice, this clearly occurs in the GI tract68. Our knowledge of microbiome dynamics, especially age-related changes, during human
adulthood is limited. Similarly, in the stomach,, the age-related progressive development of gastric
atrophy (enhanced by H. pylori presence75,76) selects for gastric microbiota that are
substantially different from the norm 77. The microbiome is essential for the activation of host immune responses 104. Antibiotic use in human
infancy, before age 6 months, was significantly associated with obesity development123. The gut microbiota and rheumatoid arthritis

Disregulation of host responses secondary to DYSBIOSIS within the gut lumen could affect
distant anatomical sites through activation of host immune responses. This may be a
mechanism in rheumatoid arthritis, another chronic idiopathic inflammatory condition. Although these criteria were advanced largely to unravel epidemiological
relationships, they are applicable to genetics as well and to metagenomics, in particular. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 10

Perspectives

For understanding causation and pathogenesis, model organisms provide an important
approach. For diseases that can be studied
in model organisms, microbiota roles can be explored within the constraints of particular
model systems (Table 2). The extension of this concept to humanized model
organisms130 allows better approximation of the effects of the human microbiome on
disease processes in tractable animal models. Important questions to pursue are listed in Box 2. As such, this is a frontier for human
preventive medicine, and for medical management of chronic diseases. He is an Assistant Professor of Medicine at the NYU Langone Medical
Center, USA.