Cho and Blaser

Page 2

Characterizing the microbiome

Tools for studying the metagenome

individuals, and possibly, their disease risks. The taxonomic diversity inherent in complex environmental communities and the task of
identifying specific associations with host traits create unique challenges. As sequencing and bioinformatics technologies continue to evolve (see ref 21 for a review of
the state-of-the-art technologies), scientific priorities will include elucidating the ‘core’
metagenome that occupies a specific human niche, and discerning the differences between
normal and diseased hosts.. As an example of the latter, Greenblum et al. By categorizing metagenomic sequences based on

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01. Their analysis identified specific network topologies related to obesity and IBD;
skewed topologies chiefly differ in genes related to host interactivity, particularly in
relationship to metabolism. In the short-term, functional redundancy may mask
extinction effects, but in the longer-run, extinctions lead to loss of contingency responses
that can cause ecological crashes49. Considering the importance of guilds of bacteria

Nat Rev Genet. All are subject to perturbation in the course of
normal development and aging, and especially with disease. Influences on the microbiota during the life cycle

As described in the previous section, differences in microbiota composition exist across
body sites and between individuals. In general, the greater the force of mating
preference, the more likely those populations become sexually isolated64,65; this could affect
tribal differentiation and other ethnic differences in humans. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 6

composition may have affected mating preference in humans, representing another
phenotype under strong selective pressure. These concepts are particularly relevant to oncogenesis, which is generally age-related. Studies to
explore these findings using HTS are currently underway89. The discovery that H. pylori was adapted to survive in the acidic gastric environment
overturned the dogma that the stomach is sterile. H.
pylori is a classical AMPHIBIONT; the presence (or absence) of an H. pylori dominated gastric
microbiota is strongly associated with particular diseases with important age-related
differences85. Further evidence of a link between colonic microbiota and colorectal cancer is suggested by
the ability of antibiotic administration to alter the composition of the colonic microbiota and
to affect the expression of host genes involved in cell cycle regulation, reducing epithelial
proliferation100. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 9

The gut microbiota and pbesity

exposure disturbs the gut microbiome118,119, but roles for the microbiome in steatosis are
unresolved. Patients with cirrhosis have a substantially altered
microbiome, including community-wide changes at multiple taxonomic levels, with
enrichment of Proteobacteria and Fusobacteria (phyla), and Enterobacteriaceae,
Veillonellaceae, and Streptococacceae (family) 121. Although many observations suggest
links between microbiome composition and liver disease, definitive associations in humans
are lacking. This may be a
mechanism in rheumatoid arthritis, another chronic idiopathic inflammatory condition. For diseases that can be studied
in model organisms, microbiota roles can be explored within the constraints of particular
model systems (Table 2). The extension of this concept to humanized model
organisms130 allows better approximation of the effects of the human microbiome on
disease processes in tractable animal models. Modifying disease risk by altering metabolic, immunological, or
developmental pathways are obvious strategies. examined top-scoring non-
linear abundance relationships133. Although incomplete,
such work leads to new approaches to understand the underlying complexity. As such, this is a frontier for human
preventive medicine, and for medical management of chronic diseases. He is an Assistant Professor of Medicine at the NYU Langone Medical
Center, USA. His current research focuses on the role of the gut microbiome in drug
metabolism and availability. In Roux-en-Y surgeries, a portion of the small
bowel is bypassed to decrease the absorption of nutrients

A condition in which the normal microbiome population structure is
disturbed, often through external pressures such as disease states or
medications

Describes an animal that is colonized solely with known strains of
bacteria or other microorganisms.