First we explored in detail the in vitro inhibitory effects of a selection of LGC strains against growth and 
pathogenic properties (adhesion to vaginal cells and hyphae formation) of Candida albicans. As 
lactobacilli exhibit various levels of lactic acid production17, we rationalized here that the selected lactobacilli 
should have a strong intrinsic capacity to produce lactic acid, at least in the optimal growth conditions. This gel was supplied to patients 
with acute VVC for 10 days. S1)..

The lactobacilli with the strongest antimicrobial effects showed adhesive capacities of 11.3% (L. plantarum 
WCFS1), 11.8% (L. rhamnosus GG) and 34.7% (L. pentosus KCA1)  to vaginal keratinocyte cell line 
(VK2/E6E7), used as model for the vaginal epithelium. 1e)..

formulation of lactobacilli in silicone gel to preserve viability and promote topical applica-
tions. Based on the above screening, three LGC strains were selected i.e. L. plantarum WCFS1, L. pentosus 
KCA1 and L. rhamnosus GG. The vaginal gel was developed to ensure 
maximal exposition of living bacteria to the vaginal wall through spreading after intravaginal application and 
maintain a high viability. The concentration of viable lactobacilli did decline during storage at 25 °C, 
showing roughly a ten-fold reduction after 6 months of storage..

proof-of-concept study in patients with VVc. This corresponded to 2.5.109–
1010 CFU of bacteria per application or 2.5-250 times the amount of bacteria in 1 ml of vaginal discharge29. No safety issues of the vaginal LGC gel 
were reported. www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/Figure 1. The regular growth medium without 
any added microorganisms was used as a negative control. ( We also investigated the bacterial community present in the samples. We did observe shifts in relative abundances of the lactobacilli. The lactobacilli-containing gel was devel-
oped in collaboration with the Belgian biotech company YUN nv (see ‘Competing interest’ statement).