There are several recent reviews on sequencing and anal-
ysis  of  the  microbiome,  although  a  full  discussion  of  these 
methods  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  review.28-31  In  brief,  com-
monly  used  methods  to  study  the  microbiome  use  either 
amplicon sequencing methods that analyze the partial genome 
or whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing. Through profiling the 
entire genome, this method allows for resolution at the species 
and  even  strain  level  in  addition  to  the  definition  of  bacterial 
function through mapping the genome to reference databases..

Analysis of both 16s rRNA and metagenomic sequencing 
has traditionally relied on comparing the relative abundance of 
various  genera,  species,  and  strains  between  different  groups. Cross-sectional compari-
sons  were  also  made  with  29  healthy  control  patients. Interestingly, although all patients were 
in clinical remission at study entry, a lower baseline abundance 
of F. prausnitzii (P = 0.014) and Bacteroides (P = 0.030) pre-
dicted relapse after therapy cessation in addition to biochem-
ical markers such as an elevated serum C-reactive protein. . A  subse-
quent study of a peptidomic analysis of F. prauznitzii culture 
supernatants  showed  7  peptides  derived  from  a  microbial  an-
ti-inflammatory  molecule  that  had  a  dose-dependent  effect 
on  reducing  the  activation  of  the  NF-κB  pathway.35  Luminal 
delivery  of  this  peptide  through  Lactococcus  lactis  alleviated 
colitis  in  dinitrobenzene  sulfonic  acid  mice  models.35  In  other 
experiments, F. prauznitzii or its supernatant also induced the 
production of IL-10 and transforming growth factor-β1.36. Abundance of Clostridiales, Veillonella, Bacteroides, and Anaerostipes at baseline . responders; several functional differences on pathway analysis
CD); greater abundance of R. inulinivorans and Burkholderiales at baseline in 
Higher baseline alpha diversity (species) in responders than in nonresponders (in . week 8 and Actinomyces abundance decreased. At the end of the study, 
responders’ microbial composition was closer to that of healthy 
control  patients  than  nonresponders’  microbial  composi-
tion, an effect that was also separately observed for anti-TNF 
therapy and exclusive enteral nutrition. In contrast, response to therapy was not asso-
ciated with a change in fungal composition. In those who responded to 
treatment,  there  was  a  decrease  in  Proteobacteria  and  an  in-
crease in Lachnospiraceae..

The  author  and  colleagues  previously  performed 
metagenomic  sequencing  from  fecal  samples  of  85  patients 
with  IBD  initiating  treatment  with  vedolizumab.25  The  study 
cohort included 43 patients with UC and 42 patients with CD. The primary outcome, remission at week 14, was attained by 31 
patients. A total of 35% of the cohort remained in remission 
at week 54. Stool sam-
ples were obtained at baseline and weeks 4, 6, and 22. Specifically,  fecal  abun-
dance  of  Rothia  and  Ruminococcus  was  associated  with  the 
development of stricturing complications and Collinsella abun-
dance was greater at baseline in patients who developed pene-
trating  disease. They also observed that abundance of Clostridiales was 
lower in those with IBD than in control patients.