Feeding mode interacts with other perinatal factors to 
influence the infant gut microbiota. Ho and colleagues 
reported  that  non-exclusively  BF  infants  have  a  lower 
abundance of Proteobacteria, but only among those deliv-
ered via cesarean section (C-section)  However, breast-
feeding  appears  to  moderate  the  detrimental  effects  of 
C-section delivery and intrapartum antibiotics on the early 
microbiota, producing a microbiota profile more similar to 
that of vaginally delivered infants or those not receiving 
antibiotics  Geography and ethnicity are also important 
to take into account. Fruit intake negatively associated with Ruminococcus . In Australian 2- to 3-year-olds, both habitual diet, as meas-
ured by a Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ), and recent 
dietary intake, as measured by a 24-h recall 3 days prior to 
fecal sample collection, influenced fecal microbiota com-
position  Dairy intake was negatively associated with 
species richness and diversity and Bacteroidetes abundance, 
but was positively associated with Erysipelatoclostridium 
spp. Bifidobacterium and Collinsella were positively cor-
related with refined-sugar enriched foods, and Collinsella 
was also positively associated with fruit and curry intake . Taken  together,  these  findings  provide  evidence  that 
the microbiome in children and adolescents is shaped to a 
greater degree by dietary intake than by ethnicity 
 While it is has been postulated that the microbiota after 
age 3 resembles that of adults  emerging evidence sug-
gest that, while the microbiota of children can be assembled 
into enterotypes  differences persist between 
children  and  adults. lactis BB-12, CFU colony-forming unit, CS cesarean section, d day, FISH fluorescent in situ hybridization, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-pro . lactis HN019
L. rhamnosus HN001
Powder in capsules. ↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and Bacte-. ↓ Colonization rate of B. longum in ST11 + BL999
↓ Colonization rate of B. infantis in LPR + BL999
Bifidobacterium in LPR + BL999 at 6 mo of age. amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain and . over the first y
related to B. fragilis and Blautia . BT1 + B. longum BGT
BR3 + B. longum subsp. and amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain . ↑relative abundance of Lacto-
↑ Proportion of Faecalibacterium. 5 × 109 CFU/d, 5 d/wk
B. longum BB536
Freeze-dried powder.