The majority of these techniques are based on the extraction of DNA and the ampliﬁcation of the 16S
ribosomal RNA gene (rRNA)  16S rRNA sequencing has become the most useful technique to
highlight diversity and abundance of the microbiome. Moreover, recent studies have identiﬁed a
critical role for commensal bacteria and their products in regulating the development, homeostasis,
and function of innate and adaptive immune cells  It is paradoxical to note that the gut microbiota
functions are highly preserved between individuals, whereas each individual’s gut microbiota are
characterized by a speciﬁc combination of bacterial species due to inter-individual and intra-individual
variations throughout human life. This review aims to deﬁne what would be the optimal gut microbiota composition in order
to maintain these optimal microbiota immune and metabolic functions. We will see how these gut microbiota variations may have
huge implications for intestinal and extra-intestinal disorders and, consequently, may inﬂuence health. Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

3 of 22

Figure 1. Examples of taxonomic gut microbiota composition. In the box are cited examples of bacteria
belonging to Phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, representing 90% of gut microbiota. After birth, a rich and dynamic ecosystem
develops from mother’s skin, vaginal and fecal microbiota, and environment microbiota contacts. have an
enzyme named lacto-N-biosidase, which facilitates the assimilation of GOS  If Biﬁdobacterium
quantity increases, the quantity of HMOs in feces decreases causing elevated acetate and lactate
concentrations and decreasing pH  an HMO consumption by Biﬁdobacteria in the infant’s
gut may suggest a prebiotic effect of HMOs on gut infant microbiota by selectively stimulating
Biﬁdobacterium spp. The abundance of genera Biﬁdobacterium, Clostridium coccoides, and
Bacteroides are predominant after weaning  The microbiota of breastfed children and the microbiota
of children previously fed with formula milk become closer to each other (Table 1). Dietary habit changes
(more monotonous) may also weaken gut microbiota diversity. Microbiota variations within individuals. Indeed, an enterotype is a functional
harmonious association of several bacteria species rather than a systematic addition of bacteria species. Indeed, bacteria clusters
of enterotype I derive energy primarily from carbohydrates using principally glycolysis and pentose
phosphate pathways, whereas bacteria clusters of enterotypes II and III are able to degrade mucin
glycoproteins of the gut mucosal layer. Enterotypes seem to be principally deﬁned according to dietary
habits. Understanding the origins and functions of enterotypes may improve the knowledge of the
relationships between gut microbiota and human health. Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

10 of 22

2.2.3. suggested associations of exercise frequency with gut microbiota composition
of young children and adolescents. In particular, 16S
rDNA sequences belonging to the family Lachnospiraceae within the phylum Firmicutes are in greater
abundance in the IBS clone library 

Other studies conﬁrmed and revealed some phyla and genera variations in IBS patients
compared to healthy controls: an increase in the Firmicutes-to Bacteroidetes-ratio, a decrease in some
Firmicutes families (Lactobacilli, Faecalibacterium) and the Actinobacteria population (Biﬁdobacteria,
Collinsella), and an increase in some Firmicutes families (Veillonella, Streptococci, and Ruminococcus spp.) indicated a diminution of Lachnospiraceae and Bacteroidetes
microbial populations and an increase in Proteobacteria families in IBD patients compared to control
gut microbiota. in Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and in Biﬁdobacterium
adolescentis and an increase in Ruminococcus gnavus. Therefore,
gut microbiota variations, such as a reduction of butyrate producers and an increase in opportunistic
pathogens, constitute a major structural imbalance of gut microbiota in CRC patients. and lower proportions of Bacteroides spp. Moreover, none of the differences in alpha
diversity has been observed between PD cases and controls, whereas beta diversity has been
revealed for three bacterial families (Lactobacillaceae, Barnesiellaceae, and Enterococcaceae)  PD is
associated with changes in gut microbiota and this gut microbiota dysbiosis may be the mechanism of
neuroinﬂammation that leads to PD pathology 

Hepatic Encephalopathy

Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is a complication of cirrhosis and is deﬁned as a spectrum
of neuropsychiatric abnormalities in patients with liver dysfunctions. Conclusions

Each healthy human is provided with unique gut microbiota. Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.