Ananthakrishnan
 
 

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

FIGURE 1. Amplicon 
sequencing methods profile segments of the bacterial genome, 
typically the hypervariable regions of the highly conserved 16s 
ribosomal RNA gene. Through profiling the 
entire genome, this method allows for resolution at the species 
and  even  strain  level  in  addition  to  the  definition  of  bacterial 
function through mapping the genome to reference databases. The 
2

investigators obtained fecal samples from 33 patients with CD 
who  stopped  infliximab  therapy  (as  part  of  an  interventional 
study  to  assess  the  rate  of  relapse  after  biologic  cessation). Fecal  samples  were  obtained  at  therapy  cessation,  2  months, 
6 months, and the end of follow-up. Cross-sectional compari-
sons  were  also  made  with  29  healthy  control  patients. Over 
follow-up, 19 patients relapsed and 14 remained in remission. Note  that  the  culture  supernatant  also  had  a  similar  effect  in 
reducing the severity of this particular colitis, suggesting that 
the  effect  of  F.  prauznitzii  may  be  mediated  in  part  through 
the  production  of  anti-inflammatory  metabolites. In contrast, response to therapy was not asso-
ciated with a change in fungal composition. The  baseline  abundance  of  F.  prauznitzii  was 
higher  in  responders  than  in  nonresponders. In a study by Michail and colleagues, pa-
tients who were steroid-responsive showed greater diversity at 
baseline than nonresponders.44

The  author  and  colleagues  previously  performed 
metagenomic  sequencing  from  fecal  samples  of  85  patients 
with  IBD  initiating  treatment  with  vedolizumab.25  The  study 
cohort included 43 patients with UC and 42 patients with CD. The primary outcome, remission at week 14, was attained by 31 
patients. A total of 35% of the cohort remained in remission 
at week 54. Comparisons were performed 
between stool samples obtained at baseline, 1 week, 4 weeks, and 
8 weeks after therapy and with 26 previously profiled healthy 
children. Patients  in  remission  at  week  6 
also had a higher alpha diversity at baseline than did those with 
active disease. Disease Progression

Two pediatric inception cohorts with serial sampling of 
the microbiome in mucosa and stool provided insights into the 
potential  predictive  value  of  microbial  markers  in  identifying 
disease  progression.14,  23  A  total  of  913  children  were  enrolled 
at  diagnosis  of  CD,  most  of  whom  had  a  nonstricturing, 
nonpenetrating phenotype.14 At follow-up, 54 and 24 patients 
had  stricturing  and  penetrating  complications  respectively, 
and 21% received anti-TNF therapy. Specifically,  fecal  abun-
dance  of  Rothia  and  Ruminococcus  was  associated  with  the 
development of stricturing complications and Collinsella abun-
dance was greater at baseline in patients who developed pene-
trating  disease. The  PROTECT  cohort  recruited  400  children 

did not (q = 0.09 and 0.06, respectively). However, this 
difference  was  no  longer  significant  in  those  who  responded, 
suggesting that an increase in abundance of Clostridiales could 
be  a  biomarker  of  treatment  response. A  model  of  gut  mi-
crobial  composition  at  baseline  predicted  infliximab  response 
at  week  30  with  an  87%  accuracy,  which  was  superior  to  the 
predictive  value  of  the  Crohn’s  Disease  Activity  Index  (58% 
accuracy) and calprotectin levels  The most in-
formative features in this model were the abundance of various 
Clostridiales and the abundance of Veillonella, Bacteroides, and 
Anaerostipes. Twenty-three  patients  who  were  treated  with  either  anti-TNF 
drugs  or  vedolizumab  acted  as  control  patients. However, the rate of 
metabolite  exchange  between  organisms  (ie,  metabolic  inter-
change) was lower at baseline in nonresponding patients with 
IBD than in healthy control patients in contrast to those who 

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 

Microbiome-Based Biomarkers

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

TABLE 2. An important limitation of existing data is heterogeneity in the selec-
 
tion of patients including variation in disease activity, severity, and 
ongoing treatments (Table 2). A  second  important  challenge  with  existing  data  is  the  wide  vari-
 
ability in the definition of outcomes. Further, studies 
have  varied  in  the  use  of  symptom-based  disease  activity  scores, 
calprotectin normalization (using different thresholds), endoscopic 
remission, or global physical impression to define the outcome. The 
varying  accuracy  of  each  of  these  parameters  confounds  the  in-
terpretation  of  findings  and  highlights  the  lack  of  replicability  of 
results across cohorts. Newer methods such as quantitative microbial pro-
filing may be important to identify additional changes pertinent to 
the development of disease. This in-
consistency complicates an understanding of the impact of the biologic 
parameter being studied and of such external influences. To reduce this 
concern, there must be transparent reporting of this information in every 
study and an establishment of minimum acceptable standards. However, existing studies 
are limited by small sample sizes and significant heterogeneity 
preventing robust validation. Ananthakrishnan
 
 

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

7

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 

Microbiome-Based Biomarkers