Feeding mode interacts with other perinatal factors to 
influence the infant gut microbiota. Introduction 
of foods high in protein and fiber increases microbial diver-
sity, but the particular foods most correlated with microbial 
diversity differ depending on whether the infant is still being 
breastfed  For example, a greater number of predicted 
functional changes were identified in FF and MF infants dur-
ing introduction of solids compared to BF infants, suggest-
ing that breastfeeding may increase the plasticity of the infant 
microbiome . Fruit intake negatively associated with Ruminococcus . Bifidobacterium and Collinsella were positively cor-
related with refined-sugar enriched foods, and Collinsella 
was also positively associated with fruit and curry intake . Taken  together,  these  findings  provide  evidence  that 
the microbiome in children and adolescents is shaped to a 
greater degree by dietary intake than by ethnicity 
 While it is has been postulated that the microbiota after 
age 3 resembles that of adults  emerging evidence sug-
gest that, while the microbiota of children can be assembled 
into enterotypes  differences persist between 
children  and  adults. Additionally,  children  may  also  be 
more similar to each other than adults are. Change in Bifidobacterium counts: GOS 5 g > GOS 
↔ numbers of DGGE bands. perfringens, C. difficile, and Enterobacteriaceae. ↑ relative abundances of Bifidobacterium and Lactoba-. They observed that infants whose 
mother received probiotics had lower counts of Bifidobacte-
rium and a higher percentage of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus 
than placebo at 6 months of age  In addition, several 
groups investigated the diversity of infant microbiota, report-
ing that administration of probiotics during pregnancy and 
lactation, or directly to infants after delivery have no or lim-
ited effects on alpha and beta diversity of infant microbiota 
(Table 3)..

Probiotics have been administrated directly to infants and 
children (Table 4). ↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and . lus La-5 + BB-12 
LGG + L. acidophi-
Fermented milk
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. breve M16V + B. longum BB536
Powder in water, milk or formula
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d. B. bifidum W23 + B. lactis W52 + L. 
Powder in water, milk or formula. ↑ prevalence of species belonging to B. longum group at . amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain and . 1.2 × 109 CFU/L
L. reuteri DSM 17938
Formula. BT1 + B. longum BGT
BR3 + B. longum subsp. and amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain . of intervention
Lactobacillus after 3 and 6 mo 
↑counts of Bifidobacterium and . ↑relative abundance of Lacto-
↑ Proportion of Faecalibacterium. 4 × 1010 CFU/d
L. casei Shirota
4 × 108 CFU/d
LGG
Oily suspension.