The majority of these techniques are based on the extraction of DNA and the ampliﬁcation of the 16S
ribosomal RNA gene (rRNA)  16S rRNA sequencing has become the most useful technique to
highlight diversity and abundance of the microbiome. Moreover, recent studies have identiﬁed a
critical role for commensal bacteria and their products in regulating the development, homeostasis,
and function of innate and adaptive immune cells  It is paradoxical to note that the gut microbiota
functions are highly preserved between individuals, whereas each individual’s gut microbiota are
characterized by a speciﬁc combination of bacterial species due to inter-individual and intra-individual
variations throughout human life. We will see how these gut microbiota variations may have
huge implications for intestinal and extra-intestinal disorders and, consequently, may inﬂuence health. The Actinobacteria phylum is proportionally less abundant and mainly represented by
the Biﬁdobacterium genus  Examples of taxonomic gut microbiota composition are illustrated in
Figure 1. Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

3 of 22

Figure 1. Examples of taxonomic gut microbiota composition. In the box are cited examples of bacteria
belonging to Phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, representing 90% of gut microbiota. Variations in the Same Individual

Human gut microbiota vary taxonomically and functionally in each part of the GI tract and
undergo variations in the same individual due to infant transitions, age, and environmental factors
such as antibiotic use. Microbiota variations within individuals are summarized in Table 1. Microorganisms 2018, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 23  Figure 1. Intestine Anatomical Regions

Gut microbiota vary according to the intestine anatomical regions, which vary in terms of
physiology, pH and O2 tension, digesta ﬂow rates (rapid in the mouth to the caecum, slower
afterward), substrate availability, and host secretions  The small intestine provides a more
challenging environment for microbial colonizers given the fairly short transit times and
the high bile concentrations. The abundance of genera Biﬁdobacterium, Clostridium coccoides, and
Bacteroides are predominant after weaning  The microbiota of breastfed children and the microbiota
of children previously fed with formula milk become closer to each other (Table 1). Dietary habit changes
(more monotonous) may also weaken gut microbiota diversity. Speciﬁc properties of antibiotics such as
antimicrobial effects or mode of action are powerful forces for the selection of intestinal microbiota
and are partially responsible for the shifts in bacterial composition during antibiotic therapy 

Each class of antibiotics has different properties and excretion systems, resulting in different

patterns of alteration in the microbiome composition 

A cultivation-independent survey of gut microbiota composition of three persons before, during,
and after two exposures to the same antibiotic (ciproﬂoxacin) has been conducted. Microbiota variations within individuals. Indeed, an enterotype is a functional
harmonious association of several bacteria species rather than a systematic addition of bacteria species. Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

10 of 22

2.2.3. Furthermore, Shigella and
Escherichia are widely under-represented. suggested associations of exercise frequency with gut microbiota composition
of young children and adolescents. Gut Microbiota Variations in Health and Disease

Gut microbiota composition is highly variable. In particular, 16S
rDNA sequences belonging to the family Lachnospiraceae within the phylum Firmicutes are in greater
abundance in the IBS clone library 

Other studies conﬁrmed and revealed some phyla and genera variations in IBS patients
compared to healthy controls: an increase in the Firmicutes-to Bacteroidetes-ratio, a decrease in some
Firmicutes families (Lactobacilli, Faecalibacterium) and the Actinobacteria population (Biﬁdobacteria,
Collinsella), and an increase in some Firmicutes families (Veillonella, Streptococci, and Ruminococcus spp.) in Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and in Biﬁdobacterium
adolescentis and an increase in Ruminococcus gnavus. Biﬁdobacterium longum, Clostridium
histolyticum, C. lituseburense, and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii group proportions are less abundant in
untreated CD patients than in healthy controls. and lower proportions of Bacteroides spp. and an increase in various opportunistic pathogens (Clostridium spp., Bacteroides caccae) as well as an enrichment of other microbial functions conferring sulfate reduction
(Desulfovibrionaceae spp.). The gut microbiota variations are also involved in the pathogenesis of PD. suggested, in agreement with most other studies  an increase in Lactobacillaceae abundance
in Parkinson patients compared to healthy controls. Moreover, none of the differences in alpha
diversity has been observed between PD cases and controls, whereas beta diversity has been
revealed for three bacterial families (Lactobacillaceae, Barnesiellaceae, and Enterococcaceae)  PD is
associated with changes in gut microbiota and this gut microbiota dysbiosis may be the mechanism of
neuroinﬂammation that leads to PD pathology 

Hepatic Encephalopathy

Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is a complication of cirrhosis and is deﬁned as a spectrum
of neuropsychiatric abnormalities in patients with liver dysfunctions. Throughout life, the richer and more diverse the microbiota, the better they will withstand
external threats. Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.