Ananthakrishnan
 
 

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

FIGURE 1. Through profiling the 
entire genome, this method allows for resolution at the species 
and  even  strain  level  in  addition  to  the  definition  of  bacterial 
function through mapping the genome to reference databases. Fecal  samples  were  obtained  at  therapy  cessation,  2  months, 
6 months, and the end of follow-up. Cross-sectional compari-
sons  were  also  made  with  29  healthy  control  patients. In contrast, response to therapy was not asso-
ciated with a change in fungal composition. The  baseline  abundance  of  F.  prauznitzii  was 
higher  in  responders  than  in  nonresponders. The primary outcome, remission at week 14, was attained by 31 
patients. A total of 35% of the cohort remained in remission 
at week 54. In the baseline stool sample, alpha diversity at the 
species  level  was  higher  among  those  with  CD  who  achieved 
remission at week 14 than in those who were not in remission 
at  that  time  point. This  difference  was  noted  primarily  at  the 
species  level. Patients  in  remission  at  week  6 
also had a higher alpha diversity at baseline than did those with 
active disease. Specifically,  fecal  abun-
dance  of  Rothia  and  Ruminococcus  was  associated  with  the 
development of stricturing complications and Collinsella abun-
dance was greater at baseline in patients who developed pene-
trating  disease. The  PROTECT  cohort  recruited  400  children 

did not (q = 0.09 and 0.06, respectively). In  patients  who  provided  stool  sam-
ples  at  baseline  and  weeks  14,  30,  and  54,  remission  at  week 
14  was  associated  with  greater  microbial  persistence,  defined 
as  the  similarity  of  later  samples  to  the  week  14  microbial 
profile, up to 1 year. A  model  of  gut  mi-
crobial  composition  at  baseline  predicted  infliximab  response 
at  week  30  with  an  87%  accuracy,  which  was  superior  to  the 
predictive  value  of  the  Crohn’s  Disease  Activity  Index  (58% 
accuracy) and calprotectin levels  The most in-
formative features in this model were the abundance of various 
Clostridiales and the abundance of Veillonella, Bacteroides, and 
Anaerostipes. Interestingly, 
patients with IBD but not with rheumatic disease demonstrated 
a shift in diversity toward that of the control patients with anti-
TNF therapy, suggesting that this effect was likely mediated in 
part  by  resolution  of  intestinal  inflammation  rather  than  di-
rect effect of the biologic agent.24 When compared to healthy 
control patients, 14 indicator phylotypes, notably Coprococcus 
and  R.  inulinivorans,  were  differentially  distributed  between 
patients with IBD and healthy control patients. Limitations of Existing Data and Suggestions for 
Future Research

1. A  second  important  challenge  with  existing  data  is  the  wide  vari-
 
ability in the definition of outcomes. Further, studies 
have  varied  in  the  use  of  symptom-based  disease  activity  scores, 
calprotectin normalization (using different thresholds), endoscopic 
remission, or global physical impression to define the outcome. The 
varying  accuracy  of  each  of  these  parameters  confounds  the  in-
terpretation  of  findings  and  highlights  the  lack  of  replicability  of 
results across cohorts. This in-
consistency complicates an understanding of the impact of the biologic 
parameter being studied and of such external influences. To reduce this 
concern, there must be transparent reporting of this information in every 
study and an establishment of minimum acceptable standards. Existing  tools  for  profiling  the  taxonomic  or  functional  profile  of 
 
the microbiome or the metabolome are not readily translatable to 
point-of-care tests in the clinic because of their logistical challenges 
in profiling single samples cost-effectively and the high volume of 
data  generated  with  each  profile. Further  research  is  essential  to 
move predictive associations identified in the research arena to clin-
ical  care. Indeed, intriguing preliminary data 
have supported the role of such biomarkers in predicting many 
important clinically relevant outcomes.