There are several recent reviews on sequencing and anal-
ysis  of  the  microbiome,  although  a  full  discussion  of  these 
methods  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  review.28-31  In  brief,  com-
monly  used  methods  to  study  the  microbiome  use  either 
amplicon sequencing methods that analyze the partial genome 
or whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing. Through profiling the 
entire genome, this method allows for resolution at the species 
and  even  strain  level  in  addition  to  the  definition  of  bacterial 
function through mapping the genome to reference databases..

Analysis of both 16s rRNA and metagenomic sequencing 
has traditionally relied on comparing the relative abundance of 
various  genera,  species,  and  strains  between  different  groups. Fecal  samples  were  obtained  at  therapy  cessation,  2  months, 
6 months, and the end of follow-up. Interestingly, although all patients were 
in clinical remission at study entry, a lower baseline abundance 
of F. prausnitzii (P = 0.014) and Bacteroides (P = 0.030) pre-
dicted relapse after therapy cessation in addition to biochem-
ical markers such as an elevated serum C-reactive protein. . A  subse-
quent study of a peptidomic analysis of F. prauznitzii culture 
supernatants  showed  7  peptides  derived  from  a  microbial  an-
ti-inflammatory  molecule  that  had  a  dose-dependent  effect 
on  reducing  the  activation  of  the  NF-κB  pathway.35  Luminal 
delivery  of  this  peptide  through  Lactococcus  lactis  alleviated 
colitis  in  dinitrobenzene  sulfonic  acid  mice  models.35  In  other 
experiments, F. prauznitzii or its supernatant also induced the 
production of IL-10 and transforming growth factor-β1.36. week 8 and Actinomyces abundance decreased. At the end of the study, 
responders’ microbial composition was closer to that of healthy 
control  patients  than  nonresponders’  microbial  composi-
tion, an effect that was also separately observed for anti-TNF 
therapy and exclusive enteral nutrition. from  ileal  tissue  from  CD  patients  undergoing  resection.37  In 
comparison with healthy control patients, the patients with CD 
had a lower biodiversity at the time of the surgery that improved 
postoperatively but was still less diverse than that of the healthy 
control  patients.