Gut microbiota are composed of several species of microorganisms, including bacteria, yeast,
and viruses. Taxonomically, bacteria are classiﬁed according to phyla, classes, orders, families,
genera, and species. Lachnospiraceae, Peptostreptococcaceae, and
Clostridiaceae were dominant genera in both preterm and term pigs. abundance in preterm than term pigs was found . Indeed, an analysis of the meconium of newborn infants revealed a
strong correlation between the microbiota of the newborn digestive tract and the microbial communities
of the mother’s vagina: Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Sneathia. With regard to older people over the age of 70, gut microbiota composition can be affected by
digestion and nutrient absorption changes and immune activity weakness. Dietary habit changes
(more monotonous) may also weaken gut microbiota diversity. Lachnospiraceae *
Peptostreptococcaceae *
Clostridiaceae *. Each enterotype
with its distinctive clusters of bacteria and respective functional characteristics deﬁnes a distinctive
way of generating energy from fermentable substrates available in the colon. Colorectal cancer is the third most common cause of cancer mortality in the world 
Structural fecal bacterial segregations between CRC patients and healthy volunteers have been
demonstrated  The gut microbiota of the CRC patients were enriched in Bacteroides fragilis,
Enterococcus, Escherichia/Shigella, Klebsiella, Streptococcus, and Peptostreptococcus and were impoverished
in Roseburia and other butyrate-producing bacteria of the family Lachnospiraceae  The gut microbiota
of the healthy volunteers were enriched in Bacteroides vulgatus and Bacteroides uniformis. and lower proportions of Bacteroides spp. than controls..

Genomic analysis identiﬁed an association of Fusobacterium spp. and an increase in various opportunistic pathogens (Clostridium spp., compared gut microbiota composition from patients with and
without a diagnosis of AD and revealed a lower microbial diversity compositionally distinct from
control-age and sex-matched individuals, with a decrease in Firmicutes and Biﬁdobacterium abundance
and an increase in Bacteroidetes abundance in the microbiome of AD participants..

Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is a complication of cirrhosis and is deﬁned as a spectrum
of neuropsychiatric abnormalities in patients with liver dysfunctions. Fusobacteriaceae, Veillonellaceae, and Enterobacteriaceae were positively and Ruminococcaceae
was negatively related to inﬂammation.