Human 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

SPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

Table 1. Humans also have an appendix,
which  is  absent  in  mice. In mice, fermentation of indigestible food
components  is  compartmentalized  in  the  cecum,  whereas,  in
humans, fermentation takes place in the colon, and the cecum is
vestigial . Panels B and C are reproduced from “Comparative
anatomy and histology: A mouse and human atlas” by Piper M. Treuting and
Suzy Dintzis, 2012, with permission from Elsevier. Gut-brain axis: bidirectional signaling between the gut microbiota and
the host brain, affecting normal homeostasis and contributing to disease. Taenia coli: three longitudinal smooth muscle ribbons along the outside
of the colon. found seven genera that were common in 50% of the cohort (Tap et
al., This number is higher than the one observed in humans: the overall
stool microbiota richness (i.e. the number of different genera in the
population) was estimated at 226 bacterial genera across 208 donors,
using the data from the Human Microbiome Project Consortium (Li
et al., Meta-analysis of mouse and human fecal microbiota based on published 16S rDNA sequencing data. ( 2013),  being  dominated  by
Lachnospiraceae  and  Ruminococcaceae  or  Bacteroidaceae  and
Enterobacteriaceae, respectively. low 

the 

Overall,  these  observations  show  that  clear  differences  can  be
observed at the level of specific genus/species abundances between

5

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

the murine and human gut microbiota. Some common trends
have emerged from this research. The discrepancies in these results suggest that
humans need more time for the diet interventions to change their
enterotypes given the more drastic changes in diet in the wild mouse
study. The  comparison  of  trends  of
alterations in gut microbiota composition in IBD between human
and  model  organisms  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  IBD
encompasses a heterogenous group of diseases, including Crohn’s
disease (ileal, colon), ulcerative colitis and intermediate colitis, all

of which can also be at different stages (for example, active or in
remission). In general, these models were created
by  introducing  genetic  modifications  in  mice  that  resemble  the
genetic  defects  of  IBD  patients,  or  by  relying  on  external
disturbances to induce disease. These
factors  can  be  confounders  but  can  also  be  controlled  for  with
appropriate experimental design in mouse studies. As  a  case  in  point,  coumestrol,  a
phytoestrogen, from alfalfa (clover) is used in rodent diets, which
increases the ingestion of estrogen equivalents by mice compared
with humans (Degen et al., • Low cost of maintenance, high reproductive rate, short life cycle. Murine  models  are  usually  inbred  in  order  to  reduce  the
phenotypic  variation  that  arises  from  genetic  heterogeneity. In addition, the discovery of a contribution
of the gut microbiota to their development has added another layer
of  complexity 
their  pathophysiological
mechanisms. 2012)] and the interactions with the gut microbiota [e.g. some models
do not develop colitis in germ-free conditions (Hudcovic et al., The intrinsic complexity of gut microbiota research,
together with the inconsistency of colitis mouse models (chemically
induced or genetically engineered), makes interpreting the results of
gut  microbiota  research  from  these  models  in  terms  of  human
disease far from easy. However, it should be highlighted
that the host-microbe relationships in these humanized models do
not necessarily reflect the real relationships seen in humans, because
the gut microbiota is transplanted into a host with which it has not
co-evolved. This
difference  is  thought  to  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  rat  has  a
microbiota  that  is  more  similar  to  humans  than  mice  do,  thus
facilitating the establishment of the inoculated microbiota (Wos-
Oxley  et  al., Non-human  primates  are  also  suitable  models  for  human  gut
microbiota  research,  with  the  obvious  advantage  of  close
evolutionary relatedness to humans. It is, however,
important to keep in mind that models always have some degree of
dissimilarity  with  the  system  modeled.