/  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306   316–327 

317

given  ecosystem. In  many
instances,  comparative  analysis  of  patient  and  healthy  control
cohorts  revealed  that  shifts  in  the  microbiome  are  associated  with
human  diseases  (Berry  and  Reinisch,  2013). The  laboratory  mouse  is  currently  the  primary  experimen-
tal  model  organism  in  preclinical  research. 2015),  and  mouse  strains  can  be  relatively
easily  re-derived  germ-free  (Macpherson  and  McCoy,  2015),  which
has  set  the  stage  for  the  establishment  of  gnotobiotic  models  (i.e.
mice  colonized  with  deﬁned  bacterial  strains  or  mixtures). In  addition,
maintenance  of  germ-free  mice  is  demanding  and  requires  special-
ized  equipment  and  experienced  staff. Despite  these  challenges,
gnotobiotic  mice  are  widely  used  and  can  in  combination  with
“omics”  technologies  and  genetic  engineering  provide  important
mechanistic  insights  into  the  molecular  mechanisms  underlying
microbe–microbe  and  microbe–host  interactions. Recently,  the  cultivation  of  bacteria  experienced  a  great
upswing. In  this  review,  we  revisit  current  knowledge  of  the  mouse
gut  microbiota,  the  relevance  of  mouse  models  for  microbe–host
interactions  studies,  and  give  an  outlook  on  future  challenges  and
opportunities  in  the  ﬁeld. Humanized  mice  from  a  microbial  perspective:  Hybrid
models  of  clinical  relevance

A

  number  of  pioneering  studies  have  employed  human-derived
Escherichia  coli  and  Bacteroides  spp. as  model  organisms  to  elucidate
key  principles  of  microbe–host  interactions  in  gnotobiotic  mice. These  bacteria  can  be  genetically  manipulated  and  allow  functional
genetic  analysis. Over  the  last
decade,  the  groups  of  Conway  and  Cohen   studied  E.  coli  car-
bohydrate  utilization  and  competition  in  the  intestine  in  detail. Thus,  the
mutant  only  transiently  colonizes  the  gut  after  which  the  mice

re-establish  a  completely  germ-free  state. This  model  allows  a
number  of  fundamental  principles  underlying  bacterial  induction
of  mucosal  immune  responses  to  be  addressed. Bacteroides
thetaiotaomicron  (B.  theta)  and  Bacteroides  fragilis  are  highly  abun-
dant  and  ubiquitous  obligate  anaerobic  members  of  the  human  gut
microbiota  (Moore  and  Holdeman,  1974;  Qin  et  al., 2003),  which  shapes  the  mutualistic  relation-
ship  between  Bacteroides  spp. and  their  human  host  (Comstock,
2009). Mono-colonization  of  mice  with  B.  theta  induces  pronounced
changes  in  host  mucosal  gene  expression  (Hooper  and  Gordon,
2001). Speciﬁcally,  B.  theta  can  modify  host  epithelial  differen-
tiation  in  a  way  that  supports  its  own   growth:  it  promotes  the
production  of  fucosylated  glycans  by  the  host  and  in  turn  uses
them  as  nutrient  sources  (Bry  et  al., 2005)  that  prevents  gut  inﬂammation
(Mazmanian,  2008)  and  promotes  tolerogenic  immune  responses
by  signaling  on  Foxp3(+)  regulatory  T  cells  through  TLR2  (Round
et  al., 2010,  2013;  Samuel  and  Gordon,  2006). Although  models  harboring  only  few  bacteria  have  been
very  helpful,  care  must  be  taken  when  interpreting  data. Germ-free  mice  can  also  be  used  to  investigate  functions  of
complex  human-derived  microbiota. The  microbiota  in  these  models  is  complex
and  thus  not  fully  characterized,  and  therefore  these  models  are
not  gnotobiotic. However,  it  remains  unclear  how  well  dif-
ferent  human  gut  bacterial  taxa  establish  in  the  mouse  intestinal
milieu.