Small-subunit rRNA sequences con-
sisting of 5,014 bacterial species type strain sequences in 988 genera (Table 1),
along with associated taxonomic assignment information, were obtained from
Bergey’s Taxonomic Outline of the Prokaryotes (release 5.0   The
sequences averaged 1,460 bases in length and had a range of 1,200 to 1,833 bases. These sequences formed the Bergey corpus. Each sequence was labeled with
a set of taxa from domain to genus. From the highest rank to the lowest, the
major formal taxonomic ranks are domain, phylum, class, order, family,
genus, and species. There are occasional intermediate ranks such as “sub-
class” and “suborder”..

Using the RDP 9 alignment  we extracted segments cor-
responding to 100-base regions of the Escherichia coli refer-
ence sequence J01695 at 25-base intervals and used each re-
gion independently for exhaustive leave-one-out
testing,
removing the corresponding full-length sequence from training
for each test. In general, accuracy was greater for regions
mapping to the 16S hypervariable regions . The av-
erage bootstrap conﬁdence estimate was similarly higher in the
hypervariable regions ..

crepancies between the underlying phylogeny and
Bergey’s taxonomy. These misclassiﬁcations are
not evenly distributed among the taxa. Of the three most rep-
resented phyla (Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Actinobacteria),
the Actinobacteria had the fewest errors (3%, or 31 in 1,220
trials), while the misclassiﬁcation rate for the Firmicutes was
about ﬁve times as high  Within
the Firmicutes, more than two-thirds of the errors occurred in
the class Clostridia  and within that class, the
genus Eubacterium stood out, with 30 misclassiﬁcations in 41
trials (see the supplemental material)..

FIG. Phylogenetic analysis of the Alicyclobacillaceae, including
the genera Sulfobacillus and Alicyclobacillus. Bootstrap conﬁdence estimates above 85% are
shown. Three misclassiﬁcations made by the RDP Classiﬁer are high-
lighted, with the original (release 5.0) description appended with a
corrected description. S. disulﬁdooxidansT became A. disulﬁdooxi-
dansT. In 2005, S. disulﬁdooxidans was formally reclassiﬁed as a new
combination, A. disulﬁdooxidans  S. thermosulﬁdooxidans VKM
1269T became “A. tolerans K1.” They are nearly identical to each
other and 19% different from Z21979. In 2005, S.
thermosulﬁdooxidans strain K1 was reclassiﬁed as the type strain of a
new species, A. tolerans  In our analysis, however, the sequence for
K1 given in the naming paper (accession number AF137502) is 8%
different from that for Z21979. These two sequences are 14% different, and X60602 is now de-
scribed by GenBank as from a Bacillus sp.