This vast array of data has contributed
to a deeper understanding of the role of the gut microbiome in health and disease, the factors which
shape it, and the potential to harness its therapeutic potential for optimal health. In Part II, we focus on the potential use of the microbiome to prevent disease and promote health. Ageing has a signiﬁcant impact on the gut microbiota with dramatic compositional and functional
changes observed in the elderly microbiota (in general >65 years). Thuricin CD is an example
of a sactibiotic bacteriocin produced by a human gut isolate, Bacillus thuringiensis  While it has a
narrow spectrum of inhibition, thuricin CD is capable of killing a wide range of C. diﬃcile isolates, its
antimicrobial activity being as potent as the antibiotics vancomycin and metronidazole, but without the
concomitant damage to other members of the microbiota  Bacteriocin production can also aid niche
occupation of the producing strain. Comparison of consequences of poor-quality diet versus a healthy diet on the gut and gut
microbiota (MUFAs = monounsaturated fatty acids; PUFAs = polyunsaturated fatty acids). Furthermore, the
abundance and activity of the sulﬁte-reducing bacterium, Bilophila wadsworthia, was also shown to be
increased on the animal-based diet. Within the Bacteroidetes, the genera Prevotella and Xylanibacter were uniquely abundant in the African
children being absent in the European children. longum or the ﬁbre inulin prevented
mucus defects. who also noted a higher proportion
of Actinobacteria in obese subjects. In the same study, animals fed a high fat diet
supplemented with BCAAs had reduced food intake and weight gain compared to the high fat diet
alone but became equally insulin resistant as those on the high fat diet. In this case, consumption
of the Mediterranean diet for two years increased the abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which
make up the Bacteriodetes phylum, which has previously been reported to be reduced in obese
In addition, genera with saccharolytic activity, including Faecalibacterium, Roseburia
people 
and Ruminococcus were also increased. Indeed, we have already seen that an animal-based diet high in
fat and protein alters the gut microbiota resulting in an increase in the abundance of bile-tolerant
microorganisms, such as Bilophila, Alistipes and Bacteroides and long-term consumption selects for
a Bacteroides enterotype directly investigated if typically consumed
dietary fatty acids alone could sustain the growth of the human gut microbiota using an in vitro
multi-vessel simulator system of the human small intestine. Desulfovibrionaceae has also been associated with impaired glucose tolerance and most
serious metabolic syndrome phenotypes in mice  Thus, the results of the study indicate that
gut microbiota alterations following long-term supplementation of the trans-10, cis-12 CLA isomer
could be detrimental to health. Following 16 weeks
on the diet, mice revealed several neurovascular enhancements with potential to reduce the risk of
Alzheimer’s disease which could be associated with the observed gut microbiota changes which
included an increase in beneﬁcial bacteria, including Akkermansia muciniphila and Lactobacillus and a
reduction in pro-inﬂammatory microbes Desulfovibrio and Turicibacter. Additionally, in a mouse model of glioma, mice fed
the ketogenic diet had slightly increased survival compared to mice fed the control diet and showed
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in several key microorganisms  The ketogenic diet generally includes fats

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

22 of 45

of all chain lengths thus increases in blood ketone levels could be responsible for the observed
gut microbiota changes 

7.2. Protein source or type has also been shown to impact gut microbiota composition, given that the
amino acid composition diﬀers between types. in the cecum compared to the milk protein isolate fed group. Excretion of total bile acids
and SCFAs were signiﬁcantly increased in faeces from mice fed buckwheat. Mungbean protein also
proved superior to casein in reducing high fat diet induced weight gain in mice  The mungbean
protein caused elevated secretion of GLP-1, an increase in the cecal and faecal bile acid pool with a
dramatically elevated secondary: primary bile acid ratio; eﬀects which were abolished in germ free
mice. Amino acid metabolites increased on the
high protein diet owing to protein degradation by the gut microbiota. In contrast, non-starch polysaccharides (wheat bran) presented little evidence of changes to
the faecal microbiota, which the authors state may be attributable to the smaller increase achieved
for non-starch polysaccharides compared to a 4.8 fold increase in resistant starch 
Interestingly, of the 14 volunteers, >60% of the resistant starch remained undigested in two compared to
<4% in the remaining 12 volunteers highlighting the signiﬁcance of the initial microbiota composition. rectales in almost half of these individuals. H2-scavenging sulphite reducers and acetogens also increased. Lactobacillales was also signiﬁcantly increased on the high sugar
diet. Furthermore, not everyone responds eﬀectively to dietary interventions
aimed at improving health. The consequence of this has been an alarming surge in non-communicable
diseases, including cancer and metabolic-related diseases.