Interventions involving probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and dietary ﬁbre also oﬀer opportunities
to “fertilize” our microbiota. Synbiotics describe the
combination of probiotics and prebiotics which act synergistically. For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003)  However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes  It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism. lactis)
from T2 of pregnancy to week 28 in overweight and obese women did not prevent GDM  These
contradictory results could be due to a number of factors including diﬀerences in probiotics and doses
used, timing and duration of supplementation as well as diﬀerences in host demographics, genetics
and baseline gut microbiota of each individual..

Given such promising results, the impact of maternal probiotic supplementation on breast
milk composition and the infant microbiome is an important area of research. longum MM-2 for three weeks by elderly participants increased IL-10 concentrations
compared to the placebo  In addition, 48% of participants in the probiotic group had increased
faecal biﬁdobacteria compared to 30% in the placebo which was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (P < 0.05). Consumer receives
personalized dietary, lifestyle and supplemental recommendations..

Most commercially available 16S rRNA-based tests report on the relative abundance of F. prausnitzii
with no diﬀerentiation between F. prausnitzii subgroups A, B and C. This may lead to a misleading
interpretation of results as it has recently been found that diﬀerent subgroups produce butyrate at
diﬀerent levels and have been linked to diﬀerent disease states.