Interventions involving probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and dietary ﬁbre also oﬀer opportunities
to “fertilize” our microbiota. Synbiotics describe the
combination of probiotics and prebiotics which act synergistically. For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003)  However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes  It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism. lactis)
from T2 of pregnancy to week 28 in overweight and obese women did not prevent GDM  These
contradictory results could be due to a number of factors including diﬀerences in probiotics and doses
used, timing and duration of supplementation as well as diﬀerences in host demographics, genetics
and baseline gut microbiota of each individual..

Given such promising results, the impact of maternal probiotic supplementation on breast
milk composition and the infant microbiome is an important area of research. longum MM-2 for three weeks by elderly participants increased IL-10 concentrations
compared to the placebo  In addition, 48% of participants in the probiotic group had increased
faecal biﬁdobacteria compared to 30% in the placebo which was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (P < 0.05). Moreover, 55% of participants in the probiotic group had increased lactic acid bacteria and 52% had
decreased E. coli compared to 43% and 27% in the placebo group, respectively, representing signiﬁcant
diﬀerences (P < 0.05). Bacterial groups matching the butyrate producer F. prausnitzii were also more
abundant in stool samples from the probiotic group. The overall changes resembled those observed in
healthy younger populations. Administration of Lactobacillus fermentum (PCC. biﬁdum  Several metabolic parameters were also. longum, followed later on by absence of the HMAGM resulting
in deﬁcient energy harvest, immune protection and vitamin biosynthesis which are associated with
malabsorption, systemic pathogen invasion and diarrhoea used a
combination of culturomics and metagenomics to analyse the stool samples of healthy children and
kwashiorkor patients to identify potential probiotics to treat SAM. This resulted in the identiﬁcation
of 12 species in healthy children which were absent in kwashiorkor patients. The authors propose that this cocktail
of probiotics oﬀers a deﬁned, reproducible, safe and convenient alternative to faecal transplantations
for the treatment of SAM in children..

Furthermore, it is important to mention that probiotic-mediated beneﬁcial eﬀects may not require
live cells. Samples from G1 subjects were representative
of the superior diet while samples from G2 subjects represented the inferior diet. Placing the AMER communities into a model. In this respect, Neville and colleagues recently proposed a variant of Koch’s postulates to provide a framework
to establish causation in the case of a single strain in human microbiota research  On the other hand, a
vegan diet high in ﬁbre aﬀects the gut ﬂora and over time the symptoms of metabolic syndrome improve—this
type of interaction may not be fully explained physiologically or may only be demonstrated statistically.