Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

2 of 49

is diet, an element which we can control. Synbiotics describe the
combination of probiotics and prebiotics which act synergistically. For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003)  However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes  It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism. However, 30 days of synbiotic
consumption had no impact on Se levels in breast milk. Prebiotics have also proven eﬃcacious for preventing adverse health outcomes in preterm infants. The incidence of sepsis was also signiﬁcantly lower in the test group. Despite the
apparent success of synbiotics in this small number of studies, a drawback of synbiotics is the diﬃculty
predicting selectivity and speciﬁcity and the subsequent mechanisms of action; thus, future studies
should focus on unravelling how each component in the mixture, and the mixture as a whole, exerts its
(cooperative) eﬀects 

Caesarean section has been shown to inﬂuence the development and composition of the gut
microbiota. Feeding caesarean-born infants formula supplemented with Bif. A multi-strain probiotic/
prebiotic antioxidant intervention for 12 weeks in recreational athletes prior to a long-distance
triathlon was shown to reduce plasma endotoxin unit levels and maintain intestinal permeability 
Gastrointestinal symptoms such as cramping, diarrhoea, nausea and abdominal pain etc. In this regard, probiotic supplements geared at the sports industry
should be investigated with respect to typical dietary extremes undertaken by athletic individuals. Some
common stress triggers include workplace related stress, exam stress, and illness. Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

17 of 49

Table 1. breve B-3

Adult volunteers, aBMI 24
to 30 kg/m2

12 weeks

Bif. breve B-3 has the potential to improve metabolic disorders. The probiotic

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

20 of 49

strain slightly decreased triglyceride levels and improved HDL cholesterol from baseline suggesting
potential for the strain to reduce body fat in healthy, pre-obese individuals. In a later randomized, double-blind, parallel, placebo controlled trial,
obese women consuming the same prebiotic at the same concentration for three months had signiﬁcantly
lower total SCFAs, acetate and propionate (that positively correlated with BMI), as well as signiﬁcantly
lower fasting insulinemia and homeostasis model assessment (indicator of insulin resistance) compared
to the placebo group  The following species were signiﬁcantly increased in the prebiotic group
at the end of the three months, Biﬁdobacterium adolescentis, Biﬁdobacterium pseudocatenulatum and Bif. Impact of prebiotics and synbiotics on overnutrition and undernutrition in human intervention studies. In this regard, understanding what ‘responding’ and ‘non-responding’ microbiota look like is essential
as well as how to convert a ‘non-responder’ into a ‘responder.’ found that
the glycemic response varied signiﬁcantly in response to the diﬀerent bread types and the type of bread
which induced the higher glycemic response in each person could be predicted using microbiome data
recorded just prior to the intervention. Consumer receives
personalized dietary, lifestyle and supplemental recommendations. N/A

Most commercially available 16S rRNA-based tests report on the relative abundance of F. prausnitzii
with no diﬀerentiation between F. prausnitzii subgroups A, B and C. This may lead to a misleading
interpretation of results as it has recently been found that diﬀerent subgroups produce butyrate at
diﬀerent levels and have been linked to diﬀerent disease states. Hence, future commercial
tests may oﬀer genetic testing as a way to help consumers, such as lactating mothers in the case of
FUT2, make better choices and optimise health outcomes. Guidelines for Evaluating the Scientiﬁc Validity of Evidence for Providing Personalised
Microbiome-Based Dietary Advice

As noted in the previous section, there are risks associated with the rapid commercialisation of
microbiome testing including inconsistencies in results between laboratories as well as over-extrapolation of

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

32 of 49

results on the side of the service provider and over-interpretation of results on the side of the consumer. These guidelines use the ACCE model (Analytical and Clinical Validity, Clinical
Utility and Ethics) as the starting point according to which a medical genetic test should fulﬁl
requirements regarding:

i.
ii. In this respect, Neville and colleagues recently proposed a variant of Koch’s postulates to provide a framework
to establish causation in the case of a single strain in human microbiota research  On the other hand, a
vegan diet high in ﬁbre aﬀects the gut ﬂora and over time the symptoms of metabolic syndrome improve—this
type of interaction may not be fully explained physiologically or may only be demonstrated statistically. Furthermore, other members of the microbiota including the phageome,
virome and mycobiome, are likely to contribute to human health as much as the bacterial component
and should be included in analysis in order to gain comprehensive insight.