Lactobacillus crispatus  CTV-05  (Lactin-V,  Osel) 
is  a  live  biotherapeutic  product  that  contains  a 
naturally occurring vaginal strain of L. crispatus. It  is  composed  of  a  powder  containing  2×109 
colony-forming units (CFU) of L. crispatus CTV-05 
preserved  with  inactive  ingredients  and  is  ad-
ministered  with  the  use  of  a  prefilled  vaginal 
applicator. In previous clinical trials, no serious or grade 3 
adverse events that were considered to be related 
to the use of Lactin-V were reported.13-18 On the 
basis of the results from a phase 2a clinical trial 
of Lactin-V,16 the current phase 2b trial was de-
signed to assess whether treatment with Lactin-V 
after  a  5-day  course  of  metronidazole  to  treat 
bacterial vaginosis would result in a significantly 
lower  incidence  of  recurrence  of  bacterial  vagi-
nosis than placebo..

regimen for reevaluation of their eligibility. After 
providing written informed consent to partici-
pate in the trial, eligible women were randomly 
assigned,  in  a  2:1  ratio,  to  receive  Lactin-V  at 
2×109  CFU  per  dose  or  matching  placebo  and 
subsequently  received  a  carton  containing  25 
vaginal applicators. The placebo formulation con-
tained the same inactive ingredients as Lactin-V, 
without L. crispatus CTV-05..

Clinic follow-up visits were scheduled 4, 8, 12, 
and  24  weeks  after  enrollment. The 
data from the questionnaire are not reported here.). For  the  intention-to-
treat  and  modified  intention-to-treat  analyses, 
missing  data  regarding  the  concentrations  of 
L.  crispatus  species  and  L. crispatus  CTV-05  were 
not  imputed. In contrast, in 
the  placebo  group,  L. crispatus  CTV-05  was  de-
tected in 2 to 6% of participants during weeks 4, 
8, and 12 and in 2% of participants at week 24. The  results  were  materially  unchanged  across 
the  analysis  populations. I bars indicate maximum and minimum values, the horizontal lines inside the 
blue bars indicate median values, and the diamonds indicate mean values. (The circles below the blue bar at week 4 represent outliers.) The size of each 
blue bar represents the interquartile range. Participants with detectable
L. crispatus CTV-05 . Overall,  adherence  to  the  assigned 
treatment  was  high. We did not find that the occurrence of menses 
since the last visit or the occurrence of sex with-
out the use of a condom affected the detection 
of L. crispatus CTV-05.