Lactobacillus crispatus  CTV-05  (Lactin-V,  Osel) 
is  a  live  biotherapeutic  product  that  contains  a 
naturally occurring vaginal strain of L. crispatus. Osel also 
provided  both  Lactin-V  and  placebo. Premenopausal women 18 to 45 years of age 
were screened for eligibility after providing writ-
ten  informed  consent  to  be  screened. Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. T h e  n e w   e ng l a n d   j o u r na l   o f  m e dic i n e

regimen for reevaluation of their eligibility. The  memory  aid  was  to  be  com-
pleted  daily  during  the  first  12  weeks  of  the 
trial and weekly thereafter. Clinic follow-up visits were scheduled 4, 8, 12, 
and  24  weeks  after  enrollment. A positive 
L. crispatus result was defined as a level above the 
lower limit of detection for both the assay for all 
strains and the assay for the CTV-05 strain (see 
the Supplementary Appendix, available at NEJM 
.org,  for  details  of  the  PCR  methods). Trial personnel and participants were unaware 
of  the  treatment-group  assignment. Before  un-
blinding of the treatment-group assignments oc-
curred, a case-review committee identified par-
ticipants who had had protocol deviations, such 
as the use of prohibited medications, trial visits 
outside  the  protocol-specified  time  window,  or 
poor adherence to the assigned treatment; these 
participants were excluded from the per-protocol 
analyses (see the Methods section in the Supple-
mentary Appendix). Efficacy Outcomes
The primary efficacy outcome was the percent-
age of participants who had recurrent bacterial 
vaginosis  (defined  by  the  presence  of  at  least 
three Amsel criteria and a Nugent score of 4 to 
10) at any follow-up visit up to and including the 
week  12  visit. The 
data from the questionnaire are not reported here.) The severity of all ad-
verse  events  was  graded  according  to  grading 
tables  provided  by  the  Division  of  AIDS  of  the 

1908

n engl j med 382;20  nejm.org  May 14, 2020

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UPPSALA UNIVERSITY on May 13, 2020. All solicited adverse 
events were considered to be related to Lactin-V 
or placebo; the relatedness of unsolicited adverse 
events was determined by trial staff. Statistical Analysis
The efficacy analyses were performed in several 
analysis populations. Here, we present the results 
of  the  post  hoc  multiple-imputation  analyses, 
which corroborated the last-observation-carried-
forward analyses; the results of the latter analy-
ses are included in Tables S1 and S2. In  addition,  the  associations  of 
adherence  to  the  assigned  treatment  (≥75%  of 
doses administered vs. <75% of doses adminis-
tered), reported occurrence of menses since the 
last  visit  (menses  vs.  no  menses),  and  reported 
occurrence of sexual activity (sex without the use 
of a condom vs. abstinence or sex with the use of 
a condom) with the presence of L. crispatus spe-
cies and L. crispatus CTV-05 were assessed as ex-
ploratory analyses, as specified in the statistical 
analysis plan. The demo-
graphic  and  clinical  characteristics  of  the  two 
groups were generally well balanced at baseline. Lactin-V to Prevent Recurrence of Bacterial Vaginosis

Table 1. American Indian or Alaskan Native

Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander

Variable

Age — yr

Asian

Black

White

Multiracial

Unknown

Hispanic or Latino ethnic group — no. (%)† In the Lactin-V group, L. crispatus CTV-05 was 
detected in 79% (at week 12) to 84% of partici-
pants during weeks 4, 8, and 12 and in 48% of 
participants at week 24 . T h e  n e w   e ng l a n d   j o u r na l   o f  m e dic i n e

Table 2. †  This variable represents the primary outcome. Safety
After the exclusion of 1 participant in the Lactin-V 
group who did not receive any doses, 151 par-
ticipants  in  the  Lactin-V  group  and  76  partici-
pants  in  the  placebo  group  were  evaluated  for 
safety;  data  on  solicited  adverse  events  were 
missing for 11 and 10 participants, respectively, 
owing to early loss to follow-up. Median Concentration (log10 CFU/ml)

10

89

7 6

5

4 3

2

1

0

4

8

12

24

Trial Week

Figure 2. (The circles below the blue bar at week 4 represent outliers.) The size of each 
blue bar represents the interquartile range. and was 5.6×106 CFU per milliliter at week 24 
. Solicited Local (Genitourinary) Adverse Events, 
According to Treatment Group. No severe solicited local adverse events were reported 
in either group. Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with 

the full text of this article at NEJM.org.