Lactobacillus crispatus  CTV-05  (Lactin-V,  Osel) 
is  a  live  biotherapeutic  product  that  contains  a 
naturally occurring vaginal strain of L. crispatus. Osel also 
provided  both  Lactin-V  and  placebo. If  a  potentially  eligible 
woman met at least three of four Amsel criteria 
(i.e.,  thin,  white  or  yellow,  homogeneous  dis-
charge;  >20%  clue  cells  on  microscopic  exami-
nation; vaginal fluid with a pH of >4.5; and re-
lease  of  a  fishy  odor  when  10%  potassium 
hydroxide  is  added  to  a  vaginal  specimen),  a 
vaginal swab was obtained and sent to a central 
laboratory at Magee–Womens Research Institute. Gram’s staining of the vaginal smear was used 
to determine the Nugent score (0 to 3 [normal], 
4  to  6  [intermediate],  or  7  to  10  [indicative  of 
bacterial  vaginosis]).19  A  blood  sample  was  ob-
tained to test for HIV infection and syphilis; a 
vaginal swab was obtained for molecular testing 
for gonorrhea, chlamydia, and trichomonas in-
fections; and a urine specimen was obtained to 
test for beta human chorionic gonadotropin and 
urinary tract infection. Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. T h e  n e w   e ng l a n d   j o u r na l   o f  m e dic i n e

regimen for reevaluation of their eligibility. The  memory  aid  was  to  be  com-
pleted  daily  during  the  first  12  weeks  of  the 
trial and weekly thereafter. Clinic follow-up visits were scheduled 4, 8, 12, 
and  24  weeks  after  enrollment. A positive 
L. crispatus result was defined as a level above the 
lower limit of detection for both the assay for all 
strains and the assay for the CTV-05 strain (see 
the Supplementary Appendix, available at NEJM 
.org,  for  details  of  the  PCR  methods). Vaginal 
applicators  that  were  returned  at  the  follow-up 
visits  were  stained  with  0.5%  trypan  blue  as  a 
proxy for adherence to the assigned treatment.20 
Further details of the trial, including trial proce-
dures and the complete list of eligibility criteria, 
are provided in the Supplementary Appendix. Trial personnel and participants were unaware 
of  the  treatment-group  assignment. Efficacy Outcomes
The primary efficacy outcome was the percent-
age of participants who had recurrent bacterial 
vaginosis  (defined  by  the  presence  of  at  least 
three Amsel criteria and a Nugent score of 4 to 
10) at any follow-up visit up to and including the 
week  12  visit. The 
data from the questionnaire are not reported here.) The severity of all ad-
verse  events  was  graded  according  to  grading 
tables  provided  by  the  Division  of  AIDS  of  the 

1908

n engl j med 382;20  nejm.org  May 14, 2020

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UPPSALA UNIVERSITY on May 13, 2020. All solicited adverse 
events were considered to be related to Lactin-V 
or placebo; the relatedness of unsolicited adverse 
events was determined by trial staff. Statistical Analysis
The efficacy analyses were performed in several 
analysis populations. Efficacy
Primary Outcome
Among  the  228  participants  who  underwent 
randomization, the status of recurrence of bac-
terial vaginosis was known for 197 participants 
 In the intention-to-treat population, re-
currence  of  bacterial  vaginosis  by  week  12  oc-
curred in 46 participants in the Lactin-V 
group  and  in  34  participants   in  the  pla-
cebo group (risk ratio, 0.66; 95% confidence in-
terval [CI], 0.44 to 0.87; P = 0.01) (Table 2). Lactin-V to Prevent Recurrence of Bacterial Vaginosis

Table 1. American Indian or Alaskan Native

Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander

Variable

Age — yr

Asian

Black

White

Multiracial

Unknown

Hispanic or Latino ethnic group — no. (%)† †  Race and ethnic group were reported by the participant. T h e  n e w   e ng l a n d   j o u r na l   o f  m e dic i n e

Table 2. †  This variable represents the primary outcome. (The circles below the blue bar at week 4 represent outliers.) The size of each 
blue bar represents the interquartile range. and was 5.6×106 CFU per milliliter at week 24 
. Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with 

the full text of this article at NEJM.org.