it

Introduction
Asthma is a common chronic disorder during pregnancy, affecting between 8% and 13% of pregnant
women 
is often a comorbid condition with food and environmental allergies  Asthma
exacerbation rates during pregnancy are high  and more severe asthma or poor symptom control have
been associated with low birthweight  A greater risk for childhood asthma following uncontrolled
versus controlled maternal asthma during pregnancy has been reported  These variations in risk to the
offspring point to a potential in utero influence of maternal asthma. Written informed
consent was obtained from all mothers. Hospital birth records
provided data on mode of delivery, sex and infant exposures during birth. Since 23–30% of asthmatic women
asthma treatment
the CHILD study
discontinue treatment during pregnancy due to lessening symptoms,
questionnaire would have correctly classified women reporting treatment prior to conception but not
during pregnancy. Data were rarefied to 13 000 sequences per sample. Using the adjusted rank transform (ART) nonparametric test
for interaction  the p-value for the interaction between infant sex and maternal prenatal asthma on
Lactobacillus abundance was 0.001. With the
exception of Firmicutes being less abundant in female infants born to women with asthma ( p=0.03), no
other differences were evident in phylum abundance, microbial richness or diversity between infants born
to women with versus those without prenatal asthma (supplementary figure S1, supplementary table S1). Lactobacillus abundance were found between non-Caucasian males born to mothers with (median
0.0005%, n=5) and without (median 0.0007%, n=112) prenatal asthma. The restricted analyses
revealed similar trends for the genus Lactobacillus in the gut microbiota of male, Caucasian infants
( p=0.06) born to an asthmatic mother (table 3, supplementary table S2). Comparisons were performed
using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. The false discovery rate (FDR) was used to adjust p-values for multiple
testing and crude p-values <FDR p-values are indicated by “#”. The p-values <0.1 are reported and
p-values <0.05 are indicated in bold. ¶: comparison of Lactobacillus was the primary hypothesis. intrapartum antibiotics, alongside a reduction in abundance of

Lactobacilli were less abundant in male infants born to women with asthma and concomitant food or
environmental allergies, or asthma and pre-pregnancy overweight; statistical significance was not observed in
the absence of either comorbidity (table 4). Firmicutes were much less abundant in females born to overweight mothers with asthma. restricted to Caucasian, vaginally delivered, breastfed infants not
exposed to maternal antibiotics during birth; +: comparison of Lactobacillus was the primary hypothesis. OR: odds ratio; aOR: adjusted odds ratio; CI: confidence interval. These associations were not present in
female offspring. Male infants are at higher risk of developing wheeze during infancy than female infants, especially if they
are Caucasian  although sex differences in gut microbiota composition have not been a focus of
attention until recently  Literature reporting a higher risk for overweight with antibiotic use in male,

https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00280-2017

7

ASTHMA | P.T. KOLEVA ET AL. Further,
amniotic fluid are capable of modulating expression of toll-like receptor genes in the fetal gut  In our
study, the reduction in Lactobacillus abundance was most apparent among infants whose mothers had
asthma and overweight or a history of allergies. Acknowledgements
We are grateful to all the families who took part in this study, and the whole CHILD team, which includes interviewers,
computer and laboratory technicians, clerical workers, research scientists, volunteers, managers, receptionists and nurses. Anita Kozyrskyj will serve as the guarantor for the contents of this paper. Manitoba; F Ratjen, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto; A Sandford, University of British
Columbia; J Scott, University of Toronto; JA Scott, University of Toronto; MR Sears (Founding Director), McMaster
University; F Silverman, University of Toronto; E Simons, University of Manitoba; P Subbarao (Director), The Hospital
for Sick Children and University of Toronto; T Takaro, Simon Fraser University; SJ Tebbutt, University of British
Columbia; T To, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto; SE Turvey (Co-director), University of
British Columbia. A.L. Kozyrskyj conceived the study and obtained funding, designed the analyses and wrote the final
version of the manuscript. All authors provided
critical comments on the manuscript content and approved the final version of the manuscript.