Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

and react to form a response, and understanding how these
responses combine to affect human health. However, it is important to distinguish the role of the
microbiome as a mediator of the effect of diet on metabolism
from the potential of the microbiome to be an effect modifier
of response to diet (Figure 2). In both cases, a randomization scheme is implemented,

randomizing either the order of treatments (cross-over)
or the assignment of individuals to separate treatments
(parallel). Thus, in the attempt to control one
source of variation, another is introduced. Changes in circulating lipids  insulin
sensitivity/resistance  or inflammatory markers
were also common measured responses. Humans:Glucoseandinsulin,SCFAs,

Intervention

Humans(39healthyadults,10

Barleykernelbread(BKB)vs.whitewheat

Kovatcheva-

Mice:PPGR,liverglycogen
breathhydrogen

weight,fecalpH
GLP-1,PYY,lipidproﬁles,body
HbA1c,SCFAs,glucoseandinsulin,

individuals)
humanfecesfromhighorlowP/B
(gnotobiotic,colonizedwith
selectedasRorNR)andmice

ﬂourbread(WWB)for3deach


Datcharyetal. Intervention

Humans

Sourdoughwhole-grainbreadvs.white

Koremetal. syndromeand/orobesity)
Humans(78adultswithmetabolic

Respondercriteria

Biologicalmeasures

Studydesign

Model

Dietaryintervention



Fiber

Citation

TABLE1Reviewofmethodsusedtoconductprecisionnutritionstudies1

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

(Continued)

ChangeinBif.abundance(nodiscretecut-oﬀ)

Onlymicrobiotaresponse

Intervention

Humans

nulinvs.placebo(8g/d

Kolidaetal. In
contrast, qPCR, or real-time PCR, measures amplification of
DNA in real-time using fluorescence of hybridized probes
specific for individual taxa, allowing for more accurate
quantification 

Once amplified, DNA can be used for a variety of methods
to compare and identify samples. DNA mi-
croarrays, which utilize oligonucleotide probes immobilized
onto a glass slide to hybridize to complementary nucleotide
sequences, provide phylogenetic identification. A challenge for both
methods is that they are computationally intense and require
expertise to analyze the data that are generated. Normalization and transformation methods for gut
microbiome data. Data can be transformed

Gut microbiome and precision nutrition: Part I 11

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

TABLE 3 Review of methods used to analyze precision nutrition studies1

Microbiome measures

Association or
prediction

Statistical methods

Korpela et al. Microbiota composition (qPCR) and function

Association

Paired t-test



(protein expression)

Holscher et al. Microbiota composition 

Association

Linear mixed models

Fuller et al. Microbiota composition (qPCR)

Association

Spearman correlation

Hullar et al. Association compared with prediction studies. Other studies go further to complete
the second step (“Prediction” studies, Table 3), using an
individual’ pretreatment microbiome (sometimes in addition
to other baseline characteristics) to devise models to predict

16 Hughes et al. and there is currently no consensus on how to decide this
value 

how that individual will respond to a dietary intervention, or
to design dietary advice suitable for the individual. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

FIGURE 4 Steps of precision nutrition research. Typically,
observations are plotted on a scatterplot of the first 2
principal coordinates and data points are labeled to identify
biologically significant groups (e.g. disease, no disease). However, in all of these clustering methods, groups
are statistically defined and may not indicate any biological
significance. Correlation of continuous variables in association studies. RV coefficient can be used to assess the association
of the independent variable with a continuous outcome. This method performs best when dimensionality is low (i.e.
fewer input variables) whereas random forests may perform
better when dimensionality is high (i.e. many input variables)


Bayesian network (BN) analysis is a graphical model
that depicts the relations between variables and their prob-
abilities or dependencies. Mice offer a model in which differences in the gut microbiota
may be studied in a controlled experimental context, allowing
for the determination of causality and development of

mechanistic hypotheses  For example, transplantation
of isolated strains or communities of bacteria into germ-free
mice is one of the best models in use to demonstrate causal
relations between the gut microbiota and host metabolism
 This approach has been used in studies such as
Kovatcheva-Datchary et al. Human
nutrition, the gut microbiome and the immune system. Possemiers S, Rabot S, Espín JC, Bruneau A, Philippe C,
González-Sarrías A, Heyerick A, Tomás-Barberán FA, De
Keukeleire D, Verstraete W. Eubacterium limosum activates
isoxanthohumol from hops (Humulus lupulus L.) into the potent
phytoestrogen 8-prenylnaringenin in vitro and in rat intestine. Smits SA, Marcobal A, Higginbottom S, Sonnenburg JL, Kashyap PC. procedures, analysis pipelines, and analytical methods. This will allow researchers
to devise a network of effects to better understand the ways in
which the microbiota impacts our health as well as the ways
in which we may manipulate the microbiota to improve our
health.