Several studies have demonstrated modulation of colonic 
microbiota by prebiotic inulin or inulin-type fructans. Clostridium XIVa
E. halli R. hominis
Anaerostipes . Additional described effects of prebiotics include reduc-
ing  toxins  produced  from  protein  metabolism  in  urine 
(p-cresol and ammonia) and serum (p-cresyl sulphate) 
 and increasing calcium absorption in adolescents [30, 
31]. Prebiotics may also exert beneficial effects on host 
physiology which are independent of the microbiota as dem-
onstrated by in vitro experiments for GOS. Results suggested that PPIs 
diminished the gastric acid barrier, as species found in the 
oral microbiome of PPI users were more abundant in the gut 
than in non-users  It is increasingly observed that the 
use of PPIs is associated with an increase in the incidence of 
enteric infections like Clostridium difficile and Campylobac-
ter. Given the profound effect of PPIs on the gut microbiome 
and the fact that over 11% of population in The Netherlands 
and other European countries are using PPIs on prescription 
(not including over the counter use of PPIs) implies a major 
PPI-dependent influence on the gut microbiome taxonomy 
and function on a populational scale..

The human gut microbiota contains bacteria that are ben-
eficial to the host, and bacteria with pathogenic potential, 
termed ‘pathobionts’  An important role of beneficial 
bacteria is the metabolic production of SCFAs by cross-feed-
ing . which produce solubilized oligosaccharides and 
polysaccharides that act as substrates for butyrate-producing 
species such as Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Eubacterium 
rectale, Roseburia spp, Eubacterium hallii and Anaerostipes 
spp  Butyrate has multiple effects on the host including 
maintenance of gut barrier function by stimulating the pro-
duction of mucin, antimicrobial peptides, and tight-junction . Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is a Gram-negative obligate 
anaerobe which is difficult to culture, and taxonomically is in 
the Clostridia order of Firmicutes . The bar represents 10 µm (Photo, M. Sadaghian Sadabad). nitrate, which was generated as a byproduct of the inflamma-
tory host response, selectively enhanced growth of E. coli in 
the large intestine of mice  Moreover, F. prausnitzii pro-
duces a 15 kDa anti-inflammatory protein that inhibits the 
NF-κB pathway in intestinal epithelial cells and was shown 
to prevent colitis in a mouse model . Therefore, the maternal microbiome 
also seems to be important for the development of the neo-
natal microbiome. A  growing  number  of  placebo-controlled  RCTs  have 
investigated the effect of probiotics on mood, cognition 
and brain function in humans. lactis, 
Streptococcus thermophiles, and two Lactobacillus spp. produced significant changes in brain activity assessed by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), in response 
to an emotional faces attention task. Many alcohol-dependent subjects have alterations in 
their intestinal permeability and gut microbiome. FMT is highly effective for treating recurrent Clostridium 
difficile infections and may be used more widely in the future 
for conditions such as metabolic syndrome..

Conflict of interest  MHM and ME are employees of DSM Nutritional 
Products,  Kaiseraugst,  Switzerland  and  as  such  no  external  funding 
was provided. RJMB, RAR, 
RKW, MF declare no conflict of interest.