H.E.  Blum  /  Advances  in  Medical  Sciences  62   414–420 

415

thousands  or  ten  thousands  of  single-stranded  DNA  species,
reverse  transcribed  RNA  (cDNA)  or  oligonucleotides  of  known
sequence  can  provide  a  global  gene  (genomics),  gene  expression
(transcriptomics,  proteomics)  or  metabolite 
(metabolomics)
proﬁle  (‘signature’)  that 
for  the  disease  of
individual  patients,  including  its  natural  course/prognosis  and
response  to  therapy. Clinically,  this  may
eventually  translate  into  clinical  advances  in  disease  prevention,
early  diagnosis  and  therapy. It  should  be  cautioned,  however,  that
the  contribution  of  a  deﬁned  SNP  to  the  risk  assessment  for  a
given  disease  must  be  weighed  against  established  clinical
parameters  and  needs  to  be  carefully  evaluated  before  entering
clinical  practice. The  human  microbiome  project

The  human  microbiome  project  (HMP)  was  established  in  2007
as  another  global  consortium    The  HMP  and  the 
‘Meta-
genomics  of  the  Human  Intestinal  Tract  (Meta-HiT)  Consortium
Europe’
  aim  at  the  sequencing  of  all  microbes  (eukaryotes,  archaea,
bacteria,  viruses)  that  inhabit  speciﬁc  body  sites,  such  as  the
mouth,  throat  and  airways,  stomach  and  intestine,  the  urogenital
system  and  the  skin,  respectively  . The  intestinal  microbial  community

In  recent  years  the  intestinal  microbial  community  has  been
It  represents  a  microbial  ecosystem

in  great  detail. (A)  Different  microbiomes  in  humans;  (B)  The  intestinal  microbiome  in  healthy  individuals  and  patients  

416 

H.E.  Blum  /  Advances  in  Medical  Sciences  62   414–420

identiﬁed  bacterial  species 

consisting  of  trillion  microbial  cells  with  an  aggregate  9.9  million
microbial  genes  across  the  fecal  microbiome    While  until
recently,  the  environment  in  utero  has  been  considered  sterile,
DNA-based  analyses 
in  maternal
ﬂuid  and  meconium. The  colonization  of  the
placenta,  amniotic 
human  gut  begins  at  birth  with  a  rapid  expansion  of  bacterial
diversity  and  is  characterized  by  a  successively  changing  compo-
sition  that  eventually  becomes  relatively  stable  in  adulthood  
While  the  speciﬁc  microbial  species  and  subspecies  and  their
proportions  vary  greatly  from  person  to  person  the  individual
microbiome  is  unique  and  becomes  more  diverse  in  the  elderly. In  view  of  the  numerous  and  diverse  physiological  functions  of
the  intestinal  microbiota  in  human  health  (Table  1)  it  is  not
surprising  that  it  is  also  involved  in  gastrointestinal  as  well  as  non-
gastrointestinal  diseases,  such  as  obesity/metabolic  syndrome,  and
atherosclerosis/cardiovascular  as  well  as  neurologic/psychiatric
diseases,  making  it  one  of  the  most  dynamic  current  topics  in
biomedical  research  (Table  2). In  the  following,  a  few  examples  will
be  discussed  in  more  detail. Inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases  and  colon  cancer

The  inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases  (IBD)  in  humans  include
ulcerative  colitis 
(CD). These  are
(UC)  and  Crohn  disease 
characterized  by  inﬂammation  limited  to  the  mucosal  layer  of
the  colon 
the
gastrointestinal  tract,  including  extraintestinal  sites  in  CD. While
the  pathogenesis  of  IBD  is  not  fully  understood    it  is  clear  that
its  pathology  depends  among  others  on  the  intestinal  microbial
‘IBD-
community    Further,  a  case-control  study  identiﬁed 

involvement  of 

in  UC  and 

transmural 

the 

Table  1
Functions  of  the  intestinal  microbial  community  in  human  health  (examples).