Page 2

environmental exposures (Brown et al., More specifically, the state of the science will 
then be presented regarding the maternal gut during pregnancy, related maternal-fetal health 
implications and evidence-based nursing care strategies to improve delivery of care and 
optimize health. The gut microbiome provides a broad range of functions. 2016; Kim, Romero, 
Chaemsaithong, & Kim, 2015). Gut microbes found in amniotic fluid of women who 
experienced preterm premature rupture of membranes suggest that the gut microbiome could 
play a role in intrauterine infections (DiGiulio et al., Possible mechanisms of 

MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 01. Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Edwards et al. A recent study to evaluate the relationships among maternal weight, gut 
microbiome, blood pressure and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) levels in 
overweight and obese pregnant women found the abundance of butyrate-producing bacteria 
to be significantly negatively associated with systolic and diastolic blood pressure and PAI-1 
levels (Gomez-Arango et al., These findings suggest increasing butyrate-producing 
bacteria may contribute to lower BP in overweight and obese pregnant women. This could 
prove to be a strategy to reduce the low grade inflammation and higher obstetric risks 
suffered by overweight and obese women or those with gestational diabetes. When there is a disruption of any of the components of this system, disease 
may manifest (Foster & McVey Neufeld, 2013; Gareau, 2014). The impact of stress on the neuroendocrine system, especially when chronic, can result in 
immunologic dysregulation and heightened risk and virulence of infection (Cepeda, Katz, & 
Blacketer, 2016). Hormonal Changes in Pregnancy and the Gut Microbiome

The prenatal period is marked by dramatic hormonal shifts with resultant unique 
inflammatory and immune changes that alter gut function and bacterial composition 
(Brantsaeter et al., Dramatic changes 
in ovarian hormones during the prenatal and postpartum periods also affect gut contractility 
and transit (Mayer, Savidge, et al., It is plausible that the hormone levels involved in 
increasing gut transit time are an adaptive response to allow greater nutrient and energy 
harvest, thus promoting weight gain in pregnancy. The microbial diversity in the gut at the 
start of pregnancy appears to be similar to that of non-pregnant women (Santacruz et al., Yet, as the pregnancy advances, the abundance of gut bacteria associated with 
inflammatory states increases in nearly 70% of women (Santacruz et al., Negative 
interference with the brain-gut axis (depicted on right side of Figure 1) during these times is 
associated with a higher maternal and child risk for chronic intestinal disorders, conditions 
which affect weight and growth, and even neuropsychiatric disorders (Mayer, Knight, et al., Appropriate 
type, duration and indication of prebiotic, probiotic and antibiotic use in the prevention and 
treatment of illness will become an important topic for discussion with clients in the future, 
since all act on the gut microbiome and may impact overall health and gestational weight 
gain (Griffin, 2015). There are no current clinical guidelines to facilitate these discussions 
pending further research. Dietary and lifestyle patterns that impact the brain-gut axis also need to be assessed. Identification of food 
sensitivities (gluten, dairy, and nuts are common) and elimination of those foods from the 
diet reduce systemic inflammation and improves gut health. Further, fiber can improve constipation and other gastrointestinal conditions 
common in pregnancy (Griffin, 2015). Conclusion

Diet and lifestyle practices are modifiable factors that can affect the brain-gut axis, and 
ultimately, the long-term health of women and infants.