378

Turk J Urol 2018; 44 377-83


Among  these  treatment  approaches,  probiotic  applications  are 
among the promising alternatives. Both microorganisms are lactic acid 
bacteria and have protective roles against pathogens colonized 
in the urogenital region. UM reported in healthy women is summarized in 
Table 1. Bacterial isolation can 
be performed using EQUC method in 80% of the cases reported 
as  ‘no  growth’  in  standard  cultures  of  urine  samples. Despite the presence of many species of bacteria in the urinary 
system,  it  is  of  interest  to  note  that  these  bacteria  do  not  lead 
to  a  chronic  UTI. So,  in  a  sense,  hosts  are  choosing,  and  containing 

Table 1. The role of probiotics in women with recurrent urinary tract infections

379

Table 2. Properties which should be possessed by a healthy probiotic 

They should be able to adhere to the cells

They should be able to prevent or decrease adherence of pathogenic microorganisms

They should be able to secrete acids, hydrogen peroxide, and bacteriocins so as to prevent growth of pathogens

It should be safe, and should not be invasive, carcinogenic, and pathogenic

They should be able to form clusters so as to produce normal-balanced flora 

microorganisms that will not harm them. Are the host and the 
bacteria  developing  all  together? It  is  debatable 
whether  this  condition  arises  from  a  genetic  predisposition  or 
from a bacterial transfer which occurs in childhood or perhaps 
even at birth. This difference, however, is thought to play a role in susceptibil-
ity to certain diseases. are dominant bacteria and form UM 
which demonstrates antimicrobial activity. Many scientific studies have 
shown  that  regulation  of  the  gastrointestinal  and  vaginal  flora 
with probiotic support may prevent genitourinary infections. Probiotics 
must  be  resistant  to  gastric  and  bile  acids  in  order  to  reach  the 
intestinal system and produce beneficial effects on the body. Probiotics can be found in foods and food supplements (in cap-

Stewardson et al.compared ciprofloxacin and nitrofurantoin 
treatments in their study and found that the ciprofloxacin group 
had a significant effect on intestinal microbiome which mostly 
contain  healthy  Lactobacillus  spp. In  the  group  of  nitrofuran-
toin, microbiota structure demonstrated relatively lower degree 
of variations. Antibiotics used in the treatment of these 
infections reduce the number of lactobacilli in the urinary sys-
tem and may cause antibiotic resistance in the following period 
and  destroy  the  existing  natural  barrier  of  the  urinary  system 
formed against infections. If  pathogenic  bacteria  can 
achieve this, then why Lactobacillus, an important component 
of  vaginal  colonization,  can  not  do  it? In these studies the authors reported that probiotic 
capsules administered orally may regulate the vaginal flora and 
may be effective on recurrent UTIs. Prevention of UTIs in women
A  meta-analysis  on  the  application  of  Lactobacillus  was  pub-
lished. Abad  and  Safdar  reviewed  25  clinical  trials  in  a  systematic 
review  they  published  in  2009  and  investigated  the  presence  of 
Lactobacillus-containing probiotics in the prevention and treatment 
of urogenital infections. It is also stated that 
additional studies are needed to clearly define the optimal dose 
and duration of application. In 
addition,  antibiotic  resistance  was  significantly  reduced  in  the 
probiotic  group  compared  to  the  control  group. In  a  recent 
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2 study, Stapleton et al. These patients were 
divided into two groups and for 10 weeks following an episode 
of cystitis placebo treatment was given to 48 patients, and other 
48  patients  received  intravaginal  probiotics  (Lactin-V)  contain-
ing  Lactobacillus  crispatus    The  results  of  this 
study showed that the incidence of recurrent UTIs in patients who 
received  intravaginal  Lactobacillus  treatment  decreased  signifi-
cantly compared to the placebo group. Relationship between premenopausal UTI and probiotics
Most  studies  on  probiotic  application  in  recurrent  UTI  in  the 
literature  have  been  performed  in  premenopausal  women. In 
fact, the risk factors in premenopausal women are different from 
those of the postmenopausal women. In  UTI  use  of  mono-,  and  combination  treatments  with  probiot-
ics  has  been  published  (Table  3). Researchers noted that 
the combination was well tolerated and effective. In clinical practice, an integrality should be established between 
scientific  evidence,  clinical  experience  and  patients’  desire.