Competing interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist. Furthermore, the gut microbiota
composition of these infants was compared to the gut microbiota of the offspring of healthy
normoglycemic women to evaluate possible differences between the two cohorts of newborns. Data relative to the type of delivery, birth weight, gestational age and the type of feeding were
extracted from medical records. Containers were immediately
stored at −80 ˚C for DNA extraction. No storage medium was used 

PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0226545 December 16, 2019

3 / 18

GDM offspring gut microbiota composition

In the case of infants from normoglycemic mothers, fecal samples have been reported to be

collected from diapers using standard sterile collection tubes 

Fecal DNA extraction and sequencing

Total DNA from the feces collected was extracted using the RNeasy Power Microbiome KIT
(Qiagen, Milan, Italy) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Pairwise Spearman’s non-parametric correlations were
used to study the relationships between the infant relative abundance of microbial taxa and
maternal dietary and metabolic variables. Hierarchical clustering analysis at genus level (S1 Fig) showed a separation between the
infant microbiota and the mother microbiota (anosim P<0.01). α-diversity measures of fecal microbiota. The direct association between maternal fasting glucose at enrolment and Enterococcus
(Rho = 0.49) was no longer confirmed in the multivariate model, while the inverse association
between Clostridiales and maternal changes across pregnancy (delta) in glycated hemoglobin
(HbA1c) levels was statistically significant (Table 1). Two out of 29 women were treated with insulin;
none received metformin. PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0226545 December 16, 2019

6 / 18

GDM offspring gut microbiota composition

Fig 3. Only correlations with P-values <0.002 are shown. Data at enrolment (plot A) or at
study-end (Plot B). Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) of unweighted UniFrac distances matrix for 16S rRNA gene sequence data. A higher α-diversity was evident in the latter (for the Chao-1
diversity index, P = 0.001). Nutritional recommendations were given to our women between 24–28 weeks of gesta-
tional age, at the time of the oral glucose challenge test and GDM diagnosis  Only 34.1%
of our participants resulted compliant to the nutritional advice; indeed, dietary adherence and
nutritional habits at the end of pregnancy did not influence the offspring microbiota. This hypothesis needs
to be confirmed by further studies. Contrasting data are available about this topic, since a different microbial pattern
have been reported between C-section-delivered infants
and vaginally-delivered infants. Many associations that we found to be not statistically signifi-
cant, could have become so if we had analyzed a larger sample. Heatplot showing OTUs of
GDM patients at enrolment (red bars), study end (green bars) and their offspring (blue bars). Inner bars indicate the presence of an oligotype
in a given sample. Enrolment characteristics and pregnancy outcomes of the GDM women. Data curation: Ilario Ferrocino, Rosalba Rosato, Simona Bo. Methodology: Valentina Ponzo, Ilario Ferrocino, Rosalba Rosato, Simona Bo. Writing – original draft: Valentina Ponzo, Ilario Ferrocino, Simona Bo.