Round and Mazmanian

Page 2

and anti-inflammatory responses, and balances in the community structure of gut bacteria
may be intimately linked to the proper function of the immune system. Here, we discuss recent evidence that suggests a
beneficial partnership has evolved between symbiotic bacteria and the immune system. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14. Expression and localization of pattern-
recognition receptors (e.g., Toll-like receptors; TLRs) by the epithelium is influenced by
bacterial colonization of the gut, and expression of defensins and other antimicrobial
proteins are deficient in germ-free animals (Table 1). L-selectin and CD44 are known to be involved in homing of
lymphocytes to sites of inflammation. If true, then an evolutionary alliance has been forged between mammals and beneficial
bacteria that is critical in maintaining the long-term survival of both. IBD (particularly
Crohn's disease) is generally thought to be driven by T lymphocytes. Alternatively, the particular diet given to the animal might influence Treg subsets within the
intestine as most animal food, even if autoclaved, may have varying amounts of microbial
molecules (such as TLR ligands). It is possible that different classes (or even species) of
bacteria induce diverse immunological functions. In a model of disease induced by the adoptive transfer of pathogenic T cells into
immunodeficient (Scid−/− or Rag−/−) recipient mice, colonization of animals with intestinal
pathogens such as Helicobacter hepaticus was found to exacerbate inflammation59. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 8

In the early 1900s, Ilya Mechnikov was the first to propose the use of live microorganisms
to maintain bowel health and prolong life. Now, the term ‘probiotic’ is used to describe
dietary microbes that are able to confer a health benefit on the host76. The importance of B. fragilis in
maintenance of a healthy immune response was recently illustrated by the finding that
colonization by B. fragilis or treatment with purified PSA can protect from the induction of
experimental IBD66. These data have identified a single molecule made by a
symbiotic microorganism that stimulates CD4+ T cells to make IL-10, required for the
suppression of the inflammatory process during colitis, and suggest that other beneficial
bacteria may produce factors that can positively shape the host immune response during
IBD. The
current treatments for IBD are either ineffective in most patients or result in severe side
effects. As mentioned above, germ-free

Nat Rev Immunol. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 11

animals have numerous other immunological defects that may lead to disease, which
implicates a role for the microbiota in actively supporting health. This consortium of bacteria contains tenfold more cells than the
human body, 100 times the number of genes than in the human genome and has the
metabolic capacity of the human liver91,92. Although pathogenic bacteria clearly
induce local inflammation during acute infections, have symbiotic bacteria evolved to
regulate those inflammatory processes that are harmful to the host (and therefore, harmful to
the existence of the symbiont)? Perhaps genetic and habitual factors shape the composition
of the microbiota, which in turn shapes the immune system of individuals predisposed to
inflammatory disease (Figure 3). Symbiosis means “living together” as originally defined, the
relationship must be constant, intimate and between dissimilar
species. A symbiotic association in which both members benefit from the
relationship. They provide the
first line of defence against entry of pathogens through the mucosal
barrier. High endothelial venules are present mainly in the
interfollicular areas. Lymph nodes located at the base of the mesentery.