+34-958-246187
† All the authors are the members of SAMID Network. Hence, the microbiome modulates the
inﬂammatory mechanisms related to physiological and pathological processes that are involved in
the perinatal progress through diﬀerent mechanisms. Keywords: microbiome; pregnancy; fetus; placenta; newborn; infancy; critical illness; sepsis; allergy

1. These metabolites may have an inﬂuence both in the mother and in the newborn by
down-regulation of pro-inﬂammatory responses at the speciﬁc sites where the allergens are located,
which typically precedes asthma in childhood  In addition, the may also inﬂuence bone marrow
stimulation by reprogramming the immunological tone of the mammalian ecosystem 

Finally, it is important to consider that the discrepancies of the data obtained to date could be
inﬂuenced by a number of factors such as the dietary pattern, the ethnicity, the geographic location,
and the research methodology. In addition, changes in speciﬁc pathological infancy situations have also been revised. However, published data
are not consistent, since a number of factors might inﬂuence the microbiota proﬁle such as the diet,
antibiotic, or other supplement intakes, as well as the methodology of research. Therefore, a holistic
approach is needed to understand all this information. Alpha-diversity changes in gut microbiota during pregnancy. A number of protective lactic
acid-producing Lactobacillus species dominates the healthy vaginal microbiota in most reproductive-age
women. It has
been hypothesized that pregnancy creates a nutrient environment that is more favorable to some
sensitive strains  The presence of pathogenic bacteria Porphyromonas gingivalis and Aggregatibacter
actinomycotemcomitans in gingival sulcus were signiﬁcantly higher during early and middle stages
of pregnancy compared to non-pregnant women  The oral alpha-diversity index was higher
in the third trimester compared to non-pregnant women, and this may be related to the increase of
progesterone and estradiol. In addition, it has also been suggested that the transfer of maternal vaginal
microbes plays a minor role in seeding infant stool microbiota since the overlap of maternal vaginal
microbiota and infant faecal microbiota is minimal, while the similarity between maternal rectal
microbiota and infant microbiota was more pronounced 

The discrepances of the results obtained could be due to diﬀerent factors associated to C-section
delivery such as antibiotic administration, but also to breastfeeding, maternal obesity, gestational
diabetes mellitus, and even the analytical methodology. In preterm infants,
breast milk has been associated with improved growth and cognitive development and a reduced
risk of necrotizing enterocolitis and late sepsis onset  Occasionally, the absence of mother’s
own milk (MOM) requires the use of donated human milk (DHM). might be related to a pro-inﬂammatory status in
these pregnancies. Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

9 of 21

Finally, a number of bacteria, viruses, and protozoa infections have been associated with pregnancy
complications. To our best knowledge, only one study has analyzed the microbiota in children in a pediatric ICU
(PICU)  These authors found that the skin, oral, and fecal microbiota diﬀers sharply from critically
ill children compared with healthy children and adults. On one hand, sedation and endotracheal intubation
decrease mucociliary clearance and cough, reducing the elimination of microorganisms. On the other
hand, mechanical ventilation, pneumonia, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) favor
alveolar edema, increasing the amount of nutrients available and decreasing the amount of oxygen
in some areas. Furthermore, the slowing down of intestinal transit, frequent drugs (sedatives, opioids, catecholamines),
and the alteration of the mechanisms of microbial elimination (decreased production of bile salts and
IgA, pharmacological alkalinization of pH, etc.) Microbiome and Infection in Infants

The role of microbiome diversity and its variations in the incidence and susceptibility to infection
has also aroused great interest beyond the neonatal period. Regarding
respiratory infections, diversity of the oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal microbiota in children
with pneumonia was lower compared with healthy controls. Furthermore, a correlation between the
presence of certain taxa in sputum and the clinical course of community acquired pneumonia has been
described 

HIV infected children present reduced gastrointestinal microbial diversity  Modulation of
the intestinal microbiome through nutritional supplementation, with the aim of decreasing bacterial
permeability, has been attempted in the context of HIV infection with scarce success 
In addition, the microbiome has been suggested to impact the risk of diﬀerent infectious diseases. Two randomized
controlled trials have analyzed the impact of probiotic supplementation on children with acute
gastroenteritis without proving any beneﬁcial clinical outcome  Supplementation with
prebiotics or probiotics may also enhance vaccine response and thus becomes a new tool for the
improvement of vaccine eﬃcacy  However, results have been controversial in this ﬁeld and
warrant further investigation. M.D.M. had primary responsibility
for the ﬁnal content. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This research was funded by the PN I+D+I 2008–2011 (Spain), ISCIII- Sub-Directorate General for
Research Assessment and Promotion and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), RETICS Maternal
and Child Health and Development Network, SAMID Network, Ref. Grant nº JR16/00021); Cristina Calvo
is a member of the IdiPAZ Research Institute, Madrid.