378

Turk J Urol 2018; 44 377-83


Among  these  treatment  approaches,  probiotic  applications  are 
among the promising alternatives. Various  studies  have  been 
performed  concerning  the  potential  roles  performed  by  compex 
microbial  structures  in  many  different  diseases. In studies on urinary microbiomes, the degree of concentration 
of  bacteria  habiting  in  urinary  systems  may  vary  according  to 
the sex, the method of urine collection, and the technique used 
to  study  UM. Bacterial isolation can 
be performed using EQUC method in 80% of the cases reported 
as  ‘no  growth’  in  standard  cultures  of  urine  samples. Suitable  nutrients  for  these  bacteria  may  be 
found in the environment and at the same time virulence factors 
that  may  cause  infection  in  most  organisms  may  be  detected. So,  in  a  sense,  hosts  are  choosing,  and  containing 

Table 1. Are the host and the 
bacteria  developing  all  together? It  is  known  that  frequently 
recurrent UTIs develop in children of the women who experi-
ence  clinically  recurrent  episodes  of  UTIs. This  difference  may  be  thought  to  be  related  to  differences  in 
anatomical structures, hormones and local defense mechanisms. are dominant bacteria and form UM 
which demonstrates antimicrobial activity. Probiotics 
must  be  resistant  to  gastric  and  bile  acids  in  order  to  reach  the 
intestinal system and produce beneficial effects on the body. The  concept  of  probiotics  was 
first  introduced  by  Elie  Metchnikoff,  the  Russian  Nobel  Prize 
winner  in  1907. Metchnikoff  notes  that  the  microbes  in  the 
digestive  system  can  provide  positive  contributions,  espe-
cially  in  the  digestive  system  diseases. When considered as a part of multiple treatment, antibiotics and 
probiotic treatment should last 2-4 hours to prevent damage to 
viable microorganisms in the gastrointestinal tract. The  same  investigators  have  empha-
sized that oral Lactobacillus therapy can colonize these bacteria 
in the urinary tract following intestinal colonization. If  pathogenic  bacteria  can 
achieve this, then why Lactobacillus, an important component 
of  vaginal  colonization,  can  not  do  it? Clinical  studies  have 
demonstrated  that  oral  administration  of  Lactobacillus  can 
demonstrate  its  effects  after  reaching  the  vagina. Prevention of UTIs in women
A  meta-analysis  on  the  application  of  Lactobacillus  was  pub-
lished. Abad  and  Safdar  reviewed  25  clinical  trials  in  a  systematic 
review  they  published  in  2009  and  investigated  the  presence  of 
Lactobacillus-containing probiotics in the prevention and treatment 
of urogenital infections. It is also stated that 
additional studies are needed to clearly define the optimal dose 
and duration of application. These patients were 
divided into two groups and for 10 weeks following an episode 
of cystitis placebo treatment was given to 48 patients, and other 
48  patients  received  intravaginal  probiotics  (Lactin-V)  contain-
ing  Lactobacillus  crispatus    The  results  of  this 
study showed that the incidence of recurrent UTIs in patients who 
received  intravaginal  Lactobacillus  treatment  decreased  signifi-
cantly compared to the placebo group. Other risk 
factors can be described as factors that cause vaginal coloniza-
tion of uropathogens and decrease in the number of Lactobacilli 
which pass through ascending route into the urinary system. Researchers noted that 
the combination was well tolerated and effective. Although 
there have been few studies on the prevention of recurrent UTIs 
without use of antibiotics within the past years, interest in this 
area has increased over the years. Today, however, there is no doubt 
that UM has changed during UTI and antibiotherapy. However,  probiotics  are  preferred  by  the  patients 
because they are safe and more tolerable than antibiotics.