Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

and react to form a response, and understanding how these
responses combine to affect human health. The effects
of the gut microbiome extend far beyond the gastrointestinal
system, influencing immunity  and
brain function  in short, everything we require to
function as human beings. In both cases, a randomization scheme is implemented,

randomizing either the order of treatments (cross-over)
or the assignment of individuals to separate treatments
(parallel). Randomized, controlled clinical trials with a standardized
diet are generally considered the “gold standard” in
dietary intervention trials because the potential for con-
founding is minimized and the estimated intervention effect
can be interpreted causally. Thus, advances in sequencing technology have led
to rapid adoption of culture-independent techniques. Dietary factors inﬂuence the
composition and function of the gut microbiota. Humans:Glucoseandinsulin,SCFAs,

Intervention

Humans(39healthyadults,10

Barleykernelbread(BKB)vs.whitewheat

Kovatcheva-

Mice:PPGR,liverglycogen
breathhydrogen

weight,fecalpH
GLP-1,PYY,lipidproﬁles,body
HbA1c,SCFAs,glucoseandinsulin,

individuals)
humanfecesfromhighorlowP/B
(gnotobiotic,colonizedwith
selectedasRorNR)andmice

ﬂourbread(WWB)for3deach


Datcharyetal. syndromeand/orobesity)
Humans(78adultswithmetabolic

Respondercriteria

Biologicalmeasures

Studydesign

Model

Dietaryintervention



Fiber

Citation

TABLE1Reviewofmethodsusedtoconductprecisionnutritionstudies1

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

(Continued)

ChangeinBif.abundance(nodiscretecut-oﬀ)

Onlymicrobiotaresponse

Intervention

Humans

nulinvs.placebo(8g/d

Kolidaetal. coordinates(nodiscretecut-oﬀ)

(glucose,insulin)

Microbiotastabilityandclusteringinprincipal

FecalSCFAs,insulinsensitivity

Intervention

Humans

Respondercriteria

Biologicalmeasures

Studydesign

Model

Dietaryintervention

Citation

(WL)dietfor10wk
polysaccharides(NSPs)vs.weight-loss
type3)vs.controlleddietw/nonstarch
controlleddietw/resistantstarch(RS,
Standardweightmaintenancediet(M)vs. Standardizeddiet
Parallel
Intervention

Standardizeddiet
Cross-over
Controlled
Randomized

Supplementeddiet
Parallel
Randomized

Standardizeddiet
Controlled

Supplementeddiet(?) In
contrast, qPCR, or real-time PCR, measures amplification of
DNA in real-time using fluorescence of hybridized probes
specific for individual taxa, allowing for more accurate
quantification 

Once amplified, DNA can be used for a variety of methods
to compare and identify samples. Normalization and transformation methods for gut
microbiome data. Rarefying draws randomly without replacement
from each sample such that all samples then have the
same total count and excludes samples with total counts
below that defined threshold  Rarefaction curves can
provide guidance to determine proper rarefaction depth for
a specific data set but, depending on how much data is
removed, rarefying can reduce statistical power and has
been denounced by some  The choice of normalization
method depends on data characteristics such as library
size 

Another issue is the distribution of the data. Microbiome composition (qPCR, 16S) and

Association

function (metatranscriptomics)

Martinez et al. Microbiota composition (qPCR) and function

Association

Paired t-test



(protein expression)

Holscher et al. Microbiota composition 

Association

ANOVA

Kang et al. Microbiome composition (T-RFLP 16S, qPCR)

Association

Student’s t-test

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

Association and prediction studies share the above
methods of conducting the study and preparing the gut
microbiome data. Other studies go further to complete
the second step (“Prediction” studies, Table 3), using an
individual’ pretreatment microbiome (sometimes in addition
to other baseline characteristics) to devise models to predict

16 Hughes et al. Typically,
observations are plotted on a scatterplot of the first 2
principal coordinates and data points are labeled to identify
biologically significant groups (e.g. disease, no disease). used k-means
clustering to identify responsive and nonresponsive groups
based on butyrate production before and during the fiber
intervention. Random
effects cannot be controlled experimentally. Testing a model in an independent cohort allows for
a better assessment of the applicability of the model in the
broad population. Mice offer a model in which differences in the gut microbiota
may be studied in a controlled experimental context, allowing
for the determination of causality and development of

mechanistic hypotheses  For example, transplantation
of isolated strains or communities of bacteria into germ-free
mice is one of the best models in use to demonstrate causal
relations between the gut microbiota and host metabolism
 This approach has been used in studies such as
Kovatcheva-Datchary et al. Two meta-analyses have attempted to integrate results from
multiple studies that have investigated the effects of the
gut microbiota on human health using different laboratory
methods and analysis strategies  Such work is
important to improve our understanding of how the results
of these studies complement each other and how the features
or methods used affect the results. Chen T, Long W, Zhang C, Liu S, Zhao L, Hamaker BR. Korem T, Zeevi D, Zmora N, Weissbrod O, Bar N, Lotan-Pompan M,
Avnit-Sagi T, Kosower N, Malka G, Rein M, et al.