S2 

European Journal of Nutrition S1–S14

Crohn’s disease (CD) or ulcerative colitis (UC); and irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS). It is worth noting that the terms microbiota and micro-
biome are frequently used interchangeably and this also 
applies  here. Prebiotic interactions with the microbiome

Dietary prebiotics have been defined as “a selectively fer-
mented ingredient that results in specific changes in the 
composition and/or activity of the gastrointestinal micro-
biota, thus conferring benefit(s) upon host health”  This 
definition has been subjected to debate as it focuses largely 
around the need for selective metabolism. Arrows indicate known cross-
feeding relationships between 
the principle microbial groups 
present. Similarly, in obese 
or overweight children, an oligofructose-enriched inulin diet 
significantly increased satiety compared with maltodextrin. A meta-analysis of RCTs involving 252 sub-
jects (experimental group: n = 144, control group: n = 108) 

Fig. 2   Effect of prebiotics 
on gut function and health. For some products there is already 
good evidence on gut health and these findings should be 
communicated to health care professionals and consumers. In addition, we could 

1 3S6 

European Journal of Nutrition S1–S14

show that 4.5% of the variance in BMI is attributable to the 
gut microbiome 

Analysis of the gut microbiome revealed that the use of 
proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) was associated with a signifi-
cant decrease in gut microbiota diversity and with signifi-
cant changes of around 20% of bacterial taxa. Results suggested that PPIs 
diminished the gastric acid barrier, as species found in the 
oral microbiome of PPI users were more abundant in the gut 
than in non-users  It is increasingly observed that the 
use of PPIs is associated with an increase in the incidence of 
enteric infections like Clostridium difficile and Campylobac-
ter. The Microbiome working group within the UMCG has 
embarked recently on a large project within the LifeLines 
cohort: the 10K metagenome project. It is planned that the subjects will prospectively 
followed up every 5 years. Caco-2 cells promoted the growth and metabolism of 
the anaerobic F. prausnitzii, while genes involved in inflam-
mation and oxidative stress in Caco-2 cells were suppressed 
by F. prausnitzii 

Anti-oxidants  including  riboflavin  and  vitamin  C  are 
being investigated as new targets for intervention for the 
treatment of dysbiosis. Microbial  diversity  increases  dramatically  during 

first months of infancy . With the introduction of solid food, a more adult-like micro-
biome starts to develop as of 6 months of life, dominated by 
Firmicutes and Bacteriodetes 

Factors  promoting  a  healthy  microbiota  in  neonates 
include a vaginal delivery, delivery at term, breast feeding, 
and exposure to a variety of microorganisms. 4   Development  of  the  gut  microbiome  during  infancy. Therefore, the maternal microbiome 
also seems to be important for the development of the neo-
natal microbiome. lactis, 
Streptococcus thermophiles, and two Lactobacillus spp. There-
fore, the introduction of probiotic or symbiotic nutritional 
approaches are put forward by researches to prevent, delay, 
or ease neurological disorders in the future (see: . How-
ever, the underlying mechanisms of these interactions are 
largely unclear and, at the present time, it is not possible to 
differentiate between the microbes involved. The composition of the gut 
microbiota is influenced by intrinsic mechanisms such as 
stress, and extraneous factors such as diet, prebiotics, probi-
otics, and drugs including PPIs and antibiotics. The dysbio-
sis of gut microbiota has been shown to be associated with 
IBD, IBS and depression. Microbial metabolites (such as 
SCFAs) affect gut-brain signaling. Acknowledgements  RKW is supported by a VIDI grant 
from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO). All co-authors reviewed and approved the manuscript before 
submission. RJMB, RAR, 
RKW, MF declare no conflict of interest.