riage patterns far exceeded what was initially
suspected (Aagaard et al. This is intriguing,
as the vaginal microﬂora inﬂuences gestational
and postnatal health. 2014

Stool

Microarray

Murine

Ma et al. The 16S rDNA gene is an ideal target for classifying bacteria. ( The V1V3 and V3V5 primers sets used by the
HMP consortium are outlined. The dotted line indicates the direction of ampliﬁcation. ( Thus, experimental design is essen-
tial when examining the pregnant microbiome. Metabolomics will be similarly critical for
linking bacterial function to host health. Although it is cur-
rently challenging to fully integrate multi’omics
data, meaningful associations are beginning
to be established through correlations, network
analysis, and co-occurrence analysis (Shi et al. BV is a common and complex
alteration of vaginal ﬂora, but the description of
the bacteria involved in the vaginal dysbiosis
has changed over time. Also, this study showed that the vagi-
nal microbiome could be distinguished by eth-
nicity. However, re-
cent studies have shown the caution that must
be used when performing analysis such as CSTs
(Koren et al. This aspect was queried in a separate
study in which 32 subjects, mostly African-
American and non-Hispanic Caucasian, self-
collected vaginal samples over a 16 wk time
frame (Gajer et al. Thus, this study exempliﬁes the need
for further metatranscriptomic and metabolo-
mic studies involving large cohorts to under-
stand the role of the reproductive microbiome
in health and disease. Nearly every organ
system changes during pregnancy to promote
pregnancy maintenance or prepare for parturi-
tion. In the vagina, increased vascularity and
hyperemia develop in the skin of the vulva and
the mucosa of the vagina. Afterward,
the speciﬁc lactate structures in the vagina were
explored and it was discovered that the majority
of the vaginal lactic acid was of the D-isoform,
which cannot be produced by human metabo-
lism (Boskey et al. The utilization of Next-Gen sequencing tech-
niques to study the vaginal microbiome further
showed the presence of Lactobacillus species in
the vagina during pregnancy. And on
probing at the species level using supervised
machine learning approaches, such as linear
discriminate analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe)
and Boruta feature selection, we discovered that
the vaginal microbiome during pregnancy was
enriched in L. iners, L. crispatus, Lactobacillus
jensenii, and Lactobacillus johnsonii (Aagaard
et al. However, with a low
number and low ethnic diversity of subjects in
the study, further studies are needed to conﬁrm
these shifts of the vaginal microbiome toward
CSTs dominated by lactobacilli as pregnancy
progresses. 2010),
which was further shown by this recent study
(Romero et al. These issues regarding BV and PTB
warrant further investigation into these associ-
ations, and the examination of the microbiome
using Next-Gen sequencing techniques will be
of great utility for these studies. In contrast to
the study by Hyman et al., The maternal microbiome during infancy, and
not solely delivery mode, may be an important
factor in establishing the neonatal microbiome. In this study, the authors
found that healthy, term neonates that were
breast fed had increased diversity in their intes-
tinal microbiome when compared with hospi-
talized, preterm infants using PCR-DGGE anal-
ysis (Schwiertz et al. Therefore, future
studies are needed to entail how and why mi-
crobes remain in distinct body sites. 14

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

THE PLACENTAL MICROBIOME

The placenta has long been considered sterile in
normal gestation, where the presence of bacteria
in clinical cultures is diagnostic for intrauterine
infection and a signiﬁcant risk for PTB (Hillier
et al. In fact, the presence of pla-
cental or membrane bacteria in the absence of
histological infection has been discovered re-
peatedly over the last few decades (Hillier et al. It
was shown that membranes of normal pregnan-
cies often contain bacteria, yet show no signs of
histological infection (Steel et al. Microbiota from maternal oral, vaginal, urinary tract, and intestine are all
potential sources for these colonizing bacteria. However, further studies are necessary
to show deﬁnitively that hematogenous spread
from the oral cavity is possible for colonization
or infection of the placenta.