riage patterns far exceeded what was initially
suspected (Aagaard et al. This is intriguing,
as the vaginal microﬂora inﬂuences gestational
and postnatal health. Thus, experimental design is essen-
tial when examining the pregnant microbiome. On receiving sequence reads,
quality ﬁltering is performed to remove human
contamination, which consists of .90% of
reads in vaginal or placental samples (Human
Microbiome Project 2012c; Aagaard et al. Metabolomics will be similarly critical for
linking bacterial function to host health. BV is a common and complex
alteration of vaginal ﬂora, but the description of
the bacteria involved in the vaginal dysbiosis
has changed over time. This study recruited nearly 400 women of
mixed ethnicities. Although this initial study revealed the
complexity of the vaginal microbiome, it did
not determine the stability of the vaginal mi-
crobiome. Because this study had
a limited number of subjects and ethnic diver-
sity, it is challenging to determine how host
genetics may be associated with variability in
the stability of the vaginal microbiome between
subjects. Nearly every organ
system changes during pregnancy to promote
pregnancy maintenance or prepare for parturi-
tion. Afterward,
the speciﬁc lactate structures in the vagina were
explored and it was discovered that the majority
of the vaginal lactic acid was of the D-isoform,
which cannot be produced by human metabo-
lism (Boskey et al. However, with a low
number and low ethnic diversity of subjects in
the study, further studies are needed to conﬁrm
these shifts of the vaginal microbiome toward
CSTs dominated by lactobacilli as pregnancy
progresses. 2010),
which was further shown by this recent study
(Romero et al. These issues regarding BV and PTB
warrant further investigation into these associ-
ations, and the examination of the microbiome
using Next-Gen sequencing techniques will be
of great utility for these studies. has examined
the vaginal microbiome in preterm birth. In contrast to
the study by Hyman et al., The maternal microbiome during infancy, and
not solely delivery mode, may be an important
factor in establishing the neonatal microbiome. Which Microbiota First Populate the Infant? This is in contrast to
previous studies ﬁnding that Bacteroides relative
abundance differed based on mode of delivery
(Gro¨nlund et al. Here, the authors found that
the diversity of the intestinal microbiome in-
creased over time and with the introduction of
foods (Koenig et al. In this study, the authors
found that healthy, term neonates that were
breast fed had increased diversity in their intes-
tinal microbiome when compared with hospi-
talized, preterm infants using PCR-DGGE anal-
ysis (Schwiertz et al. 14

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

THE PLACENTAL MICROBIOME

The placenta has long been considered sterile in
normal gestation, where the presence of bacteria
in clinical cultures is diagnostic for intrauterine
infection and a signiﬁcant risk for PTB (Hillier
et al. This implies that
the bulk of the low level placental bacteria are
likely not ascending nor are contaminants of the
stool or the vagina, and instead, are quite pos-
sibly seeded largely from the oral cavity through
hematogenous spread . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

15

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al. Microbiota from maternal oral, vaginal, urinary tract, and intestine are all
potential sources for these colonizing bacteria. For ﬁnancial sup-
port, the authors acknowledge the National In-
stitutes of Health (NIH) Director’s New Inno-
vator Award (K.A., DP2 DP21DP2OD001500),
the Burroughs Wellcome Fund Preterm Birth
Initiative (K.A., 1008819.01),
the National
Institute of Nursing Research Grant (K.A.,
R01NR014792), National Institute of General
Medical Sciences (T32GM088129), Medical
Scientist Training Program (T32GM007330),
and the Human Microbiome Project funded
through the NIH Director’s Common Fund at
the National Institutes of Health (as part of NIH
RoadMap 1.5).