Microbiome profiling was based on sequen-
cing of the cpn60 universal target, which provides higher
resolution than 16S rRNA variable regions and al-
lows the resolution of Gardnerella vaginalis subgroups,
a hallmark bacteria in the disturbed microbiota 

Methods
Study population and sampling
This retrospective cohort study analysed the vaginal
microbiota of women who experienced spontaneous pre-
term birth (sPTB) and compared the resulting microbial
profiles to those of pregnant women who delivered at
term. For the purposes of this report, self-administered
vaginal swabs were taken at 16 weeks gestation and placed
in dry tubes prior to being placed in − 80 °C for storage in
the Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute Biospecimen
Storage and Processing Laboratory. A no
template control was also included in each set of PCR re-
action as negative controls. Experimental controls were
not sequenced as they did not yield any amplification. sourceforge.net) with Trinity as the assembly tool
(Additional file 1). The function aldex.clr from the ALDEx2 package in R
was used to compare the differential relative abundance
of individual taxa in term and preterm groups  Sig-
nificant differences were determined based on the false
discovery rate (FDR), which is the result of a Benjamini–
Hochberg corrected p value from a Welch’s t test calcu-
lated within ALDEx2. Results of
Bowtie2 mapping showed that these reads corresponded
to
assembly
728 OTUs
(Additional file 1). Eight OTU/species were more abundant in the term
group in comparison with preterm, all of which were
considered rare members of the bacterial community
. Bacteria prevalence

(presence/absence) was

also
assessed (only species with at least 10 total reads were
included). were associated with both term and pre-
term. Detection of Mollicutes and
Ureaplasma was not associated with any CST in particu-
lar when investigated in the term cohort, preterm cohort
or both groups together (chi-square, p > 0.05). Microbiome  6:117 

Page 7 of 15

A

B C D

E

Fig. Microbiome  6:117 

Page 8 of 15

(See figure on previous page.) 1 Vaginal microbiota profiles of women who had sPTB and term deliveries. d Heatmap of relative abundances of bacterial species within each vaginal microbiota. In particular,
previous described factors included low and high mater-
nal ages 
low BMI  high
levels of tobacco, alcohol and illicit drugs consumption

and multiple gestation  This cohort is unique in that
it did offer the opportunity to have gestational age at de-
livery as the main characteristic distinguishing these two
groups recognizing that the majority of preterm births
occurred beyond 32 weeks gestation. 3 Bacteria relative abundance differences between term and preterm groups represented by ALDEx2. Only the eight bacteria with significant relative abundance differences between term and preterm groups are shown. A recent study of a high-risk pregnant cohort has
reported that L. iners was strongly associated with short
cervix and preterm birth, as L. crispatus was associated
with term deliveries  Those differences in study out-
comes indicate that the pathogenesis of sPTB in low-
and high-risk groups might be different. anitratus

Corynebacterium timonense

Corynebacterium genitalium

Tepidanaerobacter sp. Differences in the
prevalence of several other taxa between groups were
also observed. Collectively, our overall findings were similar to other
two studies, which provided us the opportunity to

Freitas et al. study described themselves
as African American. It has been reported that the com-
position of the vaginal microbiota is strongly associated
with a woman’s ethnicity  Other studies have also
demonstrated that black ethnicity is associated with an in-
creased microbiota diversity in comparison with white
ethnicity  which could have masked differences in
bacterial diversity between term and preterm cohorts in
the Romero study. In
addition, the association with differences in Prevotella spe-
cies and Mycoplasma presence may point to signature
species associated with preterm birth. TXT 336 kb)

Additional file 2: Summary of OTU analysed in this study. XLSX 500 kb)

Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the women who participated in the study and
acknowledge the contribution and support of Ontario Birth Study Team
members and the participants. DM, AB and JEH oversaw and contributed to data collection and
participated in writing and manuscript review. All participants provided written consent at enrolment. 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.