Microbiome profiling was based on sequen-
cing of the cpn60 universal target, which provides higher
resolution than 16S rRNA variable regions and al-
lows the resolution of Gardnerella vaginalis subgroups,
a hallmark bacteria in the disturbed microbiota 

Methods
Study population and sampling
This retrospective cohort study analysed the vaginal
microbiota of women who experienced spontaneous pre-
term birth (sPTB) and compared the resulting microbial
profiles to those of pregnant women who delivered at
term. It is a
platform for studies of both pregnancy complications as

well as Developmental Origins of Health and Disease re-
lated research. For the purposes of this report, self-administered
vaginal swabs were taken at 16 weeks gestation and placed
in dry tubes prior to being placed in − 80 °C for storage in
the Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute Biospecimen
Storage and Processing Laboratory. Specimens from all
cohorts were processed similarly in terms of sample col-
lection, storage, DNA extraction, library preparation and
sequencing. Total bacterial DNA (qPCR) and detection of Mollicutes (PCR)
Quantitative PCR (qPCR)
Total bacterial DNA quantity in each sample was esti-
mated using a SYBR Green assay based on amplification
of the V3 region of the 16S rRNA gene. There were no significant differences in maternal age,
BMI, ethnicity, smoking status, consumption of alcohol
or use of probiotics between term and preterm groups
(all p > 0.05). Eight OTU/species were more abundant in the term
group in comparison with preterm, all of which were
considered rare members of the bacterial community
. Bacteria prevalence

(presence/absence) was

also
assessed (only species with at least 10 total reads were
included). were associated with both term and pre-
term. Detection of Mollicutes and
Ureaplasma was not associated with any CST in particu-
lar when investigated in the term cohort, preterm cohort
or both groups together (chi-square, p > 0.05). Microbiome  6:117 

Page 8 of 15

(See figure on previous page.) a Hierarchical clustering of Jensen–Shannon distance matrices
with Ward linkage on the relative proportions of reads for each OTU within individual vaginal samples. d Heatmap of relative abundances of bacterial species within each vaginal microbiota. Only species that are at least 1% abundant in at least one sample are shown. lactis

Lactobacillus acidophilus

Prevotella amnii

Pseudovibrio sp. Streptococcus parasanguinis

Sphingobium yanoikuyae

Prevotella tannerae

Clostridium innocuum

Eubacterium siraeum

Massilia timonae

B

Prevotella timonensis

Dialister micraerophilus

Prevotella sp. This might indicate that increased
richness, rather than the presence of specific taxa, might
be associated with sPTB. study described themselves
as African American. It has been reported that the com-
position of the vaginal microbiota is strongly associated
with a woman’s ethnicity  Other studies have also
demonstrated that black ethnicity is associated with an in-
creased microbiota diversity in comparison with white
ethnicity  which could have masked differences in
bacterial diversity between term and preterm cohorts in
the Romero study. are

Most samples in the preterm group were dominated by
Lactobacillus, yet, they collectively had higher richness
and diversity compared to samples from the term group. Other differences between cohorts
might have been masked by the presence of highly dom-
inant bacteria like Lactobacillus. At the overall level, we
did not identify a specific vaginal microbial community
structure at 11–16 weeks gestation age that predicts
sPTB. TXT 336 kb)

Additional file 2: Summary of OTU analysed in this study. XLSX 500 kb)

Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the women who participated in the study and
acknowledge the contribution and support of Ontario Birth Study Team
members and the participants. ACF was supported by a University of Saskatchewan
graduate scholarship.