The microbiological diagnosis of a ‘normal’ or dis-
turbed vaginal microbiota has historically been based on
the Nugent score, the current gold standard diagnostic
method that relies on Gram stain of vaginal smears 
The ‘normal’ vaginal microbiota in non-pregnant repro-
ductive aged women is understood to be dominated by
Lactobacillus species, while an abnormal microbiota
(defined as bacterial vaginosis) is characterized by low
abundance of lactobacilli and an overgrowth of anaer-
obic bacteria, such as Gardnerella vaginalis, Prevotella
spp., Microbiome profiling was based on sequen-
cing of the cpn60 universal target, which provides higher
resolution than 16S rRNA variable regions and al-
lows the resolution of Gardnerella vaginalis subgroups,
a hallmark bacteria in the disturbed microbiota . Microbiota profiles
Microbiota profiles were created by PCR amplification
and pyrosequencing of the cpn60 universal target region. The CST IVC was dominated by G. vaginalis
subgroup A and Megasphaera spp., Eight OTU/species were more abundant in the term
group in comparison with preterm, all of which were
considered rare members of the bacterial community
. were associated with both term and pre-
term. It is important to note that
read depth distribution did not differ between term and
preterm cohorts (t test, p > 0.05); therefore, the differ-
ences observed here in bacteria prevalence were unlikely
to be driven by cohort sequencing bias..

Mollicutes (Mycoplasma and/or Ureaplasma) were de-
tected by family-specific conventional PCR in 28/46
of pregnant women who delivered preterm
(Table 1). An associ-
ation between Mollicutes/Ureaplasma detection and the
composition of the vaginal microbiota, represented as
CST, was also investigated. Detection of Mollicutes and
Ureaplasma was not associated with any CST in particu-
lar when investigated in the term cohort, preterm cohort
or both groups together (chi-square, p > 0.05)..

CST and microbiota richness, and CST and microbiota
diversity (ANOVA, p < 0.001). abundance of other Lactobacillus species as well as
Gardnerella . Since these
bacteria are detected at very low abundance within the
microbiota profiles, their biological significance in the
vaginal microbiome is questionable. Differences in the
prevalence of several other taxa between groups were
also observed. For example, more women in the term
group had Prevotella amnii and P. tannerae detected in
their vaginal samples, whereas P. timonensis, P. bivia, P.
corporis and P. bucalis were more frequently detected in
samples from women in the preterm group (Table 3). Samples were collected at each
trimester and preterm was defined as delivery before
37 weeks of gestation. The increased microbiota richness/diversity might indi-
cate a transient state between Lactobacillus-dominated
CST and non-Lactobacillus-dominated, i.e., CST IV (A, C
or D). In
addition, the association with differences in Prevotella spe-
cies and Mycoplasma presence may point to signature
species associated with preterm birth.