proﬁle identiﬁed based on sequencing different
variable regions. The V1V3 and V3V5 primers sets used by the
HMP consortium are outlined. The dotted line indicates the direction of ampliﬁcation. ( This study recruited nearly 400 women of
mixed ethnicities. showed that these types of clus-
ter analysis are sensitive to the distance metric
used for analysis and that multiple distance
metrics should be used to promote accuracy
in data. Nearly every organ
system changes during pregnancy to promote
pregnancy maintenance or prepare for parturi-
tion. In the vagina, increased vascularity and
hyperemia develop in the skin of the vulva and
the mucosa of the vagina. However, direct asso-
ciations between speciﬁc species of Lactobacillus
and estrogen levels are lacking and warrant fur-
ther investigation..

However, the aforementioned studies were
cross-sectional, which allows for the character-
ization of a pregnancy and gestational age-com-
mon microbiome signature, but lacks capacity
for description of the dynamic changes, which
may occur in an individual over time. 2010),
which was further shown by this recent study
(Romero et al. In a separate study, the
vaginal microbiome was examined longitudi-
nally during gestation using the V3V5 amplicon
of 16S rRNA in 12 subjects that were mostly
Caucasian (Walther-Anto´ nio et al. Despite the need for further investigation
into the role of the vaginal microbiome in as-
sociation with BV and preterm birth, a recent
study by Hyman et al. has examined
the vaginal microbiome in preterm birth. In contrast to
the study by Hyman et al., Similarly, if the in-
fant was born by cesarean delivery, the infant
microbiome most closely resembled the skin
microbiome (Dominguez-Bello et al. Altogether,
this data indicate that the neonatal microbiome
is highly variable within the ﬁrst year of life. However, further studies are necessary
to show deﬁnitively that hematogenous spread
from the oral cavity is possible for colonization
or infection of the placenta.