bioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. At the end of the study, all the 
data streams were fused, pre-processed, and 
analyzed as described in this paper. 1B. Age distribution with mean of 43.8 years (SD 
12.115). We  asked  the  participants  to  not  perform  intense  exercise  2.5 
hours before or 2.5 hours after meals, to not start probiotics or pre-
biotics, to not take vitamins or supplements during the study (with a 
specific detail to avoid interfering substances as defined in [Abbott 
2016]),  to  not  take  over-the-counter  medication,  and  to  inform  the 
study coordinator if they are prescribed antibiotics during the study. The actual iAUC values for all meals, the repeated meals from Figure 
2D, and the glucose drink are shown in Figure 3A. 

Figure 3B was constructed after modeling iAUC with standardized 
macronutrient values (i.e., z-scores). 2D. Macronutrient information for 
the 9 “repeat meals” which were 
consumed twice by study partici-
pants. The 
red histogram next to sleep bars is 
the tracked physical activity. 2A

2B

2E

Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. We removed effects not significant 
by likelihood ratio test at p<.05. Several of the significant predictors were microbiome scores. This binary score, when “High,” showed a 
negative association with glycemic response. Boxplots show the interquartile range; whiskers cover the middle 95th percentile. Each timepoint is a linear regression of iAUC 
on all four standardized macronutrients. 3C. Inter- and intra-person variability for 9 repeated provided meals. 3D. Examples of individual variation in glycemic response. 3E. Relationships between anthropometric characteristics and per-participant average iAUC across all meals (provided and free). However,  in  our  analysis  there  is  no  significant  effect  of  HbA1c  on 
iAUC after controlling for other predictors. Data from 82% of users was used to train, with the data from the 
remaining  18%  held  out  for  evaluation. Averaging across 5 such random train/test splits of the data, 

the model achieves R=.80 (R2=.64) on training data, and R=.64 
(R2=.40) on held-out test data. 4B. Fixed effect estimates for all predictors included in the 
final model. Continuous predictors are standardized (mean 
is zero, units are standard deviations), meaning the expected 
response changes by the value of the coefficient when the 
predictor changes by one standard deviation. If  a  given  person’s  microbiota  mainly  shows 
ability to convert tryptophan to beneficial indoles and indole-actetate 
molecules capable of reducing inflammation and glycemic effects of 
foods,  then  it  may  be  of  benefit  to  recommend  tryptophan  sources 
(in  the  form  of  food  or  supplement)  to  such  people. Tyrosine and fructose metabolizer scores group active microbes 
by  functional  characteristics. Although it is challenging 
to  delineate  causal  mechanisms,  there  may  be  functional  patterns 

9

that connect the significant scores with gut health, intestinal barrier 
integrity,  and  inflammation. Modeling methods and model evolution
The  multilevel  mixed  effects  model  presented  first  in  the  previous 
section was deliberately chosen to better understand the incremental 
effects  of  the  significant  features,  especially  the  functional  gut  mi-
crobiome  activity  features.