the commonality that relates both BV and vaginal pH to HPV
infection (independent of HIV) is the RA of certain Lactobacil-
lus species, most notably L. crispatus. Distribution of relative abundance (RA) of Lactobacillus species..

concurrent multitype infection by HPV, while accounting for
the intraindividual correlation of the repeated observations. Histograms of Lactobacillus species as a group (Fig-
ure 1) and individual species suggested similar cut points of
low (<7.5%), medium RA. All covariates except study group were time
dependent. The average age of participants was 32.1 years, and by
design all subjects were African American and premenopausal
(see “Methods” section). Figure 2 displays a heat map of the RA data for the 25 most
abundant genera or species and how they cluster within each
CST. These models adjusted for HIV study group, time-updat-
ed covariates, and intra-individual correlations between repeat-
ed cross-sectional measures of association with prevalent HPV
(see “Methods” section). While CST I (L. crispatus dominated)
had an inverse association with detection of any HPV and espe-
cially with any oncogenic HPV, the relationship was of border-
line statistical signiﬁcance (eg, odds ratio [OR] for oncogenic
HPV was 0.30 [95% conﬁdence interval {CI},
.08–1.11];
P = .07). Last, in an exploratory analysis, we used continuous-time
multistate Markov models ﬁt using maximum likelihood meth-
ods to assess whether transition to a CST dominated by L. crisp-
atus was associated with a change in the risk of incident
detection of HPV (ie, HPV type[s] not found in any earlier
CVLs from the same woman). IV-B, lowa Lactobacillus
I, L. crispatus. Abbreviations: BV, bacterial vaginosis; CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio. a“Low” and “medium” denote the relative abundance of Lactobacillus species and L. iners, respectively. Thus, high D-lactic acid levels but not acidity per se could be
associated with reduced infection and/or transmission of
certain viruses, including HPV..

While production of H2O2 has been observed in the major-
ity of L. crispatus isolates, prior data from our group suggest
that the levels of H2O2 produced are likely too limited to great-
ly affect the risk of STIs  especially HPV infection, since
HPV is a nonenveloped virus and, therefore, likely to be resis-
tant to H2O2. Bacteriocins are riboso-
mally synthesized antimicrobial peptides and proteins 
Relatively little has been written regarding the bacteriocins
produced by cervicovaginal Lactobacillus species, with most
of the bacteriocin literature to date focused on Lactobacillus
species inhabiting the gut. L. crispatus has additionally been
noted to have potential immunomodulatory activity.