2014) and mammalian carni-
vores (Menke et al. technologies

sequencing

(HTS)

A preliminary report by the Institute of Medicine
Committee on Lyme Disease and Other Tick-Borne Dis-
eases examined the diversity of prokaryotes in three
tick species (Amblyomma americanum, Dermacentor vari-
abilis and Ixodes scapularis) using 454 pyrosequencing
technology (Clay & Fuqua 2010). Although the report
provided useful insight into the microbiomes of adults
of these three species, it primarily emphasized the over-
all gap in knowledge regarding the identity of microor-
ganisms and the roles that microbial communities play
in pathogen transmission, infectivity and pathogenicity
within tick vectors (Clay & Fuqua 2010). 2011) and France (Vayssier-Taussat
et al. Although the role of the blacklegged tick as a vector
the Lyme disease spirochete (Borrelia burgdorferi)
of
and the babesiosis protozoan (Babesia microti) has been
known since the late 1970s (Spielman 1976; Steere
et al. 2001),
only recently determined to be a human pathogen
(Platonov et al. © 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

M I C R O B I O M E O F B L A C K L E G G E D T I C K S 4965

DNA isolation

All laboratory procedures were performed under a lam-
inar ﬂow hood (AirClean Systems)
to ensure that
microorganisms from the surrounding environment did
not contaminate the samples; negative controls were
used throughout. The PCRs were
performed in triplicate with 25 lL Phusion High-Fide-
lity PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), 2.5 lL
(ﬁnal concentration of 0.5 mM) for both primers, 15 lL
nuclease-free PCR-grade water and 5 lL of DNA

4966 C . across
Representative sequences were aligned and ﬁltered
using PYNAST (Caporaso et al. The reference ML tree and the large
alignment of 91 760 sequences were used to place the
shorter sequences onto internal, that is internode, or
external, that is terminal, branches on the reference ML
tree. The remaining OTUs were

Larvae  
(Lab) 

Larvae  
(Field) 

Nymphs

Males

Females

Larvae  
(Lab) 

Larvae  
(Field) 

Nymphs

Males

Females

(B)

50

40

30

20

10

0

Phylogenetic diversity

(D)

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Simpson's index

4968 C . 1 Measures of a-diversity for each development stage. Wolbachia was the genus with the second highest

relative abundance in males (mean = 8.4%) and was
found in all other life stages, but not in all samples,
with a low relative abundance (<0.1%). 2 Relative abundance of genera occurring in whole ticks pooled by developmental stage. Conﬁdence ellipsoids
around samples display degree of variation. Overall, short
sequences could not be unambiguously placed on single
branches, but were rather assigned along a clade, which
lends a certain degree of conﬁdence. Other than that, no
bacterial genera were found with a relative abundance
≥3%, although 47 taxonomic classiﬁcations – genus
being the lowest – were present. Distinct
clustering was observed for each organ and the whole
tick when abundance data were not considered (un-
weighted UniFrac PCoA) explaining 39.53% (Axis 1)
and 22.35% (Axis 2) of the variation . A)
Unweighted Unifrac distances, abundance is ignored. ( 2015), with
Rickettsia occurring in the highest proportion in

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

blacklegged ticks (Moreno et al. More

We found similar a-diversity for ﬁeld-collected larvae
and nymphs, compared to freshly hatched larvae, for
all a-diversity measures . Borrelia and
Anaplasma
found in
nymphs and adults. Furthermore,
clustering of adult
females and freshly hatched larvae in the unweighted
UniFrac PCoA is likely due to the lower number of
OTUs present in these life stages , while the
more divergent cluster of males in the weighted Uni-
Frac PCoA is most likely due to the higher relative
abundance of non-Rickettsia genera compared to the
other life stages . Our results indicate that much of the bacterial diver-
sity observed in these ticks is not acquired via a
bloodmeal, but transmission from female to offspring
(Rickettsia), as well as environmental acquisition, plays
important roles in shaping the microbial community
within I. scapularis. Given the overwhelming abundance of Rickettsia
across life stages and organs, we attempted to dissect
its subgeneric diversity using phylogenetic criteria and
found the vast majority of the sequences to cluster
with bona ﬁde Ixodes tick rickettsial endosymbionts. awarded to CPZ and intramural support by SOK.