Even though they have limitations
like all other models, they present some important
immunological and histopathological aspects of IBD in
humans  The most widely used and characterized
experimental model of erosion and inﬂammation related
to UC in mice is the dextran sulphate sodium (DSS)-
induced colitis, which is developed by DSS administration
either in the drinking water or via intragastric
catheter  The DSS induces a reproducible
acute colitis  however, there is some controversy
regarding the type of inﬂammation that is induced. It
is however important to note that, most of the previous
studies used 16S rRNA gene ﬁngerprinting methods,
such as terminal-restriction fragment-length polymor-
phism (T-RFLP), ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
 or sequencing of few clones per
animal  which had either low accuracy and
precision or were limited in data mining. Macroscopic scores
Mice were euthanized on day 6, at the end of d5 of DSS
administration, the abdominal cavity was opened and
the colon was located, isolated and opened longitudi-
nally. DNA extraction
from colonic mucosa samples was done using ZR Tissue
and Insect DNA kit (Zymo Research Corp.). Amplicons were veriﬁed by agarose
gel electrophoresis. This was followed by multiple dilution steps using pre-
chilled hybridization buffer (HT1) (Illumina, San Diego,
CA, USA) to bring the pooled amplicons to a ﬁnal
concentration of 5 pM, measured by Qubit 2.0 Fluorom-
eter (Life technologies, Burlington, ON, Canada). The
sequencing data are uploaded into the Sequence Read
Archive (SRA) of NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra)
and are accessible through accession number SRR2830596. for further comparisons between
microbial communities. Data were presented in loading scatter
plots. The differences between groups were
considered signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. Dextran sulfate sodium and mice gut microbiota

5

Bacterial a-diversity in the colonic MAM was not
signiﬁcantly different between the control mice and
the DSS mice samples, suggesting that both sample
groups have similar bacterial species richness and
evenness . Microbiota composition at phylum and lower
taxonomic levels in the fecal samples
A total of 259,126 sequences were generated after quality
ﬁltering steps with an average of 28,791 high-quality
sequences per sample, which resulted in identiﬁcation of
11 phyla and 86 taxa. (cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

6

Peris Mumbi Munyaka et al. The p values shown
on top of each bar were calculated using SAS. The p values were determined using
PERMANOVA. Results of the relative abundances of
various phyla are summarized in Fig. Bacterial taxa with relative abundance of (cid:5)0.01% of
community were analysed using PLS-DA to identify
bacteria that were most characteristic of the DSS or
control treatments. 5a, Bacteroides
ovatus, Clostridium perfrigens, Helicobacter hepaticus, and
Parabacteroides distasonis; g. Desulfovibrio, Escherichia,
Helicobacter, Clostridium,
Parabacteroides,
Bacilli, Allobaculum, Coprobacillus, Bacteroides, rc4-4; and
unclassiﬁed members of f. Enterobacteriaceae, Clostri-
diaceae, Bacteroidaceae; o. RF39, RF32, Bacteroidales,
and Erysipelotrichales were positively correlated with
the DSS group but negatively correlated with the
control group. The low-abundance phyla (<1% of
included Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria,
community),
Cyanobacteria, Fibrobacteres, Lentisphaerae, Planctomy-
cetes, Spirochaetes, TM7, and Tenericutes. All taxa are colored based on the phyla to which they belong to. While majority of taxa were classiﬁed at the genus
level, some could only be afﬁliated to phylum (P), class (C), order (O), or family (F) levels. – From the macroscopic assessment of disease
severity in the colon, it was apparent that mice in the
DSS-induced colitis treatment exhibited overt features of
colitis compared to the healthy control group, which is
in agreement with previous results where a DSS model
was used  Also, analysis of the inﬂammatory
markers including serum CRP level, a marker of systemic
inﬂammation, showed signiﬁcant differences between
the two groups as DSS up-regulated this marker. the pathogenesis of IBD including UC and CD. This indicates that proﬁling of
fecal and colonic bacteria by Illumina sequencing may
be sensitive for investigating changes associated with

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. Generally,
despite these differences in relative abundances of
speciﬁc phylotypes, there appear to be a consensus in
overall decrease in biodiversity in IBD patients and in
murine models of colitis 

The mechanisms by which DSS induced stronger
bacterial shifts in the feces than in the colon mucosa

are not fully understood.