Downloaded from 

http://mbio.asm.org/

 on September 9, 2020 by guest

Oliver et al. KEYWORDS Lactobacillus, longitudinal, metabolome, microbiome, pregnancy, vagina

Vaginal microbes sustain important physiologies and produce metabolites that can

directly or indirectly affect maternal health and infant development during preg-
nancy. ®

Downloaded from 

http://mbio.asm.org/

 on September 9, 2020 by guest

FIG 3 Ordination of vaginal microbiomes during pregnancy. ( A) Nonmetric multidimensional scaling (nMDS) of Bray-Curtis dissimilarity between vaginal
microbiomes (n (cid:2) 42 samples) of mothers. This linear
model identiﬁed the top 10 annotated GC-TOF MS metabolites that were associated
with variation in the microbial community composition, which are shown in Fig. Metagenomics and functional potential of communities. LEfSe identiﬁed several pathways that differed between
L. crispatus and G. vaginalis, in particular, an enrichment of ammonia assimilation genes
in G. vaginalis . PERMANOVA analysis of
lipidomics data from saliva samples showed the largest difference between mothers
and offspring (PERMANOVA; R2 (cid:2) 69%; P (cid:2) 0.001; Fig. The infant metabolome for saliva and urine
had little variance attributed to which subject donated the sample, but GC-TOF MS was
able to detect a signiﬁcant change between the infant urine metabolome at birth
versus 6 and 12 months of age (PERMANOVA; R2 (cid:2) 34%; P (cid:2) 0.0007; Table S2). In
this study, we followed the vaginal microbiome through the trimesters of pregnancy for
18 women, tracking changes in the bacterial communities with longitudinal samples
and capturing their functional potential with metagenomic sequencing and multiple
platforms to assess metabolomic proﬁles. However, a subset of women exhibited compositional shifts in their CVF
microbiota as pregnancy progressed, as has also been seen in other larger cohorts 
We found several strong correlations between particular vaginal communities and
metabolites, which may help us understand the physiology underlying distinct vaginal
microbiota structures that were evident in our study. Because indole-3-lactate can act as a ligand for AhR, we speculate that L. crispatus may

July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20

mbio.asm.org 10

Downloaded from 

http://mbio.asm.org/

 on September 9, 2020 by guest

Microbiome Composition in Healthy Pregnancy

®

regulate the IL-22-AhR response in the vagina, reducing the risk of vaginal candidiasis
in the same way IAld does, and potentially activating the AhR response in newborns to
prevent early-life candidiasis. The largest differences between functional
capacity appeared to be between communities where L. crispatus or G. vaginalis were
the most abundant bacterial taxon. Studies have pointed out
Gardnerella’s preference for ammonia as a nitrogen source  moreover, this ability to
assimilate ammonia and produce amino acids has been implicated in mutualistic
interactions between species of Prevotella, in the context of BV  Together, these
BV-associated organisms contribute to genital inﬂammation, which may play a role in
the susceptibility of certain diseases, such as HIV 

Increased abundance of mannitol when L. crispatus was present is an important and
unexpected ﬁnding . To this end, reducing fructose 6-phosphate to
mannitol-1-phosphate may be an alternative and vital way L. crispatus regenerates
NAD(cid:5) for glycolysis  We did ﬁnd the gene mannitol-1-phosphate dehydroge-
nase, responsible for converting fructose 6-phosphate to mannitol-1-phosphate, was
highly correlated (R2 (cid:2) 0.9) with the relative abundance of L. crispatus. Strikingly, the ability of lipidomics to differentiate mothers from

July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20

mbio.asm.org 11

Downloaded from 

http://mbio.asm.org/

 on September 9, 2020 by guest

Oliver et al. At each time point, maternal saliva, urine, and cervical vaginal ﬂuid
were collected. Maternal urine was collected using a sterile collection cup. GC-TOF MS metabolites were extracted with a mixture of 3:3:2 acetonitrile-isopropyl
alcohol-water according to standard operating procedures from the Fiehn Lab at the WCMC 
LC-MS/MS samples were extracted using a variant of the Matyash method  Data were acquired for
complex lipids in positive and negative electrospray mode on a Waters CSH column and an Agilent 6530
QTOF mass spectrometer  Metabolites were identiﬁed by retention time MS/MS matching using
MassBank of North America (http://massbank.us) and NIST 17 libraries. The instrument was controlled
using the MALDI-MSI 4800 imaging tool. Aliquots of 100 to 200 (cid:2)l were added to lysing matrix
E tubes prealiquoted with 500 of hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) DNA extraction buffer
and incubated at 65°C for 15 min. Although DNA was extracted from
CVF, attempts to extract DNA from saliva were unsuccessful, potentially due to the storage swabs
trapping the biomaterial. The amplicon
library was concentrated using the Agencourt AMPure XP system (Beckman-Coulter), quantiﬁed using
the Kapa library quantiﬁcation kit (Kapa Biosystems), and diluted to 2 nM. Equimolar PhiX was added at
40% ﬁnal volume to the amplicon library; the 16S rRNA amplicon pool was sequenced on the Illumina
NextSeq 500 platform on a 153-bp by153-bp sequencing run, and the ITS2 amplicon pool was sequenced
on the Illumina MiSeq platform on a 290-bp by 290-bp run. After PCR, the libraries were cleaned of smaller DNA fragments, using
AMPure XP magnetic beads (Beckman-Coulter), and pooled by concentration. Raw sequence data were converted from bcl to fastq format using bcl2fastq
v2.16.0.10. Data were visualized using Tableau and Adobe Illustrator unless
otherwise noted. Traditional R2
values were also calculated by dividing the sum of squares by total sum of squares. Ethics approval and consent to participate. Metabolomics data for all samples can be found in Table S1. SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

Supplemental material is available online only. We thank Dan Cooper for enthusiasm and strategic advice.