THE JOURNAL OF PEDIATRICS (cid:129) www.jpeds.com

Volume ■■ • ■■ 2018

Trial enrolled 881 pregnant women at 3 clinical sites in the US
(Boston, Massachusetts; St. Louis, Missouri; and San Diego,
California). Inclusion criteria included a personal history of
asthma or allergy in the pregnant woman or in the father of
the fetus. The intervention phase occurred during preg-
nancy, and after birth infants were followed every 3 months
for the development of respiratory disease and other outcomes. Stool samples were collected
from infants between age 3 and 6 months. The top principal component was used
in regression models. Questions regarding the child diet were asked beginning at
age 6 months. Operational taxonomic units identiﬁed at least
10 times in at least 10 subjects were used in microbiome-
wide analyses. Covariates in multivariable analysis, chosen on the
basis of prior studies,7,11 included mode of delivery, child race/
ethnicity (African American, Hispanic, white, other), age at stool
collection, treatment arm, and maternal education. House-
hold income was not included because 22% of subjects did not
know or preferred not to report household income. We explored whether there were differences in the infant
microbiome response to diet by including an interaction term
between race/ethnicity and breast milk vs formula in regres-
sion models and by stratifying by race/ethnicity if an inter-
action was found. Cut-off P values for statistical signiﬁcance
were selected a priori. Missing data
were considered missing at random and complete case analy-
sis was employed. Infants who were
breastfed had mothers with higher educational levels (P < .001)
and higher household incomes (P < .001). T test was used for analysis of age at stool sample collection and c2 tests were used for all other comparisons. We did not ﬁnd associations between the second principal
component of the maternal diet (representing high pasta, rice,
and noodle intake) and diversity or these 4 genera. These differences remained after adjustment for de-
mographic and other dietary variables. In unadjusted analyses, both the Shannon diversity index
and richness were signiﬁcantly higher among infants who had
solid foods introduced by the time of the stool collection com-
pared with infants who had not yet had solid foods intro-
duced (2.30 ± 0.43 vs 2.14 ± 0.43, P = .002 and 33.5 ± 7.72 vs

30.5 ± 7.40, P = .001, respectively; Table IV). We found that
Biﬁdobacterium spp counts were similar among breastfed and
formula-fed African American infants, and Hispanic and white
breastfed infants had higher levels of Biﬁdobacterium spp com-
pared with formula-fed Hispanic and White infants (African

Diet during Pregnancy and Infancy and the Infant Intestinal Microbiome

3

FLA 5.5.0 DTD ■ YMPD10154_proof ■ August 30, 2018

THE JOURNAL OF PEDIATRICS (cid:129) www.jpeds.com

Volume ■■

Table IV. Mean, SD for normally distributed variables (Shannon index, Richness). b coefficients of bacterial counts represent a
difference in the log count, formula fed is reference. The Shannon index is a measure of diversity that accounts both for number of species present and for how evenly distributed bacterial counts are across the species that are present. §Dietary variables: infant breastfeeding vs formula feeding and first principal component of maternal diet (high in vegetables and low in processed meats and deep fried foods). When maternal education was added as a covariate,
the strengths of interactions between breastfeeding vs
formula feeding status and race/ethnicity were weakened
(Biﬁdobacterium spp P = .12; Lactobacillus spp P = .21). We identiﬁed signiﬁcant differences in relative abun-
dances of taxa between breastfed and formula- fed infants in
adjusted analyses stratiﬁed by race/ethnicity (Figure 3 and
Table VI; available at www.jpeds.com). Results shown for negative binomial regression analyses. Average (±SE) counts per 1000 reads of A, Bacteroides, B, Biﬁdobacterium, C, Lactobacillus, and D, Clostridia spp
among infants fed breast milk or formula, stratiﬁed by race/ethnicity. microbiome in a multiethnic population using untargeted se-
quencing techniques. The strongest associations we identi-
ﬁed were between breastfeeding vs formula feeding and the child
intestinal microbiome. However, this was
also observed in a smaller study of 9 infants10 and suggests that
diversity may not necessarily relate to health in all clinical
settings. In an ethnically homogeneous population using targeted
quantitative polymerase chain reaction on stool samples col-
lected at age 1 month, Penders et al showed breastfed infants
had less Clostridia difﬁcile compared with formula-fed infants.7,30
This contrasts with our ﬁnding of a positive association between
breastfeeding and overall Clostridia spp, though we expect that
the inﬂuence of breastfeeding differs among individual species
within this genus. ■

Submitted for publication Apr 16, 2018; last revision received Jun 12, 2018;
accepted Jul 13, 2018