Following screening, participants were admitted and placed on a WMD. Collection of food 
(duplicate meals to perform bomb calorimetry) was done on days 5–7 and 11–13. Oral  vancomycin  also  has  minimal  absorption  and 
thus nearly no local or systemic side effects in healthy individuals20. However,  when  expressed  as  percentage  of  ingested  calories 
per  day,  there  was  significantly  greater  stool  calorie  loss  during 
UF relative to OF (8.9 ± 3.7% versus 5.8 ± 1.9%, Δ = 2.3% per day, 
P < 0.0001, paired Student’s t-test; Fig. 2 | Dietary interventions impact nutrient absorption. P values 
determined by two-sided paired Student’s t-test. Participants who started the dietary phase with OF are represented by red dots, while those who started 
with UF are represented by white dots. The transit time was defined as the time between the first and the last appearance of the dye marker during each 
intervention, in hours. When analyzed within each subject, we were 
able to identify two individuals (of ten evaluated) that had signifi-
cant differences in overall microbial community structure between 
diet arms , which may suggest that the baseline gut micro-
biota matters for its sensitivity to the dietary interventions. There  were  no  significant  differences  

NATURE MEDiciNE | www.nature.com/naturemedicine

ArticlesNature MediciNeP = 0.5

∆ = 83.2 kcal d–1
P = 0.012

Placebo

Vancomycin

Placebo

Vancomycin

400

300

200

100

0

b

Absolute stool calories (kcal d–1)

d

100

80

60

40

Transit time (hours)

4,000

3,500

3,000

2,500

2,000

a

Daily food intake (kcal d–1)

c

12

10

02468

(percentage per day)
Calories excreted in stool

∆ = 2.6% per day
P = 0.0069

P = 0.2

Placebo

Vancomycin

Placebo

Vancomycin

Fig. Results from 24 participants who completed the randomized phase of the study. a, Mean of 3-d food intake (kcal d−1) in the vancomycin (n = 11) and placebo 
(n = 13) groups. Error bars represent 
the mean with 95% confidence interval. Taken 
together,  these  results  indicate  the  overall  resiliency  of  the  gut 
microbiota faced with differences in caloric intake while also high-
lighting  a  small  number  of  diet-responsive  bacterial  species  that 
could contribute to the observed differences in nutrient absorption. Next, we used metagenomic sequencing to confirm and extend 
the  observed  shifts  in  gut  bacterial  relative  abundance. Analysis 
using unpaired Wilcoxon tests revealed 41 bacterial species with a 
significant difference (false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05) in relative 
abundance  ,  with  a  skew  towards  decreased  abundance 
in the vancomycin group  Consistent 
with  our  16S  rRNA  gene  sequencing  data,  these  vancomycin-
depleted  bacteria  spanned  multiple  gram-positive  (Actinobacteria 
and  Firmicutes)  and  gram-negative  (Bacteroidetes)  phyla. Despite 
these differences, we were able to identify two bacterial species that 
consistently changed in response to both perturbations  based 
on  16S  rRNA  sequence  variants  analysis:  A.  muciniphila,  a  mucin-
degrading  bacterium  with  a  putative  role  in  preserving  gut  barrier 

NATURE MEDiciNE | www.nature.com/naturemedicine

ArticlesNature MediciNefunction24–26,  which  was  enriched  during  UF  and  in  the  vancomy-
cin group, and an unidentified species belonging to Lachnospiraceae 
NK4A136 group, which decreased during UF and vancomycin inter-
ventions. Consistent with our taxonomic analyses (Fig. There  were  no  changes  in  plasma  zonulin  or 
LPS concentrations with UF (Supplementary Table 10). 7);  or  
glucose tolerance or insulin concentrations (Extended Data Fig. Discussion
In  this  two-phase  study  we  directly  measured  ingested  and  stool 
calories, demonstrating an increased and comparable stool calorie 
loss relative to ingested calories during two states: UF versus OF and 
oral vancomycin versus placebo. This increase in stool calorie loss 
during UF and vancomycin administration occurred despite differ-
ent effects on the gut microbiota. 4 | changes in gut microbiome in response to dietary interventions. c, First 
two principal coordinates of Bray–Curtis dissimilarity for daily samples from ten subjects during the dietary phase. Each point represents a single sample 
(n = 156 samples), where color denotes subject identity and shape denotes diet (weight maintaining, WM). Letters in panels b, c and e indicate subject identity. a, Overall gut microbial colonization, represented as 16S rRNA gene copies per 
gram wet weight, between vancomycin and placebo groups (P = 0.26, two-sided unpaired Wilcoxon test). Each data point represents the mean value 
of samples from each subject (n = 63 samples from 23 subjects). b, Shannon diversity in microbial communities of vancomycin and placebo groups 
(P < 0.0001, two-sided unpaired Wilcoxon test). Δ indicates the difference (log expressed) between pre- and postdietary intervention measurements (c) and 
the difference (log expressed) between pre- and postrandomization measurements in vancomycin and placebo groups (d). Online content
Any  methods,  additional  references,  Nature  Research  reporting 
summaries,  source  data,  extended  data,  supplementary  informa-
tion, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author 
contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and 
code  availability  are  available  at  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-
020-0801-z.