in

use

symptomatic

including preterm birth (PTB).1–4 Antibiotics are effective
in eradicating BV during pregnancy5 and are recommended
The
for
consequences of antibiotic use during pregnancy have been
poorly studied,7 but
there are concerns that antibiotic-
related changes in the vaginal microbiota8 are associated
with short- and long-term morbidity in infancy and later
years.9

pregnant women.6

Probiotics might be a safe and effective alternative to
antibiotics in restoring the imbalance of the vaginal micro-
biota found in BV. We therefore performed a randomised trial of a com-
available probiotic preparation in pregnant
mercially
women to assess its biological effects on the vaginal micro-
biota. The probiotic preparation selected
has been shown to be safe when taken during preg-
nancy.14,15

Methods

conducted using an analysis plan agreed in advance with
the independent trial steering and data monitoring com-
mittee. All par-
ticipants provided written informed consent. We excluded those unable to provide
written informed consent or who had a poor understand-
ing of verbal or written English. There were no other exclu-
sion criteria. Maternal demographic, medical and obstetric
history, and antibiotic and probiotic use data were col-
lected. Based on studies carried out on non-pregnant women trea-
ted orally with the same lactobacillus strain,20 this sample
size would allow us to detect with at least 80% power a
decrease in BV of at least 50%, assuming a baseline risk of
25%, following treatment with the Lactobacillus spp. Only the
trial statistician and SCS were aware of
the allocation
sequence. These were then packaged into tamper-proof
boxes. Isolates were identiﬁed using matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionisation-time of ﬂight (MALDI-TOF)
analysis.28

Enterobacteriaceae,

spp., speciﬁc

primers

template

Vaginal bacterial community proﬁling
DNA was extracted from thawed samples by means of the
(Sigma-Aldrich,
GenElute Bacterial Genomic DNA kit
Poole, UK), modiﬁed to optimise lysis of Gram-positive
bacteria, following the manufacturer’s instructions. From
each DNA extract, variable regions V1 and V2 of the 16S
rRNA gene were ampliﬁed by PCR using fusion primers
incorporating
27F-YM
(AGAGTTTGATYMTGGCTCAG) and 338R-R (TGCTG
CCTCCCGTAGRAGT) and MiSeq adapters and barcodes
to achieve a double indexing system. Sequence reactions
were spiked with 10% 12.5 pM PhiX DNA. Sequences were clus-
(OTUs) at a
tered into operational
sequence dissimilarity distance of 0.015 using an average
neighbour algorithm and then classiﬁed using a Na€ıve
Bayesian classiﬁer implemented in mothur with the Human
Oral Microbiome Database release 14.51 reference dataset. In such cases, the odds ratio (OR) was shown
along with the list of confounders used for adjustment. Those who declined to par-
ticipate did so mostly because of an unwillingness to take
the study intervention and not being interested
in research study participation  After exclusions,
304 women were recruited and randomised to the probiotic
groups. At 18–20 weeks’ gestation, the rate of BV in the probi-
otic group was 15% 
in the placebo group. There were no differences between
the groups
in the rates of vaginal colonisation with
L. rhamnosus GR-1  E. coli
or Group B strepto-
cocci  Vaginal colonisation with
L. reuteri RC-14 was not detected in either
group
(Table 1). The stability of the microbiota within subjects
assessed by determining the theta-YC distance between the
baseline and 18–20 weeks’ gestation samples was not signif-
icantly different between the probiotic and placebo groups
(Wilcoxon). Discussion

The aim of this trail was to compare the effects on the
vaginal microbiota of oral probiotic capsules containing
L. rhamnosus GR-1 and L. reuteri RC-14 versus placebo
taken orally from early pregnancy until delivery. Previous observational studies and small-scale
randomised controlled trials in non-pregnant populations
have suggested that oral administration of probiotics can
alter the vaginal microbiota in a signiﬁcant number of
women where microbial imbalance exists.18–21 It is on this
basis that several commercial probiotic products are mar-
keted for the restoration and maintenance of a healthy
vaginal microbiota in both non-pregnant and pregnant
women.19,20 Our ﬁndings have not shown any effect on the
vaginal microbiota with the probiotic preparation used in
this trial. Mean Nugent scores with 95% conﬁdence intervals from
9–14 to 34–36 weeks’ gestation of participants in the trial. retention ensured internal validity, while the multicentre
recruitment and broad inclusion criteria enhanced external
validity. We did not take account of vaginal

6

ª 2019 The Authors. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

Probiotics and vaginal microbiota in pregnancy

Figure 3. Contribution to authorship
The trial was conceived by MM and MW, and designed by
SH and KK. JZ and BMF generated the randomisation
sequence and analysed the results. EP and WW carried out the DNA sequencing. All participants provided
informed consent to take part in the trial. Data sharing
The research team will consider reasonable requests for
sharing of patient level data.