were  housed  individually  in  plastic  cages 
equipped with a running wheel (Coulbourn 
Instruments,  Whitehall,  PA);  however, 
wheels  were  locked  in  cages  of  seden­
tary mice. A diagram of the study design is shown 
in Figure 1. At the end of the exercise period, 
mice were administered tocopherol­stripped 
safflower oil to allow them to adjust 
to the vehicle. Mice were 
then treated with the PCB mixture, and feces 
were again collected for 2 days. To minimize 
the influence of individual variations on the 
gut microbiome, each mouse served as its own 
control for PCB treatment. For each sample, 
amplified products were concentrated using 
a centrifuge filtration method and quanti­
fied by electro phoresis using an Agilent 2100 
Bioanalyzer  (Agilent  Technologies,  Santa 
Clara, CA). PhyloChip Control Mix (Second 
Genome Inc.) was added to each amplified 
product. Each scan 
was captured using the GeneChip Microarray 
Analysis Suite (Affymetrix). Hybridization 
scores and the fluorescence intensity for each 
taxon  were  calculated  as  a  trimmed  aver­
age,  with  maximum  and  minimum  values 
removed before averaging. Subsequently,  hybridization 
scores  were  calculated  as  log2(mean  probe 
fluorescence intensity) × 1,000. Pairwise BT and AT 
dissimilarity  scores  were  computed  using 
the Unifrac distance metric (Lozupone et al. Unsupervised classification 
using the nearest shrunken centroid method 
(Tibshirani et al. The  Welch’s  test  revealed 
that  exposure  to  the  PCB  mixture  signifi­
cantly (p < 0.05 by Student’s t­test) altered 
the abundance of 1,223 bacterial taxa in these 
mice (1,133 taxa had decreased abundance 
and 90 taxa had increased abundance). These taxa belong primarily to phylum 
Proteobacteria, but the classes and families 
are diverse. distance with given presence/absence metrics 
also showed prominent categorization of the 
composition of the gut microbiome between 
the exercised and sedentary mice (Figure 2A). A group of 2,510 taxa showed differences 
in abundance between the exercised and seden­
tary mice. Analysis of these taxa for dissimilarity between 

Table 1. The 10 bacterial taxa with the greatest decrease in abundance following exposure of sedentary mice to the PCB mixture. Exercise alters the structure and composition of the gut microbiome. ( B) PCoA and (C) HC-AN analysis based on weighted Unifrac distance between exercised and sedentary 
mice of the 2,510 taxa with significant abundance differences across at least one of the categories (PCoA1, 84% of variation; PCoA2, 6% of variation). This 
phenomenon was subsequently confirmed by 
HC­AN analysis (Figure 3B). Incubation of 
soil slurries with higher­chlorinated PCB con­
geners (e.g., PCB28, PCB77, Aroclor 1242) 
has been reported to result in lower bacterial 
numbers (Correa et al. In addi­
tion, alterations of the gut microbiome can 
affect PCB­induced disruption of the intestinal 
barrier and translocation of lipopoly saccharides 
into the blood stream (Choi JJ et al. volume 121 | number 6 | June 2013  •  Environmental Health Perspectives

Sedentary control
Sedentary PCB
Exercised control
Exercised PCB

–0.02

–0.01

0.01

0
PCoA1

0.005

0.000

–0.005

PCoA2

–0.010

728 

Choi et al. 2012) and pathology have 
been  reported. In support of this hypothesis, 
Islam et al. Finally, exercise may influence the com­ 
position of the gut microbiome by altering the 
intestinal immune system. In  fact, 
the average body weight of sedentary mice 
in the present study was 46.8 ± 1.4 g, and 
body weight of exercised mice was approxi­ 
mately 30% lower. In 
another study, overweight pregnant patients 
had  reduced  abundance  of  Bifidobacteria 
and Bacteroidetes and increased abundance 
of selected Firmicutes (e.g., Staphylococcus) 
and Proteobacteria (e.g., Enterobacteriaceae) 
(Santacruz et al. Conclusions 
Here we demonstrate that oral exposure to a 
mixture of environmentally relevant PCB con­ 
geners significantly altered the abundance of 
the gut microbiome by decreasing the levels of 
Proteobacteria. We observed that PCB­induced altera­ 
tions of the gut microbiome were attenuated 
by voluntary exercise.