were  housed  individually  in  plastic  cages 
equipped with a running wheel (Coulbourn 
Instruments,  Whitehall,  PA);  however, 
wheels  were  locked  in  cages  of  seden­
tary mice. Mice were allowed to exercise for 5 weeks, 
including 1 week to adapt to running and 
solitary housing. Exercised mice had 30% lower body weight 
on average than sedentary mice. At the end of 
the exercise period, we observed no changes 
in gut transit or stool frequency between the 
two groups. To minimize 
the influence of individual variations on the 
gut microbiome, each mouse served as its own 
control for PCB treatment. For each sample, 
amplified products were concentrated using 
a centrifuge filtration method and quanti­
fied by electro phoresis using an Agilent 2100 
Bioanalyzer  (Agilent  Technologies,  Santa 
Clara, CA). PhyloChip Control Mix (Second 
Genome Inc.) was added to each amplified 
product. Each scan 
was captured using the GeneChip Microarray 
Analysis Suite (Affymetrix). Probe  intensities  were  background  sub­
tracted and scaled to values for PhyloChip 
Control  Mix. Subsequently,  hybridization 
scores  were  calculated  as  log2(mean  probe 
fluorescence intensity) × 1,000. Before  classification 
analy sis,  we  performed  data  reduction  via 
multiple filtering steps as described by Hazen 
et al. Pairwise BT and AT 
dissimilarity  scores  were  computed  using 
the Unifrac distance metric (Lozupone et al. These taxa belong primarily to phylum 
Proteobacteria, but the classes and families 
are diverse. Exercise alters the composition of the gut 
microbiome. Experimental design indicating treatment and sampling times. A group of 2,510 taxa showed differences 
in abundance between the exercised and seden­
tary mice. These taxa were then analyzed by 

PCoA with weighted Unifrac distance, which 
indicated significant differences in the compo­
sition of the microbial communities between 
the exercised and sedentary mice (Figure 2B). The taxa that were decreased 

in  the  exercised  group  belonged  to  phyla 
Tenericutes, Bacteroidetes, and Firmicutes. The 10 bacterial taxa with the greatest decrease in abundance following exposure of sedentary mice to the PCB mixture. This 
phenomenon was subsequently confirmed by 
HC­AN analysis (Figure 3B). In addi­
tion, alterations of the gut microbiome can 
affect PCB­induced disruption of the intestinal 
barrier and translocation of lipopoly saccharides 
into the blood stream (Choi JJ et al. volume 121 | number 6 | June 2013  •  Environmental Health Perspectives

Sedentary control
Sedentary PCB
Exercised control
Exercised PCB

–0.02

–0.01

0.01

0
PCoA1

0.005

0.000

–0.005

PCoA2

–0.010

728 

Choi et al. 2012) and pathology have 
been  reported. In support of this hypothesis, 
Islam et al. Thus, our data are consistent 
because we observed a decrease in the num­ 
ber of Erysipelotrichaceae in exercised mice 
that had lost a substantial amount of body 
weight;  this  is  associated  with  the  role  of 
Erysipelotrichaceae in energy production and 
adiposity (Claus et al. We observed that PCB­induced altera­ 
tions of the gut microbiome were attenuated 
by voluntary exercise.