Cultured human gastrointestinal microbiota

997

cus, and Peptococcus (Moore & Holdeman, 1974a). 1974;
Moore & Holdeman, 1974a; Benno et al., FEMS Microbiology Reviews
published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Federation of European Microbiological Societies. are highly abun-
dant in the adult gastrointestinal tract, and in particular,
the members of the species that cluster within the Clostrid-
ium cluster IV (C. leptum group, which major constituent
is the Ruminococcacea family) and the Clostridium cluster
XIVa (C. coccoides group, which resembles the Lachnospir-
aceae family). Phylogenetic tree of the human gastrointestinal microbiota. GenBank
Accession Numbers of the SSU rRNA gene sequence are provided for each species and the family names are indicated. 1002

M. Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c & W.M. de Vos

these bacteria are responsible for protein degradation in
the gastrointestinal tract (Shen et al., 2013),
or in studies that targeted low abundant bacteria within
the gastrointestinal microbiota (Lagier et al., FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 996–1047

ª 2014 The Authors. are still considered to be opportunistic
pathogens, several decades of research have testiﬁed that
many Bacteroidetes species are highly adjusted to the gas-
trointestinal tract, where they live in high abundance (up
(cid:1)1 of intestinal material; Eggerth & Gagnon,
to 1011 cells g
1933; Moore & Holdeman, 1974a; Benno et al., 2002a), novel gastrointestinal isolates such
as Christensenella minuta (Morotomi et al., However, while molecular studies could conﬁrm their
presence in the upper intestinal tract, these also showed
that the Lactobacilli are quite variable and not as abun-
dant as other gastrointestinal genera at that location, such
as Streptococcus and Veillonella (Booijink, 2009; Booijink
et al., The species indicated in bold are
based on the SSU rRNA gene sequence clustering within the families that are designated on the ﬁgure in contrast to their ofﬁcial classiﬁcation. For the other gastrointestinal species that belong to the order of the Bacillales see Fig. 1012

M. Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c & W.M. de Vos

the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract, is associated
with celiac disease, although the abundance of these bac-
teria can be depleted with the withdrawal of gluten from
the diet of patients (Collado et al., syndrome patients

irritable bowel

(cid:1)1 of

Clostridia

The class Clostridia clusters bacteria that are dominant
and frequently detected in the lower gastrointestinal tract
that are distributed within the families: Clostridiaceae,
Christensenellaceae, Eubacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae, Pepto-
streptococcaceae, Ruminococcacea as well as bacteria with
an unclear taxonomic status that are classiﬁed within
Clostridiales Incertae Sedis families XI and XIII (Garrity
et al., which based on the SSU rRNA gene sequence cluster within distant phylogenetic groups, are depicted in the gray area. Similar to the other gastrointestinal bacteria,
the initially deﬁned Ruminococcus spp. have been recognized as gastrointestinal
inhabitants, although a number of other species that are
ofﬁcially classiﬁed within different genera (predominantly
Clostridium) belong to the Peptostreptococcaceae family
according to their SSU rRNA gene sequence . Two of
these gastrointestinal bacteria,
namely Catabacter hongkongensis and C. minuta, form a
the
separate cluster within the Clostridiales order of
Clostridia class and are the only cultured representatives
of a phylogenetic group that was previously detected only
in various molecular studies and was in a previous review
designated as uncultured Clostridiales II (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojano-
vi(cid:1)c et al., This strictly anaerobic bacte-
rium has been isolated from various body sites, while the
strain isolated from feces showed an ability to desulfate
transformation of steroid
and perform other chemical
molecules
feature of
(Van Eldere et al., The ﬁrst
record of this bacterial group dates from 1898 when Veil-
lon and Zuber isolated Staphylococcus parvulus, which was
later
from infected
appendix tissue (Veillon & Zuber, 1898). Members of the Negativicutes are assacharolytic
and utilize end=products of sugar metabolisms of other
gastrointestinal bacteria (such as lactate or succinate) to
produce propionate, forming an important trophic chain. Phylogenetic tree the human
gastrointestinal species that belong to the
class of the Betaproteobacteria. among other Proteobacteria, have increased
abundance in infants with colic (de Weerth et al., This species was isolated in 2003,
liquid
as a bacterium that was able to grow in basal

FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 996–1047

ª 2014 The Authors. These bacteria can be detected
in the human oral cavity and the gastrointestinal tract,
while a recent study of the microbiota along the gastroin-
testinal tract has shown that TM7 bacteria are one of the
common microorganisms, widely distributed among
humans (Stearns et al., 2008), but even when
tinal
present, these bacteria constitute an extremely minor frac-
tion, as indicated by the fact that only one of over 15 000
SSU rRNA gene sequences in the study of the microbiota
of inﬂammatory bowel disease patients and controls orig-
inated from a Gemmatimonadetes bacterium (Frank et al., Furthermore, Galactomyces geotrichum has
been detected in the human fecal samples using molecular
techniques (Scanlan & Marchesi, 2008) and cultivation
(Gouba et al., Having in mind their source, and
instability (as illustrated in the results of longitudinal fol-
low up of fungal microbiota; Scanlan & Marchesi, 2008),
it is likely that these fungi are not a constant and func-
tionally relevant part of the gastrointestinal microbiota. Neobalantidium coli is the largest pro-
tozoan parasite that infects humans, but its natural hosts
are pigs.