Cultured human gastrointestinal microbiota

997

cus, and Peptococcus (Moore & Holdeman, 1974a). FEMS Microbiology Reviews
published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Federation of European Microbiological Societies. GenBank
Accession Numbers of the SSU rRNA gene sequence are provided for each species and the family names are indicated. 1002

M. Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c & W.M. de Vos

these bacteria are responsible for protein degradation in
the gastrointestinal tract (Shen et al., FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 996–1047

ª 2014 The Authors. are still considered to be opportunistic
pathogens, several decades of research have testiﬁed that
many Bacteroidetes species are highly adjusted to the gas-
trointestinal tract, where they live in high abundance (up
(cid:1)1 of intestinal material; Eggerth & Gagnon,
to 1011 cells g
1933; Moore & Holdeman, 1974a; Benno et al., Because of their broad metabolic potential, the role of
in the gastrointestinal microbiota is

the Bacteroidetes

complex: while the reduced abundance of the Bacteroide-
tes in some cases is associated with obesity (Ley, 2010)
and irritable bowel syndrome (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., 2007), which illustrates that future research is expected to
dramatically expand our knowledge about the functional
contribution of this group to the ecosystem and the host. The species indicated in bold are
based on the SSU rRNA gene sequence clustering within the families that are designated on the ﬁgure in contrast to their ofﬁcial classiﬁcation. Little is
known about the function of these bacteria in the ecosys-
tem, but it is noteworthy that two independent studies have
shown that members of the Bacillales order, more speciﬁ-
cally Aneurinibacillus spp., syndrome patients

irritable bowel

(cid:1)1 of

Clostridia

The class Clostridia clusters bacteria that are dominant
and frequently detected in the lower gastrointestinal tract
that are distributed within the families: Clostridiaceae,
Christensenellaceae, Eubacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae, Pepto-
streptococcaceae, Ruminococcacea as well as bacteria with
an unclear taxonomic status that are classiﬁed within
Clostridiales Incertae Sedis families XI and XIII (Garrity
et al., which based on the SSU rRNA gene sequence cluster within distant phylogenetic groups, are depicted in the gray area. Eubacterium
rectale- and Eubacterium hallii-related species. Blautia is a recently described bacterial genus that
groups
several abundant gastrointestinal bacteria that
were previously assigned to the Ruminococcus genus –
notably those related to Ruminococcus obeum . have been recognized as gastrointestinal
inhabitants, although a number of other species that are
ofﬁcially classiﬁed within different genera (predominantly
Clostridium) belong to the Peptostreptococcaceae family
according to their SSU rRNA gene sequence . Two of
these gastrointestinal bacteria,
namely Catabacter hongkongensis and C. minuta, form a
the
separate cluster within the Clostridiales order of
Clostridia class and are the only cultured representatives
of a phylogenetic group that was previously detected only
in various molecular studies and was in a previous review
designated as uncultured Clostridiales II (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojano-
vi(cid:1)c et al., The ﬁrst
record of this bacterial group dates from 1898 when Veil-
lon and Zuber isolated Staphylococcus parvulus, which was
later
from infected
appendix tissue (Veillon & Zuber, 1898). The Negativi-
cutes are typically isolated from the oral cavity or the
proximal small bowel (Rogosa, 1965; Simon & Gorbach,
1986), but representative species from this group can be
detected in high abundances even in the lower intestinal
tract. Members of the Negativicutes are assacharolytic
and utilize end=products of sugar metabolisms of other
gastrointestinal bacteria (such as lactate or succinate) to
produce propionate, forming an important trophic chain. produce
NO, which is an important biological regulator (Culotta
& Koshland, 1992; Anderson et al., Phylogenetic tree the human
gastrointestinal species that belong to the
class of the Betaproteobacteria. Among them, Pseudomonas
frequently
aeruginosa is
reported as a member of the fecal microbiota of healthy
humans
(Finegold et al., Finally, a recent study of the microaerophilic fecal
microbiota of children revealed diverse and prevalent colo-
nization of Campylobacter spp. Hence, their prevalence is low in samples from the lower
gastrointestinal tract (Hansen et al., These bacteria can be detected
in the human oral cavity and the gastrointestinal tract,
while a recent study of the microbiota along the gastroin-
testinal tract has shown that TM7 bacteria are one of the
common microorganisms, widely distributed among
humans (Stearns et al., Having in mind their source, and
instability (as illustrated in the results of longitudinal fol-
low up of fungal microbiota; Scanlan & Marchesi, 2008),
it is likely that these fungi are not a constant and func-
tionally relevant part of the gastrointestinal microbiota.