The present-day view of the gastrointestinal microbiota
composition is quite different than prior to the molecular
revolution. are capable of equol production
from isoﬂavones (Matthies et al., are still considered to be opportunistic
pathogens, several decades of research have testiﬁed that
many Bacteroidetes species are highly adjusted to the gas-
trointestinal tract, where they live in high abundance (up
(cid:1)1 of intestinal material; Eggerth & Gagnon,
to 1011 cells g
1933; Moore & Holdeman, 1974a; Benno et al., Bacteroides dorei, AB242143
Bacteroides vulgatus, AB510712
Bacteroides massiliensis, AY126616. Members of the genera Leuconostoc and Weissella used to
be considered as occasional and possibly transient mem-
bers of the gastrointestinal microbiota. Blautia is a recently described bacterial genus that
groups
several abundant gastrointestinal bacteria that
were previously assigned to the Ruminococcus genus –
notably those related to Ruminococcus obeum . 2010) and in mucosal samples of
colorectal cancer patients (Chen et al., are observed in irritable
bowel syndrome patients (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., which can be utilized by Blautia spp..

of important metabolic functions. Similar to the other gastrointestinal bacteria,
the initially deﬁned Ruminococcus spp. Two of
these gastrointestinal bacteria,
namely Catabacter hongkongensis and C. minuta, form a
the
separate cluster within the Clostridiales order of
Clostridia class and are the only cultured representatives
of a phylogenetic group that was previously detected only
in various molecular studies and was in a previous review
designated as uncultured Clostridiales II (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojano-
vi(cid:1)c et al., Not much is known about the role of this
group of strictly anaerobic bacteria in the human gastro-
intestinal tract, but it is noteworthy that bacteria that
belong to the Christensenella/Catabacter group were
reported to be dramatically depleted in fecal
samples of ulcerative patients relative to controls (Rajili(cid:1)c-
Stojanovi(cid:1)c
(ﬁvefold)
depleted in fecal samples of patients with postinfectious
irritable bowel syndrome (Jalanka-Tuovinen et al., 1975), and this property that
may be detrimental to health as described below for the
Deltaproteobacteria..

Finally, Halanaerobaculum tunisiense has been identiﬁed
by pyrosequencing of the V6 variable region of the SSU
rRNA gene in a recent study that compared efﬁciency of
culturomics and pyrosequencing approach for studying
the gastrointestinal microbiota diversity (Lagier et al., can also
remain asymptomatic, suggesting that at least some species
of this genus are commercial members of the gastrointesti-
nal microbiota..

The genus Helicobacter has been derived from Cam-
pylobacter after reclassiﬁcation of
the latter (Goodwin
et al., The presence of the Planctomycetes in the human gas-
trointestinal tract was reported only in molecular-based
studies (Wilson & Blitchington, 1996; De Filippo et al., In an early cultivation study,
which dates from 1968, a single methanogenic species,
isolated from four of ﬁve individuals, was identiﬁed as
Methanobrevibacter ruminantium (Nottingham & Hun-
gate, 1968).