Microbiome  5:158 

Page 2 of 19

infant nutrition, and common clinical practices in neonatal
care  We hypothesize that assembly and function
of the preterm infants’ gut microbiota is associated with
postnatal growth patterns and represents a yet unexplored
personalized therapeutic potential for optimizing infant
development. We found that mode of
delivery was not significantly associated with microbiota
composition after controlling for age, which is similar to
recent studies where mode of delivery was not associ-
ated with the influence of breast milk in preterm infants
or with stool composition in full-term infants 
Overall, PMA has the strongest impact on microbiota
composition, followed by the ratio of enteral calories,
total calories normalized by body weight, proportion of
dietary lipids, antimicrobial usage, proportion of dietary
protein, and diuretics usage (Additional file 1: Table S1). To characterize the apparent
developmental phases of
the premature infant gut
microbiome, we used threshold values for the log ratio
the three predominant bacterial classes—Bacilli,
of
Gammaproteobacteria, and Clostridia—to construct a
decision tree that permits objective assignment of indi-
vidual microbiota samples to one of the three phases
based on their composition . The groupings
and bars within each group indicate the phases of the first and second sample of a pair of consecutive samples, respectively, and are ordered as
described in c. Transition probabilities are included in the table below the graph. Microbiome  5:158 

Page 5 of 19

gut physiology and developmental stage influences the
microbiota following birth. Changes in
taxa abundance would suggest adaptation of the micro-
biota in response to factors that the preterm infant en-
counters while in the NICU and may affect development
of a mature, functional gut microbiota. Using a multivari-
ate mixed-effects regression model
that accounts for
subject-specific variations, we assessed changes in taxa
abundance at each phase, with PMA, gestational age at
birth, total calories per kilogram in the past week, propor-
tion of enteral calories in the past week, ratio of lipids,
carbohydrates and protein in the past week, antibiotics
and corticosteroid received during the past week, and add-
itional medications as covariates. Early and late periods of the preterm infant microbiome
To demonstrate the utility of modeling the microbiome
as three compositionally defined phases, we compared
gut microbiota development using two constant time pe-
riods based solely on PMA. Beta values are the estimated regression coefficients and p values are
computed from the likelihood ratio tests. For clarity, only significant associations are reported in this table. It has
in preterm infants, passage of
been established that
meconium as stool is both delayed and prolonged and is
observed well beyond the first stool, with final clearance
occurring up to several weeks after birth 

To identify potential associations between the presence
of meconium and P1 of the microbiota, we examined the
relationship between clearance of the meconium from the
stool and the initial transition of the microbiota out of P1
,
but did not survive beyond the first weeks in the NICU. We first developed a
discrete three phase-based model based upon quantitative
categorical classification of the preterm gut microbiota,
characterized the composition and putative functional cap-
acity of the three microbiota phases, and described the
properties of phase transition. Reads
containing more than four mismatches to the known
primer sequences or more than three mismatches to all
barcode sequences were excluded from subsequent pro-
cessing and analysis. For each functional pathway from the
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) that
was putatively identified, comparisons were made be-
tween the phases using LEfSe, which identifies features
that are statistically differentially abundant among bio-
logical classes (in this case phases) and then performs
comparative tests between pairs of biological classes to
identify where these features are significantly enriched
or diminished. Microbiome  5:158 

Page 15 of 19

assessed at each taxonomic level using the metagen-
omicsSeq zero-inflated Gaussian test  and the re-
sults are summarized in Additional file 5: Tables S4A–C.
Testing for differential functional capacity between the
phases was performed using LEfSe with per-sample
normalization to 1 M total counts, minimum effect size
of 2.0, alpha of 0.1, an all-against-all strategy, and other-
wise default parameters. The results are summarized in
Additional file 7: Table S6. Association between nutrition/medication and growth
We performed linear mixed-effect regression analysis
similar to the above model on both early and late pe-
riods (Model A) and three phases (Model B) to test
the association between the nutrition/medication factors
(as covariates) and weight Z-score as a proxy for growth
(as the response variables). For model A, LATE is consid-
ered as the baseline phase (coded as 0) and EARLY is
coded as 1. Predicting microbiome phases
We performed a mixed-effects logistic regression analyses
to study the associations between a host of nutrition- and

medication-related covariates and the three micro-
biota phases on the early and late intervals. Weighted UniFrac Principal Coordinate Analyses of
phase and Dirichlet component. ( B. Results of differential abundance tests
(metagenomeSeq zero-inflated Gaussian) of all bacterial taxa between
microbiome phases 2 and 3. DOCX 14 kb)

Additional file 10: Table S9. Availability of data and materials
All phenotypic data, 16S rRNA sequence reads and generated datasets is
publically available through dbGaP accessions phs001297.v1.p1 (PROP
rectal samples n = 721, n = 97 subjects) and phs001347.v2.p1 (RPRC/PROP
fullterm samples n = 46 samples, n = 23 subjects, meconium and stool
samples, n = 10 samples, n = 5 subjects) through url http://www.ncbi.nlm. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The institutional review board at the University of
Rochester School of Medicine and Strong Memorial Hospital approved the
study. 4Division of Neonatology,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA.