Such techniques have led to the
development of the first human intestinal gene catalog (Qin
et al. 2001),
GF mice develop more severe colitis as compared to convention-
alized mice. 2013), showing that colonization of Bacteroides
is species-specific and saturable. Finally, since immune struc-
tures in GF mice remain immature, much of our understanding
of host–microbe interactions involved in the development of the
immune system arose from the study of GF animals and is dis-
cussed in more detail later in this review..

contrast, colonization of 8-week-old GF mice could not reverse
the elevated numbers of iNKT cells (Olszak et al. Accord-
ingly, the administration of probiotics might lead to optimal re-
sults only when given at early ages. Intuitively, one
would treat such animals with antibiotics to allow the introduc-
tion of the donor microbiota. In addition, a so-called coli-
togenic flora, retrieved from transgenic mice that spontaneously
develop colitis, can successfully transmit intestinal inflamma-
tion to wild-type mice (Garrett et al. As in-
nate sensors, they respond and divide rapidly upon stimulation. ILCs regulate barrier integrity and therefore the direct physical
border between microbiome and underlying lamina propria cells
through secretion of cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor and
interferon..

Unexpectedly, individual mice from certain strains, for ex-
ample C3HRI, DBAJR and WSB, appear to be more similar in their
microbiota than other strains such as C57BL6/J (Friswell et al. These studies have demonstrated that deletion of a single
gene can cause substantial alterations in the microbiota (Vijay-
Kumar et al. For example, phenotypic differences between TLR-
deficient C57BL/6J mouse colonies mainly reflected a diver-
gence of the microbiota after extended isolated breeding of the
colonies (Ubeda et al. Thus, long-term breeding of separate
mouse lines that had been derived from the same strain appears
to result in marked changes in intestinal microbiota composi-
tion. Taken together, microbiota composition in genetically modified
mice may superimpose on the genetic effect causing a change
in host physiology..

Variation in the microbiological environment between research
institutions or commercial breeding facilities is a confounding
factor; however. the exact contribution to experimental out-
comes is poorly understood. The presence of segmented
filamentous bacteria in the gut of mice of Taconic caused a
higher frequency of Th17 cells compared with mice from Jack-
son Laboratory who lacked these bacteria (Ivanov et al. 2002); however,
it is difficult to establish which is cause or consequence.