The congruent phylogenies of mammals and their microbiota8 provide strong evidence for
the inheritance of the microbiota7 Although inheritance of the microbiota from the father is
presently little studied, increasing evidence supports inheritance from the mother34,53. In many host species, paternal contributions to offspring traits have been well
documented57,58; these observations have been extended to the microbiome, where paternal
contributions to offspring H. pylori allele composition have been shown59, In any event,
there is evidence for extensive horizontal gene transfer (HGT) within human populations,
functional classes, and ecological niches60, indicating the site-specificity and dynamism of
selection on the human microbiome. Analogous changes may be occurring in other body
sites as senescence advances. Genes may have alternative effects at different life
stages, illustrating the idea of antagonistic pleiotropy81. A related hypothesis is that co-evolved microbiota are
adaptive for the human species both by supporting early-in-life host functions and by
leading to later-in-life host demise 86..

The cutaneous microbiome is an obvious target in specific diseases, such as psoriasis, a
chronic, idiopathic inflammatory dermatologic condition87. Studies to
explore these findings using HTS are currently underway89. Atopic dermatitis, another
chronic inflammatory condition, has increased in incidence approximately three-fold over
the last 30 years in industrialized countries, suggesting a potential role for microbiome
alterations. Similarly,
Propionibacterium acnes has been implicated in the common dermatologic condition, acne. Chronic skin ulcers, often secondary to venous stasis or diabetes, lead
to substantial morbidity. In H. pylori-negative individuals, gastric
microbiota diversity is high; most of the prominent gastric phylotypes (Streptococcus,
Actinomyces, Prevotella, Gemella) also are abundant in the oropharynx of these
individuals93; indicating that either many constituents are swallowed from more proximal
sites, or that close relatives of the oral microbiota colonize more distally. control subjects, while both Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes were relatively depleted in those
with Fusobacterium-rich malignancies102. IBD susceptibility is associated with host polymorphisms in bacterial sensor genes such as
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 2 (NOD2) also known as
caspase recruitment domain-containing protein 15 (CARD15)107,108 and toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4)109, and IBD patients sometimes improve following antibiotic treatment110. Patients with Crohn’s disease have
over-representation of E. faecium and of several Proteobacteria compared to controls115. Despite substantial taxonomic variation, functional
metagenomic differences were minor37. Antibiotic use in human
infancy, before age 6 months, was significantly associated with obesity development123. Alterations in the gut microbiome also occur with interventions used to treat
obesity.