This 
chapter reviews the natural trajectory of the composition 
of  the  microbiota  during  pregnancy  and  early  life  and 
outlines  the  current  knowledge  on  the  interaction  be-
tween the microbiota and neurodevelopment. Devia-
tions  from  the  neurodevelopmental  trajectory  can  ac-
count for increased susceptibility to brain diseases later 
in life. There is a growing appreciation of the link between 
neurodevelopment and intestinal microbiota. In contrast, Bacteroides remain relatively elevated 
throughout  pregnancy    Interestingly,  microbiota 

compositional changes also occur post-partum. One of the most common macronutrient consumption 
imbalances during pregnancy is the consumption of high-
fat diets. Factors that interfere with the gut microbiota trajectory during development

Factor

Effect on the microbiota

Diet

pregnancy

Unhealthy diets can disrupt the natural trajectory of microbiota 
during pregnancy

early life

Formula feeding is associated with a distinctive fingerprint in the 
intestinal microbiota 

Mode of delivery

C-section is associated with a distinctive early microbial profile, 
dissimilar to the vaginal microbiota implicated in vertical 
transmission

Ref. During  fetal  development,  micronutrients  are  re-
quired for neurological development. Deficiency in B vi-
tamins, folate or ions, such as iron and zinc, exerts detri-
mental effects on neurocognitive development in humans 
and rodents  Folate deficiency is paradigmatic of 
the impact of micronutrient deficit on offspring neurode-
velopment. Administration  of  antibi-
otics to pregnant rats caused impairments in social be-
haviour and pre-pulse inhibition of the offspring  In 
mice, administration of non-absorbable antibiotics dur-
ing pregnancy reduced the exploratory behaviour in the 
offspring  These results warrant further research on 
the effect of microbiota. showed that a large amount 
of non-antibiotic human-targeted drugs have antimicro-
bial  properties. The  sterility  of  the  uterus  during 
pregnancy is one of the paradigms that research on the 
microbiome is revisiting. It has been sug-
gested that C-section-distinctive microbiota composition 
plays a functional role in predisposing these infants to a 
greater relative risk of neonatal infections, allergy, asth-
ma, obesity and type 1 diabetes  Pre-
clinical models of C-section suggest that the mode of de-
livery could impact on early neuronal maturation [109, 
110]. Whether modifying the initial colonizing microbi-
ota induces directly or indirectly different trajectories in 
brain development has yet to be deciphered. Early Postnatal Perturbations of the Microbiota
Early postnatal life entails an intrinsic sensitivity to en-
vironmental factors. Mode of Nutritional Provision in Early Life
The stability and composition of the early-life gut mi-
crobiota community is also dependent on diet  Ac-
cumulating evidence suggests that breastfeeding and for-
mula-based nutrition leave a distinctive fingerprint in the 
intestinal  microbiota  (Table  2). Human breast milk has a unique composition that in-
teracts with the developing gut microbiota. Culture-de-
pendent and -independent techniques revealed that it is 
a source of bacteria  Interestingly, the human milk 
microbiome can be influenced by maternal body mass in-
dex and mode of delivery  The other main compo-
nents  of  breast  milk  are  human  milk  oligosaccharides, 
which  act  as  prebiotics    Supplementation  of 
infant formula with GOS increases the abundance of Bi-
fidobacteria and Lactobacilli to levels reported in breast-
fed infants  Both breast milk microbes and pre-
biotics play a role in the standard gut microbial develop-
mental trajectory. 21

Microbiota and Neurodevelopmental Trajectories Ann Nutr Metab 2019;74(suppl 2):16–27DOI: 10.1159/000499144Healthy-diet
pregnancy

Unhealthy-diet
pregnancy

Drugs and
stress

C-section

Formula
feeding

Lifestyle

Vaginal
birth

Breast-
feeding

Fig. Factors that determine the trajectory 
of the microbiota during early life. The gut 
and  vaginal  microbiome  of  the  mother  is 
altered by diet, drugs and stress. The mode 
of delivery determines the first colonizers 
of  the  newborn’s  gut. Early  in  life,  diet, 
drugs and stress can also affect the infant 
microbiota composition. Parental care

Drugs and stress

Probiotics and Prebiotics
Most of the evidence available on the effect of early-life 
exposure to pre- and probiotics comes from preclinical 
studies. Early-Life Stress
The impact of stress on the development of the HPA 
axis has been shown to contribute to the programming of 
brain  health  in  later  life    Interestingly,  evidence 
from preclinical studies shows that early-life stress also 
alters  the  microbiota. Although  plasticity  represents  an  opportunity  for 
adaptation, it is also a vulnerable stage. Further research is needed on the characterization of crit-
ical windows to modulate the microbiota and the conse-
quences of early intervention. Disclosure Statement

The writing of this article was supported by Nestlé Nutrition 
Institute. The  APC  Microbiome  Institute  is  funded  by  Science 
Foundation  Ireland  (SFI),  through  the  Irish  Government’s  Na-
tional Development Plan. The APC Microbiome Institute has con-
ducted research funded by many Pharmaceutical and Food Com-
panies. M.G.C. is funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodows-
ka-Curie grant agreement No. J.F.C., T.G.D. and C.S. are 
supported by SFI (Grant 12/RC/2273). T.G.D. has been an invited 
speaker at meetings organized by Servier, Lundbeck, Janssen and 
AstraZeneca and has received research funding from Mead John-
son, Cremo, Suntory Wellness, Nutricia and 4D Pharma.