This 
chapter reviews the natural trajectory of the composition 
of  the  microbiota  during  pregnancy  and  early  life  and 
outlines  the  current  knowledge  on  the  interaction  be-
tween the microbiota and neurodevelopment. There is a growing appreciation of the link between 
neurodevelopment and intestinal microbiota. An  in-
crease in the presence of Lactobacilli helps maintain a low 
pH, limiting bacterial growth opportunity for other bacte-
ria  Furthermore, vaginal microbiota composition is 
critical in the context of vertical transmission of microbial 
populations  Whether interventions in the physiologi-
cal trajectory of maternal microbiota could alter the prena-
tal environment and, in turn, deviate normal brain devel-
opment is a key question in neuroscience that is starting to 
be addressed both in preclinical and clinical areas. In contrast, Bacteroides remain relatively elevated 
throughout  pregnancy    Interestingly,  microbiota 

compositional changes also occur post-partum. After the first week of pregnancy, there is an 
increase in bacterial diversity characterized by a growth 
of the Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes phyla  The 
changes seen in mice gut microbiota during pregnancy 
and post-partum make it a solid approach to the study of 
interventions in the maternal microbiota and the impact 
on offspring’s neurodevelopment. Indeed, a va-
riety of exogenous factors affect the trajectory of micro-
biota composition during pregnancy. One of the most common macronutrient consumption 
imbalances during pregnancy is the consumption of high-
fat diets. Factors that interfere with the gut microbiota trajectory during development

Factor

Effect on the microbiota

Diet

pregnancy

Unhealthy diets can disrupt the natural trajectory of microbiota 
during pregnancy

early life

Formula feeding is associated with a distinctive fingerprint in the 
intestinal microbiota 

Mode of delivery

C-section is associated with a distinctive early microbial profile, 
dissimilar to the vaginal microbiota implicated in vertical 
transmission

Ref. During  fetal  development,  micronutrients  are  re-
quired for neurological development. Administration  of  antibi-
otics to pregnant rats caused impairments in social be-
haviour and pre-pulse inhibition of the offspring  In 
mice, administration of non-absorbable antibiotics dur-
ing pregnancy reduced the exploratory behaviour in the 
offspring  These results warrant further research on 
the effect of microbiota. showed that a large amount 
of non-antibiotic human-targeted drugs have antimicro-
bial  properties. The  sterility  of  the  uterus  during 
pregnancy is one of the paradigms that research on the 
microbiome is revisiting. Early Postnatal Perturbations of the Microbiota
Early postnatal life entails an intrinsic sensitivity to en-
vironmental factors. Culture-de-
pendent and -independent techniques revealed that it is 
a source of bacteria  Interestingly, the human milk 
microbiome can be influenced by maternal body mass in-
dex and mode of delivery  The other main compo-
nents  of  breast  milk  are  human  milk  oligosaccharides, 
which  act  as  prebiotics    Supplementation  of 
infant formula with GOS increases the abundance of Bi-
fidobacteria and Lactobacilli to levels reported in breast-
fed infants  Both breast milk microbes and pre-
biotics play a role in the standard gut microbial develop-
mental trajectory. 21

Microbiota and Neurodevelopmental Trajectories Ann Nutr Metab 2019;74(suppl 2):16–27DOI: 10.1159/000499144Healthy-diet
pregnancy

Unhealthy-diet
pregnancy

Drugs and
stress

C-section

Formula
feeding

Lifestyle

Vaginal
birth

Breast-
feeding

Fig. The gut 
and  vaginal  microbiome  of  the  mother  is 
altered by diet, drugs and stress. The mode 
of delivery determines the first colonizers 
of  the  newborn’s  gut. Early-Life Stress
The impact of stress on the development of the HPA 
axis has been shown to contribute to the programming of 
brain  health  in  later  life    Interestingly,  evidence 
from preclinical studies shows that early-life stress also 
alters  the  microbiota. Although  plasticity  represents  an  opportunity  for 
adaptation, it is also a vulnerable stage. Further research is needed on the characterization of crit-
ical windows to modulate the microbiota and the conse-
quences of early intervention. Disclosure Statement

The writing of this article was supported by Nestlé Nutrition 
Institute. The  APC  Microbiome  Institute  is  funded  by  Science 
Foundation  Ireland  (SFI),  through  the  Irish  Government’s  Na-
tional Development Plan. The APC Microbiome Institute has con-
ducted research funded by many Pharmaceutical and Food Com-
panies. M.G.C. is funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodows-
ka-Curie grant agreement No. J.F.C., T.G.D. and C.S. are 
supported by SFI (Grant 12/RC/2273). T.G.D. has been an invited 
speaker at meetings organized by Servier, Lundbeck, Janssen and 
AstraZeneca and has received research funding from Mead John-
son, Cremo, Suntory Wellness, Nutricia and 4D Pharma.