Presence of haustrum and taenia coli in the colon . Another difference is the presence of transverse folds
along the length of the colonic mucosa in humans, whereas these
folds are restricted to the cecum and proximal colon in mice. Gross anatomy of the human and the mouse gastrointestinal
tract. ( D is reproduced from the
website http://theses.ulaval.ca/archimede/fichiers/24866/ch07.html with the
author’s permission. The  first  example  is  the
distribution of mucin-producing goblet cells (Table 1). Paneth cells
secrete  antimicrobial  compounds  into  the  lumen  of  the  small
intestine. For instance, Prevotella abundance
is  known  to  be  low  in  mouse  gut  microbiota  (Hildebrand  et  al., Interestingly,  two  enterotypes  were  also  identified  in  wild  mice,
dominated by Bacteroides and Robinsoniella, respectively (Wang et
al., 2013), in which low species-richness individuals
were  found  to  have  more  pronounced  inflammation,  and  to  be
dominated by Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria, the same bacterial
groups that dominated the ‘inflamed’ mouse enterotype..

Obesity
The influence of diet on the gut microbiota has received increasing
research attention over recent years. Some common trends
have emerged from this research. This
shift  is  driven  by  more  complex  alterations  at  lower  taxonomic
levels  within  the  phylum  Bacteroidetes:  most  genera,  including
Prevotella and Roseburia, decreased in abundance (Neyrinck et al., Interestingly, the overall trend observed in mouse studies
agrees with that found in human studies. Overall,  this
highlights  that  the  use  of  diet  intervention  in  murine  models,
including the use of humanized gnotobiotic mice, can mimic the
changes in gut microbiota that occur in relation to human diet..

Bacteroides enterotype, which is associated with animal protein, and
Prevotella enterotype, which links to diets with more carbohydrates
and simple sugars. On the other hand, a study on wild
mice by Wang et al. 2001)].
The  concern  is  not  only  that  symptoms  are  not  concordant  with
human IBD, but that the underlying mechanism, such as the cross-talk
between the immune system and the gut microbiota, might not be the
same in the mouse model being used.