Interventions involving probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and dietary ﬁbre also oﬀer opportunities
to “fertilize” our microbiota. For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003)  However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes  It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism. Feeding caesarean-born infants formula supplemented with Bif. Probiotic consumption in the elderly cohort has been shown to improve certain immune parameters
as well as beneﬁcially modulating the intestinal microbiota. In a later
study with the same probiotic strain, ﬁve months of supplementation to university athletes and game
players (n = 243) had no impact on upper respiratory tract infection symptoms which the authors state
could be attributable to the low incidence of such symptoms during the study  The probiotic
was associated with plasma cytomegalovirus and Epstein Barr virus antibody titres which could be
interpreted as an improvement in immune status. lactis BB12
reduced the duration and severity of upper respiratory tract infections in college students and fewer
school days were missed . improved including serum insulin levels and homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance. Improvements in some blood parameters related to liver function and
inﬂammation were observed and signiﬁcant correlations could be made between these and the changed
fat mass indicating that Bif. Consumption of inulin-type fructans by obese women at 16 g/day for 3 months led to gut
microbiota changes which included an increase in Biﬁdobacterium and F. prausnitzii, both of which
negatively correlated with serum lipopolysaccharides The prebiotic also decreased Bacteroides
intestinalis, Bac. Furthermore, the presence of high levels of Clostridium sphenoides,
a common gut inhabitant and Firmicutes member, in the faecal microbiota of obese individuals before
dietary invention was associated with a decrease in cholesterol following intervention while obese
individuals with abnormally low abundance of this species did not beneﬁt in terms of cholesterol
levels. In a randomized controlled
trial investigating the impact of increased intake of whole grains versus fruits and vegetables on the
gut microbiota in obese and overweight individuals, Kopf et al. reported that Americans consuming
unrestricted diets had less diverse faecal microbiota (termed AMER) compared to the microbiota of
individuals consuming calorie-restricted plant-rich diets (termed CRON) and the AMER microbiota
lacked many bacterial lineages representative of CRON. Placing the AMER communities into a model. For example, numerous genetic variations have been linked
to inﬂuencing a range of microbiota  However, other factors
such as diet may mask the eﬀect of genetics on the microbiome making it diﬃcult to predict changes in
phenotype without assessing an individual’s diet and including this in the interpretation. in the infant gut and increased risk of diabetes, alcohol-induced pancreatitis
and Crohns disease. Hence, future commercial
tests may oﬀer genetic testing as a way to help consumers, such as lactating mothers in the case of
FUT2, make better choices and optimise health outcomes..

A relatively “simple” interaction with a single strain of bacteria, measuring the outcome (e.g., glucose
response) over a number of weeks can give more conﬁdence of “cause and eﬀect.”