Interventions involving probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and dietary ﬁbre also oﬀer opportunities
to “fertilize” our microbiota. Feeding caesarean-born infants formula supplemented with Bif. Consumption of heat-killed Lactococcus lactis JCM
805, also known as LC-Plasma, for 13 days was shown to relieve the morbidity and symptoms of
upper respiratory tract infections in male athletes performing high-intensity exercise  This was
achieved by activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) which are known to play a signiﬁcant role
in viral infection. improved including serum insulin levels and homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance. breve B-3 was used in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving adult volunteers with BMI ranging from 24 to 30 kg/m2  According to the WHO, BMI
values from 25.0 to 29.9 represent a pre-obesity nutritional status, while a BMI of 30 falls into class
I obesity  In the trial, participants received either placebo (n = 25) or a B-3 capsule (n = 19)
(approximately 5 × 1010 cfu/day) for 12 weeks  Consumption of the B-3 capsule signiﬁcantly
lowered fat mass by week 12. longum, followed later on by absence of the HMAGM resulting
in deﬁcient energy harvest, immune protection and vitamin biosynthesis which are associated with
malabsorption, systemic pathogen invasion and diarrhoea used a
combination of culturomics and metagenomics to analyse the stool samples of healthy children and
kwashiorkor patients to identify potential probiotics to treat SAM. Consumption of inulin-type fructans by obese women at 16 g/day for 3 months led to gut
microbiota changes which included an increase in Biﬁdobacterium and F. prausnitzii, both of which
negatively correlated with serum lipopolysaccharides The prebiotic also decreased Bacteroides
intestinalis, Bac. Furthermore, the presence of high levels of Clostridium sphenoides,
a common gut inhabitant and Firmicutes member, in the faecal microbiota of obese individuals before
dietary invention was associated with a decrease in cholesterol following intervention while obese
individuals with abnormally low abundance of this species did not beneﬁt in terms of cholesterol
levels. In a randomized controlled
trial investigating the impact of increased intake of whole grains versus fruits and vegetables on the
gut microbiota in obese and overweight individuals, Kopf et al. Placing the AMER communities into a model. In addition,
we have already mentioned that whole genome sequencing is more informative than 16s rRNA gene
sequencing and this is something the consumer should be made aware of. been shown to produce the highest level of butyrate of all the three subgroups and also produces
an anti-inﬂammatory protein called MAM. Hence, future commercial
tests may oﬀer genetic testing as a way to help consumers, such as lactating mothers in the case of
FUT2, make better choices and optimise health outcomes..

A relatively “simple” interaction with a single strain of bacteria, measuring the outcome (e.g., glucose
response) over a number of weeks can give more conﬁdence of “cause and eﬀect.” with any type of response thus harder to
determine if it is the nutrients or microbe growth, or both.