rates of cell turnover in germ-free animals compared with wild-type animals13. IECs have many immunological functions (Table 1): they can secrete and
respond to various cytokines and express molecules (such as major histocompatibility
molecules) that directly interact with lymphocytes. Intriguingly, the specificity of
RegIIIγ is directed toward specific Gram-positive bacteria. Prior colonization with specific
commensal bacteria antagonized S. flexneri infections, whereas colonization with control
species such as E.coli did not, implying that some members of the microbiota provide
protection against intestinal bacterial pathogens18. L-selectin and CD44 are known to be involved in homing of
lymphocytes to sites of inflammation. Moreover, S. typhimurium
exploits this deficiency in “colonization resistance” to establish infection and cause
disease22. While important for maintaining a barrier to the colonization of potentially
pathogenic organisms, it appears that the microbiota may also provide the host immune
benefits. As shown in Table 2,
many individual or combinations of bacterial species have been shown to ameliorate the
symptoms of IBD in humans and mouse models. Treatment of colitic mice with the
probiotic cocktail, VSL#3, increased the production of IL-10 and the percentage of TGFβ-
expressing T cells77. physical development of the immune system, including expansion and differentiation of
splenic CD4+ T cells81. The importance of B. fragilis in
maintenance of a healthy immune response was recently illustrated by the finding that
colonization by B. fragilis or treatment with purified PSA can protect from the induction of
experimental IBD66. Finally, transfer
of IL-10-deficient CD4+ T cells into Rag−/− recipient mice abolished the ability of PSA to
protect from experimental colitis66. These data have identified a single molecule made by a
symbiotic microorganism that stimulates CD4+ T cells to make IL-10, required for the
suppression of the inflammatory process during colitis, and suggest that other beneficial
bacteria may produce factors that can positively shape the host immune response during
IBD..

Does harboring certain strains of bacteria predispose an individual to disease or protect from
it? The intestinal bacterial composition of IBD patients differs
greatly from that of healthy controls74. No infectious organisms have ever
been conclusively demonstrated to be involved in IBD, though various studies are still
ongoing.