The  idea  of  oral  probiotic  application  is  based  on  the  knowl-
edge  that  pathogens  that  cause  most  of  the  urogenital  infec-
tions progress from the rectum to the perineal region and then 
to  the  vagina  and  the  mesentery. If  pathogenic  bacteria  can 
achieve this, then why Lactobacillus, an important component 
of  vaginal  colonization,  can  not  do  it? Clinical  studies  have 
demonstrated  that  oral  administration  of  Lactobacillus  can 
demonstrate  its  effects  after  reaching  the  vagina. In these studies the authors reported that probiotic 
capsules administered orally may regulate the vaginal flora and 
may be effective on recurrent UTIs. It has also been emphasized 
that oral probiotics may be more comfortable for patients than 
for  vaginal  administration,  and  that  patient  compliance  with 
treatment may be better..

probiotic chain was shown to be safe and effective in preventing 
recurrent UTIs in adult women (Table 3). In 
conclusion, they found evidence that Lactobacillus species (par-
ticularly L. rhamnosus GR-1 and L. reuteri) may be useful in the 
prevention and treatment of recurrent UTIs. In  a  double-blind 
study, Beerepoot et al.demonstrated that supplementation with 
480  mg  L.  rhamnosus  GR-1  and  L.  reuteri  RC-14  significantly 
though incompletely decreased the mean number of recurrences 
in  patients  with  uncomplicated  UTI  relative  to  the  control. In  a  recent 
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2 study, Stapleton et al. investigated 100 premenopausal women who had undergone cys-
titis at least once within the last 12 months . These patients were 
divided into two groups and for 10 weeks following an episode 
of cystitis placebo treatment was given to 48 patients, and other 
48  patients  received  intravaginal  probiotics  (Lactin-V)  contain-
ing  Lactobacillus  crispatus    The  results  of  this 
study showed that the incidence of recurrent UTIs in patients who 
received  intravaginal  Lactobacillus  treatment  decreased  signifi-
cantly compared to the placebo group. . Recurrence rate was 73% in 
25 patients who received once 
weekly doses of vaginal ovules 
containing L. rhamnosus 
GR-1 ve L.reuteri B-54; 
79% decrease was observed 
in recurrence rates in 30 
patients who received once 
weekly doses of intravaginal 
lactobacillus growth factor . Vaginal, >1.6x109 
CFU/L. rhamnosus 
GR-1 and 
L.fermentum B-54. These  combinations  have  been 
applied with different microorganism strains and different routes of 
administration (vaginal, oral) and effective results have been report-
ed.administered 
a combination of 120 mg cranberry, 109/CFU L. rhamnosus SGL 06 
and 75 mg vitamin C for 3 months in female patients with recurrent 
UTI. In the 3rd and 6th month controls, the response rates to treat-
ment were 72.2% and 61.1%, respectively. Researchers noted that 
the combination was well tolerated and effective.