13_PARAGRAPHS

The aim of the present study was to utilize Illumina
sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene and inferred meta-
genomics by open source software PICRUSt (Phyloge-
netic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of
Unobserved States [61]) to investigate differences in
microbiome composition and function in the fecal and
colonic mucosa of mice treated with 5% DSS for 5 days.
We demonstrated that oral administration of DSS in
C57Bl/6 mice signiﬁcantly decreased bacterial species
richness and shifted bacterial community composition.
Speciﬁc taxa were associated with DSS treatment that
may be important as intervention targets against the
disease.
In addition, DSS largely altered microbial
activities and their functional pathways.

DNA extraction and quality control
Approximately 200 mg of each fecal sample was used
for DNA extraction using ZR fecal DNA extraction kit
(Zymo Research Corp., Irvine, CA, USA). For colonic
samples, the tissue was cut open and approximately
50 mg of mucosa scrapings were taken. DNA extraction
from colonic mucosa samples was done using ZR Tissue
and Insect DNA kit (Zymo Research Corp.). Both DNA
extraction kits included a bead-beating step for the
mechanical lysis of microbial cells. DNA was quantiﬁed
using a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo
Scientiﬁc, Wilmington, DE, USA). DNA samples were
normalized to 20 ng/ml, and quality checked by PCR
ampliﬁcation of the 16S rRNA gene using universal
(50-GAAGAGTTTGATCATGGCTCAG-30)
primers
and 342R (50-CTGCTGCCTCCCGTAG-30) as described by
Khaﬁpour et al. [47]. Amplicons were veriﬁed by agarose
gel electrophoresis.

Alpha- and beta-diversity analyses
Within community diversity (a-diversity) was calculated
by different indices of species richness and evenness
such as Observed Number of Species, Chao1, ACE
(abundance-based coverage estimators), Shannon, Simp-
son, InvSimpson, and Fisher using the open source R
software. An even depth of 21,000 and 14,500 sequences
per sample for fecal and colon mucosa samples,
respectively, was used for the calculation of diversity
indices. Beta-diversity was measured by calculating
the weighted UniFrac distances using QIIME default
scripts [58]. Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) was
applied on resulting distance matrices to generate two-
dimensional plots using the open source R software
(v. 3.1.0) and the p values were calculated using
PERMANOVA analyses of Bray–Curtis distances [59].
Differences in alpha-diversity between DSS and control
were determined using SAS (SAS 9.3, 2012). One colon sample in the control group was lost during DNA
extraction and, therefore, only samples from three mice
were included for all colon microbial analysis.

Beta-diversity in fecal and colon samples
As shown by the PCoA of weighted UniFrac distances,
fecal samples clustered separately according to treat-
ment group, suggesting that DSS and control samples
were composed of distinct bacterial communities
(p ¼ 0.007; Fig. 3a). Although clustered separately for a
large portion of communities, the colonic MAM still had
an overlap of some bacterial communities, suggesting
that DSS and control mice colon mucosa samples had
shared bacterial communities (p ¼ 0.2; Fig. 3b).

Figure 3. Principle coordinate analysis (PCoA) of weighted UniFrac distances, a measure of b-diversity of bacterial community. (a) Fecal
samples clustered separately according to treatment status of the mice, suggesting that DSS and control mice samples are composed of
distinct bacterial communities; (b) colon mucosa samples have shared bacterial communities. The p values were determined using
PERMANOVA. DSS, dextran sulphate sodium.

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim www.jbm-journal.com J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13 at the genus (g.) level, some were only classiﬁed at the
phylum (p.), class (c.), order (o.), or family (f.). Of the
11 phyla, six were abundant ((cid:5)1% of community),
including Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria,
Deferribacteres, Tenericutes, and Verrucomicrobia.
The low-abundance phyla (<1% of community),
in-
cluded Actinobacteria, Cyanobacteria, Fibrobacteres,
Spirochaetes, and TM7. Among the abundant phyla,
DSS treatment reduced Bacteroidetes (P ¼ 0.01) while
Proteobacteria were increased (p ¼ 0.004) compared
to the control. Results of the relative abundances of
various phyla are summarized in Fig. 4a.

Of the 86 taxa, 56 had abundance greater than or equal
to 0.01% of community, whereas 30 were below 0.01%.
Bacterial taxa with relative abundance of (cid:5)0.01% of
community were analysed using PLS-DA to identify
bacteria that were most characteristic of the DSS or
control treatments. As shown in Fig. 5a, Bacteroides
ovatus, Clostridium perfrigens, Helicobacter hepaticus, and
Parabacteroides distasonis; g. Desulfovibrio, Escherichia,
Helicobacter, Clostridium,
Parabacteroides,
Bacilli, Allobaculum, Coprobacillus, Bacteroides, rc4-4; and
unclassiﬁed members of f. Enterobacteriaceae, Clostri-
diaceae, Bacteroidaceae; o. RF39, RF32, Bacteroidales,
and Erysipelotrichales were positively correlated with
the DSS group but negatively correlated with the
control group. In addition, g. Dessulfovibrio, Oscillospira,
Odoribacter, Coprococcus, Dehalobacterium, Adlercreutzia,
Lactobacillus, Prevotella, Biﬁdobacterium; unclassiﬁed mem-
f. Lachnospiraceae, Lactobacillaceae, S24-7;
bers of Turicibacter, Dextran sulfate sodium and mice gut microbiota 7 and o. Lactobacillales were positively associated with
the control group but negatively associated with the DSS
group.

Microbiota composition at the phylum and lower
taxonomic levels in colonic mucosa samples
A total of 199,057 sequences were generated after quality
ﬁltering steps with an average of 24,882 high-quality
sequences per sample, which resulted in identiﬁcation
of 14 phyla and 151 taxa. Of the 14 phyla, ﬁve were
abundant ((cid:5)1% of community), including Firmicutes,
Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Deferribacteres,
and
Verrucomicrobia. The low-abundance phyla (<1% of
included Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria,
community),
Cyanobacteria, Fibrobacteres, Lentisphaerae, Planctomy-
cetes, Spirochaetes, TM7, and Tenericutes. No signiﬁcant
difference was observed among the abundant phyla
between DSS and control mice (p > 0.05). Results of the
relative abundances of various phyla are summarized
in Fig. 4b.

Of the 151 taxa, 68 had abundances greater than
or equal to 0.01% of community, whereas 83 were
below 0.01% of community. Bacterial taxa with relative
abundance of (cid:5)0.01% of community were analysed
using PLS-DA to identify bacteria that were most
characteristic of DSS or control treatments. As shown
in Fig. 5b, Lactobacillus reuteri, Bacteroides ovatus; g. rc4-4,
Rikenellaceae, Biﬁdobacterium, YS2, Clostridium; f. Bacter-
oidaceae, Clostridiaceae; o. RF32, RF39, Bacteroidales,
Clostridales; and p. Proteobacteria were positively Figure 4. Percentage of relative abundances of bacterial phyla for: (a) fecal samples and (b) colon mucosa samples. The DSS signiﬁcantly
decreased Bacteroidetes and increased Proteobacteria in fecal samples but no signiﬁcant difference was observed in the colonic mucosa
samples. DSS, dextran sulphate sodium.

Discussion The indigenous gut microbiota are thought to play a key
role in the pathogenesis of IBD. Part of the evidence for
the involvement of intestinal bacteria in IBD comes from
studies with murine models of the disease supporting
the hypothesis that a deregulated immune response against components of the intestinal microbiota is
critically involved in the pathophysiology of IBD [11].
This is supported by the fact that antibiotic administra-
tion reduces the severity of disease in these models
and rederivation of the mice to the germfree state
prevents initiation of disease [63, 64]. Conversely,
some germfree mice have been shown to have a high
mortality rate when given DSS in drinking water as
compared to conventional mice [63], suggesting that
different subsets of normal microbiota may play
certain roles in terms of the initiation, development
or attenuation of disease.

colitis and may reveal bacterial shifts at lower taxonomic
levels that could otherwise be missed. In this regard, it
was worth noting that more taxa were signiﬁcantly
associated with the DSS treatment in fecal samples
compared to the colonic samples; however, several
taxa including: Bacteroides ovatus, g. Clostridium, rc4-4;
f. Clostridiaceae, Bacteroidaceae; and o. Bacteroidales,
RF39, and RF32 were positively associated with the DSS
treatment in both fecal and colonic mucosa samples.
Some of these taxa have been reported to increase
as a result of DSS [33], and although they may have
different roles, their association with DSS in both colonic
mucosa and in feces may indicate that they may play
signiﬁcant roles in the potentiation of the abnormal
inﬂammatory response seen in DSS-treated animals, and
could therefore be important as intervention targets
against the disease. Lending support to these results,
Berry et al. [33] also found that the overall abundances of
the dominant phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes were
not affected by DSS treatment in mice, but taxa within
the two phyla showed clear changes in abundance with
respect to DSS treatment.

The mechanisms by which DSS induced stronger
bacterial shifts in the feces than in the colon mucosa are not fully understood. A similar observation has
also been reported in IBD subjects whereby, changes in
microbiome composition were more associated with
the sample origin (stool or biopsy), and minor changes
were observed in biopsy samples as opposed to stool
samples [31]. It is possible that because DSS-induced
colitis interferes directly with the intestinal epithelium
and its barrier function as well as causing crypt
damage [6, 22, 46, 81], this may lead to sloughing of
mucosal epithelium, thereby decreasing the number of
bacteria adhering to the mucosa, and consequently
increasing the abundances of bacteria in the fecal
matter.

Studies applying metagenomics, metatranscriptomics
or metaproteomics investigating functional capacities of
gut microbiota in humans [30, 31], and in mouse model
of colitis [33], reported alterations in metabolic pathways
that might affect host-microbiota interactions. These
ﬁndings are in agreement with our results whereby,
several alterations in microbial metabolic pathways in
both the colon mucosa and fecal samples were observed.
Given that the microbial analysis of diversity, commu-
nity composition and also changes at phylum level for
colonic samples did not show any signiﬁcant difference
between the DSS and control mice, the results suggest
that analysis at microbial functional level might reveal
important colitis-related changes in gut microbiome
that are otherwise not noticeable at higher phylogenetic
or community levels