9_PARAGRAPHS

Brief Reviews   e
Th Journal of Immunology The Impact of Maternal Microbes and Microbial
Colonization in Early Life on Hematopoiesis Downloaded from  http://www.jimmunol.org/  by guest on June 25, 2020 function of the immune system at distal tissues, including
primary lymphoid organs, such as the bone marrow (BM) and
thymus. In this capacity,
intestinal microbes can regulate
immune function via effects on the differentiation of hema-
topoietic progenitor cells. Not only can these processes alter the
type of leukocytes produced and released from the BM, some
microbial signals may even act at the epigenetic level, thereby
inducing semipermanent changes in individual lineages. Un-
derstanding the timing and the mechanisms by which the
microbiome can inﬂuence hematopoiesis is required for ra-
tional development of novel strategies to harness the power of
the microbiome to treat and prevent disease. In this review, we
discuss how hematopoiesis in the BM is shaped by microbial
signals during neonatal life and adulthood and following in-
fection and highlight our current knowledge of the molecular
processes involved.

Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Kathy D. McCoy, University of
Calgary, Health Sciences Centre, Room 1883, 3330 Hospital Drive N.W., Calgary, AB
T2N 4N1, Canada. E-mail address: kathy.mccoy@ucalgary.ca www.jimmunol.org/cgi/doi/10.4049/jimmunol.1701776 Downloaded from  http://www.jimmunol.org/  by guest on June 25, 2020 2520 BRIEF REVIEWS: MICROBIAL IMPACT ON HEMATOPOIESIS within this time frame. Not only can changes to the micro-
biome inﬂuence susceptibility to infections and sepsis, nu-
merous studies have revealed critical links between early life
dysbiosis (deﬁned as changes in the normal composition of
the microbiota) and a broad range of metabolomic, immu-
nological, and behavioral disorders in adulthood, including
asthma, allergy, inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD), type 1
diabetes, autism, and obesity (1, 4). Many factors, including
diet, antibiotic exposure, genotype, and method of delivery
(vaginal versus caesarean), are known to shape the developing
microbiome (1), and it is of crucial importance that we un-
derstand how these factors subsequently impact the develop-
ing immune system.

The ﬁrst few hours of life are normally associated with a rapid
increase in neutrophils in the BM and circulation of humans and
mice (4, 11). In mice, this neutrophilia is dependent on the
presence of an intact maternal microbiota and is ablated by
treatment of the pregnant dam from 5 d before birth with a
combination of ampicillin, gentamicin, and vancomycin (4). In
antibiotic-treated pups, aberrant neutrophil development could
be detected from as early as 1 d of age and was associated with
loss of IL-17A production by innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) in
the small intestinal lamina propria of the pups, together with
signiﬁcantly reduced levels of circulating G-CSF. As a result, these pups rapidly succumbed to experimental infection with
Escherichia coli or Klebsiella pneumoniae. The deleterious effects
of antibiotics could be reversed by treating mice with G-CSF or
by adoptive transfer of microbiota from normal neonatal mice.
This process was dependent on intact IL-17A signaling, high-
lighting a potential role for the IL-17A/G-CSF axis in medi-
ating the effects of the microbiota on neutrophil production in
the BM. It is important to emphasize that the antibiotic-
mediated effects in this model must reﬂect vertical transfer
from the mother to the pup, because the treatment was started
during pregnancy and discontinued prior to weaning. These
studies indicate that caution needs to be applied when con-
sidering the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics during labor or
the perinatal period and perhaps suggest potential beneﬁts of
coadministering probiotics under these circumstances.

In the experiments above, the effects of antibiotics could
reﬂect an inﬂuence on the microbiota of the mother, the
neonate, or both. To assess the impact of the maternal
microbiota alone, without any inﬂuence from microbial col-
onization of the pups after birth, Gomez de Ag€uero et al. (20)
transiently colonized germ-free dams during gestation with an
auxotrophic mutant strain of E. coli, termed HA107. This
model allows microbial colonization to occur only during
pregnancy so that the dam becomes germ-free again prior to
giving birth to her germ-free pups. This study revealed that
maternal Ab-mediated vertical transfer of maternal microbial
components vastly altered gene expression in the intestine of The Journal of Immunology 2521 Downloaded from  http://www.jimmunol.org/  by guest on June 25, 2020 FIGURE 1. Microbial signals in early life shape the repertoire of immune cell development in the BM. A child’s immune system can be modulated by microbial
signals at various stages in development. Microbial metabolites, such as SCFAs, and Abs carrying microbial molecules can pass from mother to fetus during gestation
(A) or from mother to child via breast milk (B). This has been shown to impact the immune cell repertoire in the intestine and may affect susceptibil-
ity to intestinal pathogens. (B and C) From birth onward, children are exposed to microbes in the environment (i), which
(Figure legend continues) Downloaded from  http://www.jimmunol.org/  by guest on June 25, 2020 2522 BRIEF REVIEWS: MICROBIAL IMPACT ON HEMATOPOIESIS the pups and was responsible for more intestinal ILC3 pop-
ulations (20). Gestational colonization was also responsible
for increased numbers of intestinal macrophages, although
Ab-mediated transfer was not involved in mediating this
phenotype. These data highlight a novel pathway whereby the
maternal microbiome inﬂuences the neonatal immune system.
Although no changes were observed in B cell development in
the neonatal BM, a general effect on BM hematopoiesis was
not assessed. One intriguing possibility that may account for
some of the changes in the neonatal immune system in re-
sponse to maternal colonization is raised by older studies il-
lustrating the presence of maternally derived hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) and other hematopoietic progenitor cells in
cord blood (21), from where they may seed the BM of the
developing fetus. Because these cell types can be regulated by
the host microbiome, dysbiosis in the mother could potentially
have indirect effects on the developing neonatal BM in utero by
altering the behavior of these maternally derived progenitors.
Postnatal maturation of the innate and adaptive immune
is driven by signals arising from the intestinal
systems
microbiota. Current work supports the presence of a critical
developmental window early in life when the immune system is
highly susceptible to microbial inﬂuence (22). In humans, this
window may encompass the ﬁrst 3 y of a child’s life and marks
a period of intense variability in the microbiome. If the
normal processes of establishing a microbiota are disrupted
during this period, it may have life-long consequences for the
host, leading to increased susceptibility to a number of dis-
orders, including autoimmune diseases, IBD, asthma, allergy,
obesity, and autism. Although multiple pathways are likely to
be involved, it is possible that alterations in hematopoiesis in
the developing BM or other tissues may result from decreased
or altered microbial signals. Recent work shows that the dif-
ferentiation fate of an HSC clone down a particular lineage is
predetermined by epigenetic modiﬁcations that are thought to
arise early during its development (23). This begs the ques-
tion: could early life exposure to microbes generate epigenetic
memory in the BM that has a life-long impact on host immune
responses, subsequently inﬂuencing the risk for immune-mediated
pathologies? Although not yet shown for cells in the neonatal
BM, microbial-mediated epigenetic regulation of the che-
mokine ligand CXCL16 has been identiﬁed in lung and colon
tissues (24). In that study, microbial colonization during
neonatal life was shown to be required to limit accumulation
of invariant NK T cells in the lung and colon, and this effect
was mediated through microbiota-mediated epigenetic regu-
lation of CXCL16 (24).

Exposure to microbes in early life is known to have an impact
on primary B cell development that occurs in hindgut B cell
structures in animals like the chicken and rabbit (reviewed in
Ref. 25). Whether early B cell development can occur in the
intestines of humans is not clear, although pre-B cells have
been found in the human fetal small intestinal lamina propria (26). In mice, although early B cells that express RAGs are
absent from the small intestine at birth, they are found to
accumulate in the gut mucosa at weaning, coincident with
increasing microbial colonization in early life (27). This
suggests that microbes (and potentially dietary Ags) may play
an important role in shaping the primary Ab repertoire in
early life (28), and this may occur outside of the BM.

Although the factors mediating emergency myelopoiesis
have been characterized in some detail (see below), the reg-
ulation of steady-state hematopoiesis by the normal microbiota
remains less well understood. Nevertheless, recognition of
microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) is likely to be
important; indeed, intestinal colonization of germ-free mice
with a combination of E. coli, Staphylococcus xylosus, and
Enterococcus faecalis stimulates myelopoiesis in a MyD88 and
TRIF–dependent manner (31). Although it was unclear what
cell types mediated this response, one possibility is that it
reﬂects regulation of secondary mediator production by in-
testinal enterocytes stimulated by MAMPs from the com-
mensal bacteria. This would be consistent with experiments
showing that epithelial cell–derived CXCL5 can regulate the leads to establishment of a diverse microbiota in the intestine. (ii) The host immune system responds to this intestinal colonization, leading to the local and/or systemic
production of growth factors, cytokines, and chemokines. Microbial components, such as SCFAs and MAMPs, including LPS and peptidoglycan (PGN), can also
enter the circulation from intestinal lumen. Collectively, these factors can access distal sites, such as the BM, where they may regulate the proliferation and differ-
entiation of LSK HSCs, LSK multipotent progenitors, and their descendants (iii), thus shaping commitment to speciﬁc immune cell lineages (iv). These effects of
hematopoiesis have functional consequences on host immune responses, reducing susceptibility to intestinal pathogens and modulating inﬂammatory responses, such as
to allergic airway challenge. Future work will unravel the impact that microbe-driven effects on BM homeostasis have on other tissues or immunopathologies.

Downloaded from  http://www.jimmunol.org/  by guest on June 25, 2020 The Journal of Immunology 2523 levels of circulating G-CSF and neutrophil numbers in the
BM by controlling the production of IL-17A from ILCs in
the intestine (38).

2 Neutrophil release from the BM is dependent on G-CSF
produced by vascular endothelial cells in response to TLR
ligation. G-CSF stimulates neutrophil release from the BM via
a two-pronged approach. By triggering a downregulation of
CXCL12, a surface-bound chemokine expressed by BM
stromal cells, and by activating neutrophil proteases, G-CSF
breaks the chemokine ligand–receptor bond that usually re-
tains neutrophils within the BM niche (53, 54). Further,
G-CSF triggers the release of the neutrophil chemoattractants
CXCL1 and CXCL2 from vascular endothelial cells (55). By
binding to CXCR2 on neutrophils, these chemokines recruit
newly differentiated neutrophils to the bloodstream. A similar
process of CXCL12 regulation by the monocyte chemokine
receptor CCR2 has been proposed to regulate monocyte
egress from the BM under inﬂammatory conditions (56).
Activation of CCR2 by its cognate ligand CCL2 down-
regulates CXCR4 expression by BM monocytes, releasing
them from the BM niche. Although CCL2 was previously
assumed to come from the inﬂamed tissues, a recent article by Downloaded from  http://www.jimmunol.org/  by guest on June 25, 2020 2524 BRIEF REVIEWS: MICROBIAL IMPACT ON HEMATOPOIESIS Jung et al. (57) shows that preformed CCL2 is stored in the
vesicles of stromal cells within the BM itself, from where it is
rapidly released after TLR4 ligation.

In addition to these effects in adults, it is becoming in-
creasingly clear that early life is a particularly critical period
during which disruption of normal microbial colonization can
have life-long effects on immune function. There is also
emerging evidence that exposure of the mother to microbial
signals during gestation or in the postnatal period can alter
immune responses in infants. Whether this is a downstream
consequence of altered BM hematopoiesis in the offspring
remains unclear but certainly warrants further study. Elucidating Downloaded from  http://www.jimmunol.org/  by guest on June 25, 2020 The Journal of Immunology 2525 the processes that allow the microbiota to shape immune
function early in life could provide a missing link in our
understanding of how immunopathologies develop and has
important implications for the use of antibiotics and dietary
manipulation in children and pregnant women