16_PARAGRAPHS

Materials and methods
Diets and animals Male Kunming mice were obtained from Shanghai Slac Labo-
ratory Animal, Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China), which were kept in
an environmentally controlled breeding room (temperature:
23 (cid:2) 2 (cid:3)C, humidity: 60 (cid:2) 5%, 12 hour light–dark cycle) and fed
(cid:4)1, 10% calories in fat) or
a normal diet (total calories 3.25 kcal g
(cid:4)1, 50% calories in
a high-fat diet (HF) (total calories 3.68 kcal g
fat), or a high-fat diet supplemented with resveratrol (HF-RES)
(n ¼ 8) at a concentration of 200 mg per kg per day for 12
weeks.19 Resveratrol (>99%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(China) and mixed to homogeneity during preparation of the
diets. The study was carried out in strict accordance with the
recommendations of the Guide for the Care and Use of Labo-
ratory Animals of
the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee of Jiangnan University. Mice were killed by cervical
dislocation aer a 6 h period of fasting. The ileum, liver, and
visceral adipose tissues were dissected, immersed in liquid
nitrogen and stored at (cid:4)80 (cid:3)C. The colonic contents were
collected for further analysis.

Biochemical analysis
Aer a 6 h fasting period, blood samples were collected and
were isolated by centrifugation at 1500 (cid:5) g at 4 (cid:3)C for 10 min.
Blood glucose and insulin were assayed using commercial kits
(Jingmei BioTech Co. Ltd, Shenzhen, China). Blood glucose was
estimated by the glucose oxidase method.20 Concentrations of
total cholesterol (TC), triglycerides, high density lipoprotein
cholesterol (HDL-C), and low density lipoprotein cholesterol
(LDL-C) in serum were determined by enzymatic colorimetric
methods using commercial kits (Shanghai Rongsheng Biotech
Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China).

The group- or genus-specic oligonucleotide probes targeted
the bacterial 16S rRNA, including the Bacteroides–Prevotella
group (Bac303, 50-CCAATGTGGGGGACCTT), the Clostridium
I & II group (Chis150, 50-TTATGCGGTATTAATC-
cluster
the Enterobacteriaceae group (Enter1432, 50-
TYCCTTT),
the Lactobacillus group (Lab158, 50-
GTTTTGCAACCCACT),
GGTATTAGCA(C/T)CTGTTTCCA), the Eubacterium rectale group
(Mib724, 50-GCTTCTTAGTCARGTACCG), the Atopobium group
(Ato291, 50-GGTCGGTCTCTCAACCC), the Bidobacterium group
(Bif164, 50-CATCCGGCATTACCACCC), the Enterococcus faecalis
(Enf191, 50-GAAAGCGCCTTTCACTCTTATGC), and the Clos-
tridium coccoides–Eubacterium rectale cluster group (Erec482, 50-
GCTTCTTAGTCA- GGTACCG) were used for enumeration of
dominant members of the gut microbiota. The EUB338 probe
used to determine total counts was labeled with uorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC), while the group- or genus-specic probes
were labeled at the 50-end with indocyanine (Cy3; Sangon
Biotech, Shanghai, China).

(cid:4)1 Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 5 mmol l Histology Randomly selected epididymal fat and liver tissues obtained from
mice were washed with PBS and xed in 4% formaldehyde for 1 h
at 4 (cid:3)C. Paraﬃn-embedded epididymal fat tissue was sectioned at
3–5 mm thickness and stained with hematoxylin–eosin (HE).
Ornithine carbamoyl-transferase frozen liver tissue was sectioned
at 3–5 mm thickness and stained with oil red O. Histological
assessment of the tissue morphology was performed using an
Olympus light microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).

RNA preparation and real-time qPCR analysis Total RNA was prepared from tissues using TRIzol® (Biomiga)
and treated with DNAse, according to a previously described 1242 | Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014 Published on 01 April 2014. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. View Article OnlinePaper Food & Function Table 1 Gene-speciﬁc primers used in qRT-PCR assaysa Gene name Abbreviation Primer sequences (50–30) Amplicon size (bp) Fasting-induced adipose factor Lipoprotein lipase Cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 Peroxisome proliferator activated
receptor g
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 Fatty acid synthase a F, forward; R, reverse.

Fiaf Lpl Cyp7a1 Scd1 Ppar-g Acc1 Fas F: CAATGCCAAATTGCTCCAATT,
R: TGGCCGTGGGCTCAGT
F: ACTGCCACTTCAACCACAG,
R:CCCAATACTTCGACCAGG
F: CTAAGGAGGATTTCACTTGC, R:
ACTGGTCCAAAGGTGGACAT
F: AGGCTTCTGGGCCTTATGTG, R:
TGCTTCTCTCGCCAGGAATAC
F: ATGTCTCACAATGCCATCAGGTT,
R: GCTCGCAGATCAGCAGACTCT
F: AAGTCCTTGGTCGGGAAGTATACA,
R: ACTCCCTCAAAGTCATCACAAACA
F: TGGTGAATTGTCTCCGAAAAGA,
R: CACGTTCATCACGAGGTCATG 82 361 350 128 116 126 149 method.24 The total RNA was reverse transcribed (RT) and PCR
amplied using the AccuPower® Greenstar qPCR kit (Bioneer).
QRT-PCR assays were performed for each 10 ml reaction con-
taining cDNA corresponding to 1 ng of total RNA and 900 nM
gene-specic primers (Table 1) with the following parameters: 1
cycle of 95 (cid:3)C for 5 min; 45 cycles of 95 (cid:3)C for 20 s, 60 (cid:3)C for 30 s
and 72 (cid:3)C for 20 s; and 1 cycle of 72 (cid:3)C for 5 min. b-Actin was
chosen as the housekeeping gene. Each assay was performed in
duplicate in the same run. All assays were performed in tripli-
cate with an ABI PRISM 7900HT Sequence Detection System
(Applied Biosystems). Gene expression was calculated as DCT
using b-actin as a reference, and was expressed relative to the
control group normalised to a value of 1.

Eﬀect of high-fat diet and RES on the composition of gut
microbiota FISH analysis, as a quantitative molecular-based technique, was
applied to assess the microbiota composition. The relative
abundance of the major bacterial groups indicated that, even
when considering a degree of interindividual variation, the HF
diet induced the gut microbiota dysbiosis (Fig. 2A). The results
of principal coordinate analysis showed that HF microbiomes
were clearly diﬀerent from those in CT and HF-RES mice
(Fig. 2B). Moreover, the principal coordinate analysis scores plot
in Fig. 2B supports the presence of overlapping clusters between
HF-RES and CT groups, which illustrated the relative similarity
of CT and RES treated mice in microbiotal proles. Lactobacillus
was reduced by 1.8-fold in HF mice and Bidobacterium was
decreased by 1.9-fold, whereas Enterococcus
faecalis was
increased by 1.8-fold in the HF group compared with CT mice
(Fig. 2C). Aer RES treatment, Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium
were signicantly increased, whereas Enterococcus faecalis was
signicantly decreased to that of control levels (Fig. 2C). In This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014 Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249 | 1243 Published on 01 April 2014. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. View Article OnlineFood & Function Paper Fig. 1 Phenotypes of mice groups fed on diﬀerent diets. (A) Average body weight, (B) liver weight (percentage of body weight) and (C) visceral
and subcutaneous adipose tissue weight (percentage of body weight). Values are means with their standard errors (n ¼ 8). Mean values were
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF
group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES.

Relationship between body weight and gut microbiota The correlations between body weight and the colonic bacterial
content were calculated (Fig. 3). Body weight was positively and
signicantly correlated with Enterococcus faecalis (P < 0.05)
(Fig. 3C), and body weight was negatively correlated with
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium (Fig. 3A and B). In addition, a
negative correlation was found between the body weight and the
ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes (r ¼ (cid:4)0.805, P ¼ 0.002)
(Fig. 3D).

The suppressive eﬀect of RES on Fiaf expression in the
intestine
Fiaf expression was signicantly decreased by 2.1-fold in the
intestines of HF mice compared with normal controls, and Lpl
(lipoprotein lipase) expression was signicantly increased by
1.9-fold (Fig. 4A and B). However, aer RES treatment, Fiaf
expression in the intestines of HF mice was signicantly
increased and even higher than the CT group, but had no
signicant change. Moreover, Lpl expression showed decreasing
tendency in HF-RES mice compared with normal controls, and
had a signicant change (Fig. 4A and B).

Gut microbes, as environmental factors, may regulate fat
storage and aﬀect energy metabolism homeostasis, by acceler-
ation of the processing of dietary polysaccharides and induction
of de novo lipogenesis.6,28 In the present study, both the relative
abundance of the major bacterial divisions and principal coor-
dinate analysis showed that, the HF diet induced the gut
microbiota dysbiosis. These ndings are in line with Cani et al.,29
who found that the high-fat diet disrupted gut microbiota by
promoting the growth of endotoxin producers. Resveratrol
treatment signicantly improved the gut microbiota dysbiosis
induced by the HF diet (Fig. 2A and B). Few studies have inves-
tigated the eﬀect of dietary resveratrol on the complex gut
microbiota, and they focused mainly on selected bacterial pop-
ulations. In addition, there was a decrease in the Lactobacillus
and Bidobacterium frequencies and an increase of Enterococcus
faecalis in HF mice compared with CT mice, which agree with
our previous studies that a high-fat diet signicantly decreases
the number of Lactobacillus and increases the number of
Enterococcus faecalis.30 Aer resveratrol intake, the numbers of
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium were signicantly increased. In
contrast, Enterococcus faecalis, an important, multidrug-resistant
nosocomial pathogen, was signicantly decreased in HF-RES
mice. Similar results were reported by Larrosa et al.,31 who
observed that the increase of Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium
counts in feces of the DSS-Res group became signicantly
increased aer 20 days of resveratrol intake.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014 Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249 | 1245 Published on 01 April 2014. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. View Article OnlineFood & Function Paper Fig. 3 Correlation between the body weight and the colonic bacterial content of (A) the Lactobacillus group, (B) the Biﬁdobacterium group, (C)
Enterococcus faecalis, and (D) the ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes. Mice were fed either a control diet (CT) or a high-fat diet (HF), or a high-
fat diet supplemented with resveratrol (HF-RES). Bacterial quantities are expressed as relative abundance (%). Body weight values (g) are pre-
sented as means (n ¼ 8 animals per group), with standard errors represented by vertical bars.

and the Bacteroides phylum. These ndings are consistent with
previous studies. For instance, Vendrame et al.39 described that
wild blueberries, a rich source of polyphenols, signicantly
increased the number of Bidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus
acidophilus, and Neyrinck et al.40 demonstrated that a poly-
phenol-rich extract of pomegranate peel increased the caecal
content weight and caecal pool of Bidobacteria spp. and
Lactobacillus spp. The antimicrobial activity of resveratrol could
not explain these results. Therefore,
there are additional
mechanisms, by which resveratrol mediates the composition of
gut microbiota, which should be further elucidated.

Conventionalization of adult GF mice with a normal micro-
biota (CONV-D mice) produces a 60% increase in the body fat
content accompanied by increased Fiaf mRNA expression
within 14 days. Aer knockout of the Fiaf gene, the increased
total body fat content of CONV-D mice markedly attenuates.8 By
analysis of GF and conventionalized, normal and Fiaf knockout
mice, Backhed et al.8 showed that Fiaf is a circulating lipopro-
tein lipase inhibitor and that its suppression is essential for the
microbiota-induced deposition of triglycerides in adipocytes. In
our study, HF diet inhibited the mRNA expression of Fiaf in
the intestine. Conversely, resveratrol signicantly promoted
the expression of Fiaf in the intestines of HF mice, which may
be associated with the prebiotic eﬀect of resveratrol on the
microbiota. The increased Fiaf expression enhances energy
metabolism by inhibiting LPL in the intestine and liver, which
is a key regulator of fatty acid release from triglyceride rich
lipoproteins in the muscles and heart.41 Decreased adipocyte
LPL activity leads to decreased cellular uptake of fatty acids and Fig. 4 Eﬀects of high-fat diet and RES supplementation on Fiaf (A) and
Lpl (B) mRNA expressions in ileum tissue (n ¼ 6 per group). Each
sample was assayed in triplicate; values are means, with their standard
errors represented by vertical bars; mean values were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean
values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF
group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-
fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES.

activity, exerting their inhibitory eﬀect on certain bacterial
groups by binding to bacterial membranes.35,36 Diﬀerences in
cell surface structures could explain why Gram-positive bacteria
are more sensitive to the bactericidal eﬀects of
these
compounds than are Gram-negative species.37 On one hand, in
our study, resveratrol has an inhibitory eﬀect on the growth of
these bacteria, which includes Enterococcus faecalis and the
Enterobacteriaceae group—an important pathogen closely
related to obesity and insulin resistance on a high-fat diet but
not on a normal chow diet.38 However, on the other hand, this
study showed that resveratrol intake positively aﬀected the
growth of the Lactobacillus group, the Bidobacterium group, 1246 | Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014 Published on 01 April 2014. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. View Article OnlinePaper Food & Function Fig. 5 Eﬀects of high-fat diet and RES supplementation on lipogenesis in visceral livers. (A) Oil red O stains of paraformaldehyde-ﬁxed liver
sections prepared from CT, HF, and HF-RES mice (bars: 100 mm). qRT-PCR assays of liver RNAs reveal signiﬁcant changes in the expression of
mediators or biomarkers of lipogenesis, such as LPL (B), Cyp7a1 (C), and Scd1 (D). Each relative mRNA expression was determined by the ratio of
intensity to b-actin production. Values are means, with their standard errors represented by vertical bars (n ¼ 6). Mean values were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF group: † P <
0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES.

Fig. 6 Eﬀects of high-fat diet and RES supplementation on adipocyte hypertrophy through the PPAR signaling pathway in OP mice. (A) The
corresponding hematoxylin- and eosin-stained epididymal fat sections are shown. (B) qRT-PCR assays for gene expression of the PPAR signaling
pathway in epididymal fat pads. Values are means, with their standard errors represented by vertical bars (n ¼ 6). Mean values were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF group: † P <
0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES.

adipocyte triglyceride accumulation. The stearoyl-CoA desatur-
ase 1 (Scd1) gene is involved in the synthesis and regulation of
unsaturated fatty acids from saturated fatty acids.42 The Cyp7a1
gene encodes the enzyme cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase, which
catalyzes the initial step in cholesterol catabolism subsequent to the induction of SREBP-1 and lipogenesis.43 In the liver
tissue, resveratrol promoted the expression of Cyp7a1 and
normalized Scd1 expression to that of the control level, sug-
gesting that resveratrol mainly enhances energy metabolism
through the fatty acid and cholesterol catabolism pathways