17_PARAGRAPHS

Ananthakrishnan
 
  Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020 FIGURE 1.  Conceptual framework for incorporation of microbiome-based biomarkers in the management of IBD.

Tools for Microbiome Sequencing There are several recent reviews on sequencing and anal-
ysis  of  the  microbiome,  although  a  full  discussion  of  these 
methods  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  review.28-31  In  brief,  com-
monly  used  methods  to  study  the  microbiome  use  either 
amplicon sequencing methods that analyze the partial genome 
or whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing. Amplicon 
sequencing methods profile segments of the bacterial genome, 
typically the hypervariable regions of the highly conserved 16s 
ribosomal RNA gene. Such profiling can reveal segments (oper-
ational taxonomic units [OTUs]) that are common to a specific 
taxon. A limitation of this method is that closely related bacte-
rial families may share 99% of the hypervariable region, thereby 
precluding  identification  of  individual  species  and  strains. 
A  second  commonly  used  microbial  sequencing  method  relies 
on shotgun metagenomic sequencing, which is high-throughput 
sequencing of the entire bacterial genome. Through profiling the 
entire genome, this method allows for resolution at the species 
and  even  strain  level  in  addition  to  the  definition  of  bacterial 
function through mapping the genome to reference databases.

Analysis of both 16s rRNA and metagenomic sequencing 
has traditionally relied on comparing the relative abundance of 
various  genera,  species,  and  strains  between  different  groups. 
A  limitation  of  this  method  is  that  a  change  in  relative  abun-
dance  could  result  from  either  the  increased  absolute  number 
of  a  species  of  interest  or  the  depletion  of  other  species  and 
consequent reliance on the overall microbial load. In contrast, 
quantitative profiling of absolute counts of absolute microbial 
abundances may be as or more relevant to defining the role of 
microbiome  in  human  disease.32  A  small  study  of  29  patients 
with CD revealed microbial counts that were 3 times lower than 
those of healthy control patients and differences in defining an 
association between Bacteroides (noted only in relative profiling) 
and Prevotella (only in quantitative microbial profiling) in CD.32 Prediction of Relapse and Postoperative 
Recurrence One  of  the  first  studies  to  examine  the  role  of  the 
microbiome in relapse in IBD was by Rajca et al33 (Table 1). The 
2 investigators obtained fecal samples from 33 patients with CD 
who  stopped  infliximab  therapy  (as  part  of  an  interventional 
study  to  assess  the  rate  of  relapse  after  biologic  cessation). 
Fecal  samples  were  obtained  at  therapy  cessation,  2  months, 
6 months, and the end of follow-up. Cross-sectional compari-
sons  were  also  made  with  29  healthy  control  patients.  Over 
follow-up, 19 patients relapsed and 14 remained in remission. 
Compared  with  the  healthy  control  patients,  those  with  CD 
had reduced counts of Firmicutes such as Clostridium coccoides 
(P  =  0.0003),  Clostridium 
leptum,  and  Faecalibacterium 
prauznitzii (P = 0.003). Interestingly, although all patients were 
in clinical remission at study entry, a lower baseline abundance 
of F. prausnitzii (P = 0.014) and Bacteroides (P = 0.030) pre-
dicted relapse after therapy cessation in addition to biochem-
ical markers such as an elevated serum C-reactive protein.  The  association  with  F.  prauznitzii  is  particularly  inter-
esting as prior work has shown a significant anti-inflammatory 
effect of this species. In experiments using in vitro and in vivo 
models,  Sokol  et  al34  showed  in  2008  that  stimulation  of  pe-
ripheral  blood  mononuclear  cells  by  F.  prauznitzii  resulted  in 
lower  interleukin  (IL)-12  and  interferon-γ  levels  and  higher 
levels  of  IL-10,  which  has  known  anti-inflammatory  effects. 
Interestingly, the oral administration of F. prauznitzii resulted 
in a lower severity of 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid colitis. 
Note  that  the  culture  supernatant  also  had  a  similar  effect  in 
reducing the severity of this particular colitis, suggesting that 
the  effect  of  F.  prauznitzii  may  be  mediated  in  part  through 
the  production  of  anti-inflammatory  metabolites.  A  subse-
quent study of a peptidomic analysis of F. prauznitzii culture 
supernatants  showed  7  peptides  derived  from  a  microbial  an-
ti-inflammatory  molecule  that  had  a  dose-dependent  effect 
on  reducing  the  activation  of  the  NF-κB  pathway.35  Luminal 
delivery  of  this  peptide  through  Lactococcus  lactis  alleviated 
colitis  in  dinitrobenzene  sulfonic  acid  mice  models.35  In  other 
experiments, F. prauznitzii or its supernatant also induced the 
production of IL-10 and transforming growth factor-β1.36 Most  studies  that  have  examined  the  ability  of  the 
microbiome  to  predict  future  disease  activity  from  a  state  of 
quiescence have used the postoperative model in CD. A small 
study of 12 patients with CD examined the microbiota profile  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020 Abbreviations: GA-map, genetic analysis; qPCR, quantitative polymerase chain reaction; RT-PCR, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.

3 Abundance of Ruminococcaceae and Sutterella at baseline predicted week 52 remis- Corticosteroid-  Stool, rectal biopsy, 16s  sequencing nosed with UC
2019400 children newly diag- Hyams et al23 sion week 52
free remission at  cations
disease and Collinsella and Veillonella abundance predicted penetrating compli-
Abundance of Ruminococcus and Rothia associated with development of stricturing  etrating disease
stricturing or pen- Development of  opsy, 16s sequencing
Stool, ileal and rectal bi- nosed with CD Kugathasan et al14 2017913 children newly diag-
Disease progression Proteobacteria decreased in patients in whom therapeutic success was obtained but  Change in  Stool, metagenomics Ribaldone et al42 not in nonresponders  clinical response 
microbiome with  L-arginine, ammonium, ornithine, ethanol, L-glutamine, and glycine. 
in metabolite exchange noted including less-frequent exchange of butyrate, 
None of the taxa predicted response to anti-TNF therapy. However, differences  Clinical response at  Stool, 16s sequencing Abundance of Clostridiales, Veillonella, Bacteroides, and Anaerostipes at baseline  Clinical response at  Stool, 16s sequencing predicted response baseline in those with remission at week 6 Two OTUs affiliated with Faecalibacterium and Bacteroides were more abundant at  Clinical remission at  Stool, 16s sequencing 2018232 patients with CD  Doherty et al27 responders; several functional differences on pathway analysis
CD); greater abundance of R. inulinivorans and Burkholderiales at baseline in 
Higher baseline alpha diversity (species) in responders than in nonresponders (in  Clinical response at  Stool, metagenomics 201785 patients with IBD  Ananthakrishnan  initiating vedolizumab et al25 Lower dysbiosis index and higher abundance of F. prausnitzii at baseline in re- Clinical response at  Stool, rtPCR, and  201656 patients with UC  Magnusson et al43 sponders than in nonresponders 12-14 weeks GA-map; dysbiosis test Lactococcus and Roseburia abundance increased with resolution of inflammation at  Stool, metagenomics 201590 children initiating  Lewis et al10 week 8 and Actinomyces abundance decreased uncultured Clostridiales, and Vibrio and lower abundance of S. mitis  Responders had higher baseline levels of Bifidobacterium, C. colinum, E. rectale,  Stool, qPCR Kolho et al41 week 14 week 30 week 6 week 14 week 8
calprotectin at 
Reduction in fecal 
calprotectin
tion in fecal 
Response: reduc- Steroid responders had higher baseline diversity than nonresponders Steroid response Stool, 15s sequencing others associated with endoscopic recurrence at 6 months Gammaproteobacteria, Corynebacterium, Ruminiclostridium, and R. gnavus group;  Postoperative recur- and Enterococcaceae), Enterobacteriaceae, and Veillonellaceae
rence and a greater representation of Bacilli order (especially Streptococcaceae 
Lower abundance of Clostridiales and Bacteroidales orders in those with later recur- Postoperative recur- rence rence sequencing
Ileal biopsy, 16s  pyrosequencing Ileal biopsy, 454  Relapsers had lower abundance of F. prausnitzii (P = 0.014) and Bacteroides  Clinical relapse Stool, qPCR 201433 patients with CD in  (P = 0.030) than nonrelapsers initiating adalimumab 201920 patients with CD 
hort of 23 patients 
therapy; validation co-
initiating anti-TNF 
201912 patients with IBD 
infliximab
201816 patients initiating  initiating ustekinumab Aden et al24 Zhou et al26 therapy
initiating anti-TNF  enteral nutrition
anti-TNF therapy or  therapy
initiating anti-TNF 
201511 children with IBD  steroid therapy
severe UC initiating 
201227 children with acute  section
undergoing ileal re-
2020201 patients with CD  section
undergoing ileal re- 201512 patients with CD 
remission Michail et al44
Treatment response Sokol et al38 De Cruz et al37 Rajca et al33
Disease relapse Main Findings Patient Population Year Author Interest
Outcome of   and Profile
Microbiome Source   TABLE 1. Summary of Studies of the Microbiome in Predicting Disease Outcomes in IBD Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020  Microbiome-Based Biomarkers Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020 CD  differed  in  the  median  abundance  of  14  (out  of  45)  gen-
eral bacteria, including reductions in Prevotella, Akkermansia, 
Roseburia, Alistipes, Coprococcus, and Ruminococcus and an in-
creased abundance of various members of Enterobacteriaeceae 
including Escherichia and Klebsiella. At the end of the study, 
responders’ microbial composition was closer to that of healthy 
control  patients  than  nonresponders’  microbial  composi-
tion, an effect that was also separately observed for anti-TNF 
therapy and exclusive enteral nutrition. Among the patients on 
anti-TNF therapy, 11 taxa differed from those of healthy con-
trol  patients  at  baseline  and  6  of  these  remained  significantly 
different  despite  clinical  response.  Response  to  therapy  (de-
fined as a fecal calprotectin level < 250 mcg/g) was associated 
with a decrease in Actinomyces and an increase in Lactococcus 
and Roseburia. In contrast, response to therapy was not asso-
ciated with a change in fungal composition. Ribaldone et al42 
prospectively studied the fecal microbiome in 20 patients with 
CD initiating adalimumab therapy. In those who responded to 
treatment,  there  was  a  decrease  in  Proteobacteria  and  an  in-
crease in Lachnospiraceae.

Magnusson et al43 profiled antimicrobial peptide expres-
sion from both mucosal biopsies and the fecal microbiome in 
56  patients  with  CD  and  7  patients  with  UC  who  were  anti-
TNF-naïve and were initiating biologic therapy with this class. 
Greater expression of antimicrobial peptides including DEF5, 
BPI,  ECP,  HMGB1,  and  HMGN2  was  noted  in  responders 
but not in nonresponders. Consistent with other observations, 
responders  had  a  less  dysbiotic  microbiome  at  baseline  than 
nonresponders.  The  baseline  abundance  of  F.  prauznitzii  was 
higher  in  responders  than  in  nonresponders.  The  difference 
in  the  abundance  of  F.  prauznitzii  was  more  striking  at  later 
time points, at week 2 and week 6, when responders showed an 
increasing abundance from baseline and nonresponders had no 
such  changes.43  Up  to  one-third  of  patients  with  UC  develop 
acute severe colitis. In a study by Michail and colleagues, pa-
tients who were steroid-responsive showed greater diversity at 
baseline than nonresponders.44 The  author  and  colleagues  previously  performed 
metagenomic  sequencing  from  fecal  samples  of  85  patients 
with  IBD  initiating  treatment  with  vedolizumab.25  The  study 
cohort included 43 patients with UC and 42 patients with CD. 
The primary outcome, remission at week 14, was attained by 31 
patients. A total of 35% of the cohort remained in remission 
at week 54. In the baseline stool sample, alpha diversity at the 
species  level  was  higher  among  those  with  CD  who  achieved 
remission at week 14 than in those who were not in remission 
at  that  time  point.  This  difference  was  noted  primarily  at  the 
species  level.  Compositionally,  there  was  no  separation  of  re-
sponders and nonresponders on principal component analysis, 
primarily because of similar baseline abundance of the top 15 
most  abundant  species.  Two  species,  Roseburia  inulinivorans 
and Burkholderiales, were significantly more abundant at base-
line in CD patients who achieved remission than in those who  from  ileal  tissue  from  CD  patients  undergoing  resection.37  In 
comparison with healthy control patients, the patients with CD 
had a lower biodiversity at the time of the surgery that improved 
postoperatively but was still less diverse than that of the healthy 
control  patients.  Note  that  patients  with  CD  who  had  endo-
scopic recurrence had a greater abundance of Enterococcus and 
Veillonella and that those who remained in postsurgical remis-
sion had a higher abundance of butyrate-producing Firmicutes, 
Bacteroides,  Prevotella,  and  Parabacteroides.  A  more  robust 
examination of this result was in the large REMIND study, a 
French cohort of 201 patients with CD undergoing an ileocecal 
resection.38 Here the authors examined the mucosa-associated 
microbiota  using  16s  rRNA  sequencing.  At  month  6,  several 
phyla were reduced in patients who had endoscopic recurrence 
(many  belonging  to  Firmicutes,  including  Ruminococcaceae 
and  Lachnospiraeceae),  and  there  was  an  expansion  of 
Proteobacteria.  On  multivariable  analysis,  the  presence  of  6 
(Gammaproteobacteria,  Corynebacterium, 
microbial  phyla 
Sellimonas,  Ruminiclostridium,  Hydrocarboniphaga, 
and 
R. gnavus) predicted endoscopic recurrence. However, the pre-
dictive  value  was  significantly  greater  among  those  patients 
who  did  not  receive  anti-tumor  necrosis  factor  (anti-TNF) 
therapy postoperatively than among those who did, suggesting 
that ongoing treatment may modify natural history and reduce 
the predictive utility of microbial markers.

Response to Biologic and Nonbiologic Therapies
Several  studies  have  examined  the  utility  of  microbial 
markers in predicting relapse in patients with CD or UC.39-41 An 
initial analysis of the longitudinal changes in the microbiome 
was conducted by Kolho et al,41 who profiled 68 children with 
IBD  among  whom  32  received  anti-TNF  therapy.  During  in-
duction,  patients  who  responded  (defined  by  a  reduction  in 
fecal  calprotectin)  showed  increasing  diversity  and  similarity 
to  healthy  control  patients,  whereas  a  similar  effect  was  not 
observed  among  those  who  were  nonresponders.  Although 
the  abundance  of  Bacilli,  Proteobacteria,  and  low-abundance 
Clostridium clusters increased in nonresponders, these levels did 
not increase in responders. The authors showed that patients re-
sponding to anti-TNF therapy had higher baseline abundances 
of bacteria belonging to Bifidobacterium, Clostridium colinum, 
Vibrio,  and  Eubacterium  rectale  and  a  lower  abundance  of 
Streptococcus  mitis.  A  multivariable  model  that  incorporated 
an abundance of Clostridium sphenoides and Haemophilus spe-
cies predicted a fecal calprotectin level < 200 mcg/g at 3 months 
with an accuracy of 0.88.41 Lewis et al10 performed metagenomics sequencing on stool 
samples from 86 pediatric patients who were initiating therapy 
with  either  exclusive  enteral  nutrition,  anti-TNF  therapy,  or 
partial enteral nutrition therapy. Comparisons were performed 
between stool samples obtained at baseline, 1 week, 4 weeks, and 
8 weeks after therapy and with 26 previously profiled healthy 
children. When compared with healthy children, patients with  4 Ananthakrishnan
 
  Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 5 Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020 achieved  remission,  in  whom  this  interchange  was  similar  to 
that  in  healthy  control  patients.  Specifically,  the  exchange  of 
10  metabolites  was  less  frequent  at  baseline  among  patients 
who did not achieve remission compared with healthy control 
patients; these metabolites included butyrate, L-arginine, CO2, 
ammonium,  ornithine,  ethanol,  L-glutamine,  and  glycine.  Of 
these, the latter 3 were also seen in those who achieved remis-
sion and the other exchanges were specific to patients who did 
not  achieve  remission.  Some  of  these  metabolite  exchanges, 
such as with butyrate, resolved posttreatment and most other 
exchanges  persisted.  Fecal  metabolites  also  differed  between 
responders  and  nonresponders,  with  higher  levels  of  3-indole 
propionic  acid,  L-tyrosine,  and  3-hydroxyphenylacetic  acid  at 
baseline among those who achieved remission and higher levels 
of pyric acid in the no-remission group.

One prior study examined the role of microbial compo-
sition in predicting response to ustekinumab therapy. Doherty 
et al27 performed 16s rRNA sequencing from fecal samples of 
patients treated in a phase 2 clinical trial (CERTIFI) comparing 
ustekinumab induction and maintenance to placebo. Stool sam-
ples were obtained at baseline and weeks 4, 6, and 22. A com-
bined random forest predictive model that incorporated clinical 
and baseline microbial data performed significantly better than 
clinical data containing models alone (AUC = 0.84 vs 0.62). In 
fact, the addition of clinical data did not add predictive value 
to  microbiome-only  predictive  models  (AUC  =  0.838).  Two 
OTUs were significantly different between those in remission at 
week 6 and those with active CD: Bacteroides (P = 0.022) and 
Faecalibacterium  (P  =  0.003).  Patients  in  remission  at  week  6 
also had a higher alpha diversity at baseline than did those with 
active disease. During maintenance therapy through week 22, 
microbiome-based  models  could  also  classify  disease  activity 
states  based  on  an  abundance  of  Faecalibacterium,  Blautia, 
Clostridium XIVa, Ruminococcaceae, and Roseburia.

Disease Progression Two pediatric inception cohorts with serial sampling of 
the microbiome in mucosa and stool provided insights into the 
potential  predictive  value  of  microbial  markers  in  identifying 
disease  progression.14,  23  A  total  of  913  children  were  enrolled 
at  diagnosis  of  CD,  most  of  whom  had  a  nonstricturing, 
nonpenetrating phenotype.14 At follow-up, 54 and 24 patients 
had  stricturing  and  penetrating  complications  respectively, 
and 21% received anti-TNF therapy. Interestingly, both CBir1 
positivity  and  the  presence  of  anti-saccharomyces  antibodies 
was  associated  with  a  risk  of  stricturing  or  penetrating  di-
sease  behavior.  Expression  of  genes  regulating  acute  inflam-
matory response to microbes was induced at baseline in those 
who  developed  penetrating  disease.  Specifically,  fecal  abun-
dance  of  Rothia  and  Ruminococcus  was  associated  with  the 
development of stricturing complications and Collinsella abun-
dance was greater at baseline in patients who developed pene-
trating  disease.  The  PROTECT  cohort  recruited  400  children  did not (q = 0.09 and 0.06, respectively). Strikingly, more dif-
ferences were noted on functional pathways: 13 were enriched 
at baseline in patients who achieved remission at week 14, in-
cluding branched chain amino acid biosynthesis, arginine, and 
polyamine  biosynthesis.  In  patients  who  provided  stool  sam-
ples  at  baseline  and  weeks  14,  30,  and  54,  remission  at  week 
14  was  associated  with  greater  microbial  persistence,  defined 
as  the  similarity  of  later  samples  to  the  week  14  microbial 
profile, up to 1 year. Baseline clinical data alone were insuffi-
cient in predicting remission at week 14 (area under the curve 
[AUC] = 0.62), but a neural network model incorporating tax-
onomic and pathway data improved predictive ability with an 
AUC of 0.872.

Zhou et al26 followed 16 Han Chinese patients with CD 
who were treated with infliximab for 30 weeks. Treatment was 
associated  with  an  increase  in  alpha  diversity  and  reduction 
in  disease  activity,  which  was  more  notable  in  the  responder 
group. They also observed that abundance of Clostridiales was 
lower in those with IBD than in control patients. However, this 
difference  was  no  longer  significant  in  those  who  responded, 
suggesting that an increase in abundance of Clostridiales could 
be  a  biomarker  of  treatment  response.  A  model  of  gut  mi-
crobial  composition  at  baseline  predicted  infliximab  response 
at  week  30  with  an  87%  accuracy,  which  was  superior  to  the 
predictive  value  of  the  Crohn’s  Disease  Activity  Index  (58% 
accuracy) and calprotectin levels (62% accuracy). The most in-
formative features in this model were the abundance of various 
Clostridiales and the abundance of Veillonella, Bacteroides, and 
Anaerostipes.

Aden et al24 performed a prospective study of 12 patients 
with  IBD,  17  patients  with  rheumatic  disease,  and  19  healthy 
control  patients  who  provided  fecal  samples  at  baseline  and 
2,  6,  and  30  weeks  after  treatment  with  anti-TNF  therapy. 
Twenty-three  patients  who  were  treated  with  either  anti-TNF 
drugs  or  vedolizumab  acted  as  control  patients.  Interestingly, 
patients with IBD but not with rheumatic disease demonstrated 
a shift in diversity toward that of the control patients with anti-
TNF therapy, suggesting that this effect was likely mediated in 
part  by  resolution  of  intestinal  inflammation  rather  than  di-
rect effect of the biologic agent.24 When compared to healthy 
control patients, 14 indicator phylotypes, notably Coprococcus 
and  R.  inulinivorans,  were  differentially  distributed  between 
patients with IBD and healthy control patients. All 14 species 
had a similar abundance to that of control patients at week 30 
that increased although none of these changes were specific to 
responders.  Similar to the observations by Ananthakrishnan et al,25 
the predictive value of taxonomic composition was less striking 
than the bacterial metabolic effects. None of the taxa profiled 
predicted response to anti-TNF therapy. However, the rate of 
metabolite  exchange  between  organisms  (ie,  metabolic  inter-
change) was lower at baseline in nonresponding patients with 
IBD than in healthy control patients in contrast to those who  Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020  Microbiome-Based Biomarkers Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020 TABLE 2.  Challenges and Opportunities in Studies of Microbiome-Based Biomarkers in IBD Challenge Proposed Solutions Heterogeneity in participants
Variability in outcomes
Small cohorts
Competing external influences (diet, antibiotics) Standard definitions for inclusion criteria
Use validated outcomes, preferably relying on objective markers
Multicenter and international collaborations 
Develop a minimum standard of suggested covariates that need to be ascertained and  controlled for Lack of validation of findings Harmonization of protocols to ensure comparability across cohorts and pooling data with  newly  diagnosed  ulcerative  colitis  who  were  initiated 
on  mesalamine  (+/–  corticosteroid  therapy).23  Of  these,  38% 
achieved corticosteroid-free remission at week 52. Abundance 
of Ruminococcaceae and Sutterella at baseline predicted week 
52 remission outcomes (odds ratio = 1.43, P = 0.04; and odds 
ratio = 0.81, P = 0.05, respectively).

Limitations of Existing Data and Suggestions for 
Future Research 1.  An important limitation of existing data is heterogeneity in the selec-
 
tion of patients including variation in disease activity, severity, and 
ongoing treatments (Table 2). This limitation has the potential to in-
fluence effects beyond the biological parameter being studied, leading 
to confounding and misinterpretation of data. Thus it is important 
in future studies to use well-established criteria using accepted defin-
itions to ensure comparability of data across populations.

2.  A  second  important  challenge  with  existing  data  is  the  wide  vari-
 
ability in the definition of outcomes. Among the studies that have 
examined  treatment  response,  outcomes  have  been  variably  de-
fined at 4  weeks, 8 weeks,  14 weeks, or  54 weeks.  Further, studies 
have  varied  in  the  use  of  symptom-based  disease  activity  scores, 
calprotectin normalization (using different thresholds), endoscopic 
remission, or global physical impression to define the outcome. The 
varying  accuracy  of  each  of  these  parameters  confounds  the  in-
terpretation  of  findings  and  highlights  the  lack  of  replicability  of 
results across cohorts. Thus, it is important to formulate accepted 
definitions for each of the clinically relevant endpoints in the field 
to facilitate robust validation of identified signals.

3.  Studies  have  also  varied  in  the  depth  of  microbial  sequencing, 
 
from polymerase chain reaction–based methods to 16s rRNA pro-
filing to metagenomics sequencing and strain-level analysis. While 
decreasing the cost of the more comprehensive sequencing methods 
that also define bacterial function and the recognition of variation 
in biologic effect even at the level of individual strains, the develop-
ment of microbiome-based therapies requires more comprehensive 
microbial profiling to truly identify modifiable targets. In addition, 
most  studies  have  relied  on  the  comparison  of  relative  microbial 
abundances,  which,  in  addition  to  the  species  of  interest,  may  be 
influenced by total microbial counts and changes in the abundance 
of other species. Newer methods such as quantitative microbial pro-
filing may be important to identify additional changes pertinent to 
the development of disease.

6 4.  The published studies have differed on the amount of information col-
 
lected regarding relevant important confounders including antibiotic use, 
inflammation severity, diet, and medications (to name a few). This in-
consistency complicates an understanding of the impact of the biologic 
parameter being studied and of such external influences. To reduce this 
concern, there must be transparent reporting of this information in every 
study and an establishment of minimum acceptable standards.

5.  The lack of reproducibility of associations is an important limitation 
 
of existing studies of the microbiome in IBD. Most prediction studies 
have failed to include independent external validation cohorts, in part 
limited by the costs of such cohort accrual and profiling, and by the het-
erogeneity in study procedures between different cohorts. For example, 
although genetic association studies in IBD could make rapid strides in 
identifying potentially causal gene variants by the relative ease and con-
sistency of defining a disease state (CD, UC, or control), microbiome-
based  prediction  studies  have  required  more  nuanced,  time-varying 
definitions of outcomes (such as treatment response) that have differed 
between cohorts, limiting the ability to pool data.

6.  Existing  tools  for  profiling  the  taxonomic  or  functional  profile  of 
 
the microbiome or the metabolome are not readily translatable to 
point-of-care tests in the clinic because of their logistical challenges 
in profiling single samples cost-effectively and the high volume of 
data  generated  with  each  profile.  Further  research  is  essential  to 
move predictive associations identified in the research arena to clin-
ical  care.  The  emergence  of  tools  such  as  paper-based  technology 
for microbiome profiling may prove to be cost-effective and appli-
cable to direct patient care.45 CONCLUSIONS In summary, given the likely central role of the microbiome 
in the pathogenesis of IBD, it is intuitive that microbiome-based 
biomarkers  may be particularly  relevant in  stratifying patients 
with these complex diseases. Indeed, intriguing preliminary data 
have supported the role of such biomarkers in predicting many 
important clinically relevant outcomes. However, existing studies 
are limited by small sample sizes and significant heterogeneity 
preventing robust validation. Similar to what has been achieved 
and is highly critical for advancing science in other fields (such 
as  genetics),  multicenter  collaborations  of  relatively  homoge-
neous populations and uniform accepted definitions controlling 
for  confounders  are  essential  to  move  such  microbiome-based 
biomarkers from a research endeavor to clinical practice.

Ananthakrishnan
 
  Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020 7 Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020  Microbiome-Based Biomarkers
