7_PARAGRAPHS

Immunologic Changes of the Gut Microbiome in Pregnancy During pregnancy, inflammatory states vary from higher inflammation at implantation and 
in labor to lower levels of inflammation in mid-pregnancy (Trevisanuto et al., 2013). Anti-
inflammatory properties exist at the placental bed which protects the fetus from rejection, 
yet the mucosal surfaces of the gut and other tissues experience a low-grade inflammation 
with rising levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and white cells as the pregnancy advances 
(Koren et al., 2012). When conditions like maternal obesity, gestational diabetes or a leaky 
gut shift the maternal inflammatory state from a physiologic to an excessive level, vascular 
dysfunction of the placental tissue can develop leading to deleterious effects such as fetal 
growth restriction and preeclampsia (Kashtanova et al., 2016; Kim, Romero, 
Chaemsaithong, & Kim, 2015). Gut microbes found in amniotic fluid of women who 
experienced preterm premature rupture of membranes suggest that the gut microbiome could 
play a role in intrauterine infections (DiGiulio et al., 2010). Possible mechanisms of  MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 01.

The Brain-Gut Axis Animal and human studies support the existence of a significant bidirectional relationship 
between the gut and the brain, involving multiple neurologic and endocrine signaling 
systems (Mayer, Knight, Mazmanian, Cryan, & Tillisch, 2014). Normal central nervous 
system function relies on a healthy gut microbiome or “eubiosis” (Aitken & Gewirtz, 2013). 
The discovery of two-way signaling between the gut and brain has led to this system being 
coined, the “Brain-Gut Axis” (Foster & McVey Neufeld, 2013; Gareau, 2014). In a healthy  MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 01.

Hormonal Changes in Pregnancy and the Gut Microbiome The prenatal period is marked by dramatic hormonal shifts with resultant unique 
inflammatory and immune changes that alter gut function and bacterial composition 
(Brantsaeter et al., 2011; Koren et al., 2012). Estrogen and progesterone impact the 
composition of the gut microbiome through their effect on bacterial metabolism and growth 
and virulence of pathogenic bacteria (Mulak et al., 2014). An example of this is the 
susceptibility to Listeria monocytogenes infections in pregnancy partly due to elevated 
estrogen and progesterone levels, leading to adverse outcomes, including preterm delivery or 
stillbirth (Garcia-Gomez, Gonzalez-Pedrajo, & Camacho-Arroyo, 2013). Dramatic changes 
in ovarian hormones during the prenatal and postpartum periods also affect gut contractility 
and transit (Mayer, Savidge, et al., 2014). It is plausible that the hormone levels involved in 
increasing gut transit time are an adaptive response to allow greater nutrient and energy 
harvest, thus promoting weight gain in pregnancy.

Metabolic Changes in Pregnancy and the Gut Microbiome The consequences of gut dysbiosis that lead to obesity and, likely, to excessive gestational 
weight gain, have only recently been explored in human pregnancy (Angelakis, Merhej, & 
Raoult, 2013). Of particular interest is the recognition that the immune and metabolic 
changes that occur normally in pregnancy are actually comparable to metabolic syndrome 
outside of pregnancy (Chassaing & Gewirtz, 2014). With no differences in diet, including 
total energy intake, pregnant women have been found to gain greater adiposity with 
significantly higher leptin, insulin and insulin resistance measures, cholesterol, and glycated 
hemoglobin with each trimester of pregnancy compared to their non-pregnant counterparts 
(Collado, Isolauri, Laitinen, & Salminen, 2008). The microbial diversity in the gut at the 
start of pregnancy appears to be similar to that of non-pregnant women (Santacruz et al., 
2010). Yet, as the pregnancy advances, the abundance of gut bacteria associated with 
inflammatory states increases in nearly 70% of women (Santacruz et al., 2010). The greatest 
change in the gut microbiota occurs in the ratio of certain key bacteria (Firmicutes: 
Bacteroidetes), mimicking the higher levels of Firmicutes seen in obesity (Santacruz et al.,  MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 01.

In a recent clinical trial, supplementation with specific strains of probiotics, such as 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Lactobacillus acidophilus, combined with dietary 
counseling have been found to improve glucose metabolism in healthy pregnant and 
lactating women (Brantsaeter et al., 2011). Daily intake of milk-based dietary probiotics has 
been reported to reduce blood pressure in pregnancy as well as the incidence of  MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 01.

Page 6 preeclampsia among primiparous women (Brantsaeter et al., 2011; Gomez-Arango et al., 
2016). Lactose intolerance can often be managed by ingestion of lactase enzymes with the 
dairy or by limiting intake to lactose-free dairy products. Daily yogurt consumption 
containing L. rhamnosus was found to have a statistically significant protective effect against 
heavy metal toxicity (mercury and arsenic) in pregnant women with high risk diets (Bisanz 
et al., 2014). Probiotic milk and other food products may, therefore, be worth consideration 
for women at greater risk for gestational diabetes, preeclampsia and some environmental 
toxins.

Conclusion Diet and lifestyle practices are modifiable factors that can affect the brain-gut axis, and 
ultimately, the long-term health of women and infants. The degree to which the gut 
microbiome contributes to the neurodevelopmental, immunological and intestinal health of 
the pregnant woman and her fetus is only now beginning to be measured. Health practices 
and novel therapies to promote eubiosis and treat dysbiosis of the maternal gut are still to be 
discovered but will likely prove fundamental in the care of women in pregnancy