13_PARAGRAPHS

Stool 2011 Next-Gen sequencing Jost et al. 2012 Stool Sequencing V1V2 Longitudinal Characterized the intestinal microbiome
from birth to 2.5 yr
Longitudinal Characterized healthy neonatal microbiome Wang et al.
2013 Cord blood, Bacterial culture and Cross- Neonates with amniotic ﬂuid sequencing sectional Milisavljevic
et al. 2013 esophageal Gastro- Sequencing Longitudinal Characterized the Azad et al.
2013 Stool Next-Gen sequencing Longitudinal Characterized the Primers
used Sanger,
V5V6
Universal
16s
rRNA Universal
16S
rRNA
V5, V6,
V7 Rogier et al.
2014 Stool Microarray Murine Ma et al. 2014b Colon, anus, Next-Gen V3V5 stool sequencing Nonhuman
primate necrotizing colitis had
predominantly one
bacteria dominating microbiome in VLBW
infants neonatal microbiome
from birth to 4 mo
while examining mode
of delivery and feeding Examined the role of
maternal IgA on
intestinal microbiome Examined the role of
maternal diet on
juvenile microbiome 16S-Based Metagenomics Sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene using Next-
Gen technology has recently been widely ex-
ploited to characterize the human microbiome
(Jonasson et al. 2007; Liu et al. 2007). The 16S
rRNA gene is an ideal target to classify bacteria
because of the nine hypervariable regions in this
gene that can be used to distinguish species
based on individual nucleotide polymorphisms
(Fig. 1A). Ergo, Next-Gen sequencing charac-
terizes both coarse ( phylum level) as well as ﬁne
(genus and limited species and strain) differ-
ences using universal primers to the adjacent
conserved regions (Klindworth et al. 2013).
However, 16S-amplicon-based approaches are
limited to a shorter read length as compared
with Sanger sequencing, and as a result, only
a few hypervariable regions can be contigu-
ously sequenced at a time. Initial work on ap-
proach and validation by the HMP Consortium
showed that there is variation in the taxonomy proﬁle identiﬁed based on sequencing different
variable regions. For example, V1V3 amplicons
may underestimate Acinetobacter and Escheri-
chia genera, but V3V5 provides both breadth
and depth of communities dominated by these
genera. Furthermore, V6V9 may underesti-
mate Bacteroides but provides good coverage
for Pseudomonas and Escherichia (Human Mi-
crobiome Project 2012b).

Whole Genome Shotgun (WGS)-Based
Metagenomics Although 16S sequencing is a cost effective
approach to perform metagenomics studies,
whole genome shotgun (WGS) sequencing al-
lows for deep and reﬁned taxonomic classiﬁca-
tion to the species and strain level, as well as the Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051 5 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org A.L. Prince et al.

THE VAGINAL MICROBIOME IN
REPRODUCTIVE AGED WOMEN Before the advent of Next-Gen sequencing, the
the vaginal microbiome
characterization of
through traditional microbiological techniques
(culture-dependent) revealed a predominance
of Lactobacillus species (Redondo-Lopez et al.
1990; Larsen and Monif 2001). These early
characterizations of the vaginal microbiome
resulted in the delineation of “normal” ﬂora
(deﬁned as Lactobacillus predominant), and
“abnormal” or “aberrant” vaginal ﬂora (non-
lactobacillus predominant). Early descriptions 6 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org also attempted to characterize abnormal vaginal
ﬂora, most notably in conjunction with bacterial
vaginosis (BV). BV is a common and complex
alteration of vaginal ﬂora, but the description of
the bacteria involved in the vaginal dysbiosis
has changed over time. The association be-
tween anerobic cocci and abnormal vaginal dis-
charge was ﬁrst described by Curtis in 1914, and
Gardnerella vaginalis was ﬁrst described as a
causative agent for BV in 1955 (Eschenbach
1993; Ledger 1993). However, by the 1990s,
multiple other species were found in anaerobic
cultures of vaginal discharge from subjects with
symptoms consistent with BV (Faro et al. 1993;
Hillier et al. 1993). Despite the multiplicity of
causative agents, one common ﬁnding is that
women experiencing clinically symptomatic
BV tend to be deﬁcient in lactic acid producing
species of bacteria that also convert oxygen to
H2O2 (Eschenbach et al. 1989; Hillier et al. 1992,
1993). This observation has led to several de-
cades of data demonstrating that adverse repro-
ductive health outcomes accompany “abnormal
ﬂora” associated with BV (Gravett et al. 1986;
Martius et al. 1988; Krohn et al. 1991; Hillier
et al. 1995a; Martin et al. 1999; Wiesenfeld et al.
2003; Ness et al. 2005; Brotman et al. 2010). For
instance, the incidence of BV has been associat-
ed with preterm birth and with increased risk
for acquiring sexually transmitted diseases, such
as Neisseria gonorrhea, Chlamydia trachomatis,
and human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)
(Gravett et al. 1986; Martius et al. 1988; Krohn
et al. 1991; Kurki et al. 1992; Hillier et al. 1995b;
Martin et al. 1999; Wiesenfeld et al. 2003; Ness
et al. 2005; Brotman et al. 2010; Perla et al.
2012). This
infection is
increased risk of
thought to be because of the deﬁciency of Lac-
tobacillus species that produce lactic acid and
H2O2 to provide protection from pathogenic
bacteria and viruses (Eschenbach et al. 1989).
Along these lines, previous in vitro studies have
shown that Lactobacillus acidophilus can protect
from infection with G. vaginalis, Bacteroides bi-
vius, and HIV through a peroxidase dependent
mechanism (Klebanoff and Coombs 1991; Kle-
banoff et al. 1991). Thus, although BV may in-
dicate vaginal dysbiosis in a clinical setting, there
has been historically a lack of data regarding Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy whether vaginal dysbiosis occurred as “normal”
ﬂora in women asymptomatic for BV. Currently,
Next-Gen sequencing techniques have enabled
the vaginal microbiome to be more thoroughly
characterized to determine the bacterial ﬂora of
the “normal” versus “abnormal” vagina.

One of the ﬁrst studies to reveal the com-
plexity of the vaginal microbiome using Next-
Gen techniques was performed by Ravel et
al. This study recruited nearly 400 women of
mixed ethnicities. Samples were prepared for
either V1V2 16S sequencing and were scored
for BV using Nugent criteria (Ravel et al. 2010).
Five distinct community state types (CSTs) were
revealed, and the majority of these CSTs were
dominated by species of lactobacilli. The fourth
CST included women with a vaginal micro-
biome deﬁcient in Lactobacillus species, and in-
terestingly, this group had increased incidence
of BV. Also, this study showed that the vagi-
nal microbiome could be distinguished by eth-
nicity. Asian subjects had a higher prevalence of
CST III (Lactobacillus
iners), non-Hispanic
Caucasians had a higher prevalence of CST I
(Lactobacillus crispatus), and African-American
and Hispanic subjects had a higher prevalence
of CST III (L. iners) and IV (decreased Lactoba-
cillus species) (Ravel et al. 2010). However, re-
cent studies have shown the caution that must
be used when performing analysis such as CSTs
(Koren et al. 2013). In these investigations, Ko-
ren et al. (2013) showed that these types of clus-
ter analysis are sensitive to the distance metric
used for analysis and that multiple distance
metrics should be used to promote accuracy
in data. In fact, this study used the data of Ravel
et al. (2010) in their analysis and found varying
support for the presence of CSTs based on the
analysis used (Koren et al. 2013). Thus, multiple
methods of analysis must be used to establish
a CST. An additional method that may be use-
ful to examine microbiome communities across
ethnicities is to use single nucleotide poly-
morphisms (SNPs) in mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), which provides more precision in
analysis (Ruiz-Pesini et al. 2007). We have re-
cently used this method in conjunction with
analysis of the microbiome through data lever-
aged from the HMP to examine associations Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051 7 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org A.L. Prince et al.

THE VAGINAL MICROBIOME IN
PREGNANCY With the demonstration that the vaginal micro-
biome ﬂuctuates based on the menstrual cycle,
with intercourse, and (to a much more limited
degree) with clinical symptoms of BV, we and
others sought to characterize the vaginal micro-
biome during pregnancy. Nearly every organ
system changes during pregnancy to promote
pregnancy maintenance or prepare for parturi-
tion. In the vagina, increased vascularity and
hyperemia develop in the skin of the vulva and
the mucosa of the vagina. Additionally, the vag-
inal mucosa increases in thickness and cervical
secretions increase, which causes the underlying
smooth muscle cells to hypertrophy and relax
the connective tissue. At the epithelial surface,
the vaginal epithelium hypertrophies and caus-
es a crowding of the epithelial cells, which are
rich in glycogen (Nieburgs 1947). Estrogen
(namely estradiol) rises across gestation, and
further leads to increases in glycogen levels; gly-
cogen is metabolized into lactic acid resulting in
the decrease pH (acidity) of the vagina (Gre-
goire et al. 1971; Paavonen 1983). This metab-
olism of glycogen into lactic acid was historical-
ly thought to be performed by the vaginal
epithelium, because the vaginal lumen is sufﬁ- 8 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org ciently distant from the oxygen supply to be-
come anaerobic. However, the primary source
of lactic acid became debated when Boskey et al.
reported that vaginal lactobacilli were capable of
producing lactic acid in vitro at a rate sufﬁcient
to reacidify the vagina in vivo following a neu-
tralizing exposure (i.e., ejaculate) (Boskey et al.
1999; Pybus and Onderdonk 1999). Afterward,
the speciﬁc lactate structures in the vagina were
explored and it was discovered that the majority
of the vaginal lactic acid was of the D-isoform,
which cannot be produced by human metabo-
lism (Boskey et al. 2001). Thus, vaginal bacteria,
namely lactobacilli, appear to be the primary
source of lactic acid in the vagina. In pregnancy,
the preponderance of Lactobacillus
species
appears to be aided by the estrogen-induced
increase in glycogen that contributes to the
vaginal acidic environment, which is not only
enhanced by lactobacilli but also fosters Lacto-
bacillus growth.

Before the advent of metagenomics, the
presence of lactobacilli were noted to increase
as gestational age advanced during pregnancy
(Nieburgs 1947). Further, more recent studies
showed a high prevalence of Lactobacillus spe-
cies in the vagina during either the ﬁrst, second,
or third trimester using PCR-denaturing gra-
dient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) for the V3
region of the 16S rRNA gene, and the species
with the highest prevalence were L. acidophilus
and L. iners (Herna´ndez-Rodrı´guez et al. 2011).
The utilization of Next-Gen sequencing tech-
niques to study the vaginal microbiome further
showed the presence of Lactobacillus species in
the vagina during pregnancy. Our group initial-
ly published this 16S-based metagenomic char-
acterization in a cross-sectional study (Aagaard
et al. 2012b). We used V3V5 16S sequencing
and examined the posterior fornix, mid-vagi-
na, and vaginal introitus of 24 gravid and 60
nongravid subjects. Vaginal samples collected
from a cross-sectional survey of gravid subjects
from 18 wk gestation to term or delivery, and
all samples were collected by a single physician
who also conducted the HMP sampling for
50% of subjects. All samples were extracted in
a manner identical to that used by the HMP, and
sequenced on the same pipelines. When com- Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy pared with the HMP nonpregnant reference
subjects, we found that pregnancy was associat-
ed with an altered vaginal microbiome and
marked by a decrease in alpha diversity at the
subgenus level (Fig. 2) (Aagaard et al. 2012b).
When we examined this phenomenon further,
we discovered that there was an overall enrich-
ment of the orders Lactobacillus, Clostridiales,
Bacteriodales, and Actinomycetales. And on
probing at the species level using supervised
machine learning approaches, such as linear
discriminate analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe)
and Boruta feature selection, we discovered that
the vaginal microbiome during pregnancy was
enriched in L. iners, L. crispatus, Lactobacillus
jensenii, and Lactobacillus johnsonii (Aagaard
et al. 2012b). The increase in lactobacilli may
be explained by the increase in estrogen that
occurs during pregnancy. However, direct asso-
ciations between speciﬁc species of Lactobacillus
and estrogen levels are lacking and warrant fur-
ther investigation.

However, the aforementioned studies were
cross-sectional, which allows for the character-
ization of a pregnancy and gestational age-com-
mon microbiome signature, but lacks capacity
for description of the dynamic changes, which
may occur in an individual over time. Longi-
tudinal analysis of the vaginal microbiome in
a small cohort of women across gestation has
been performed using terminal restriction frag-
ment length polymorphism (tRFLP) in 100
gravid women (Verstraelen et al. 2009). This
study categorized gravidae into two cohorts
during the ﬁrst trimester: lactobacilli-dominant
and lactobacilli-diminished. Interestingly, only
16.9% of gravidae that had a lactobacilli-dom-
inant vaginal microbiome in the ﬁrst trimester
decreased the prevalence of lactobacilli during
pregnancy. On the other hand, 56.5% of gravi-
dae with a lactobacilli-diminished vaginal
microbiome during the ﬁrst trimester gained
prevalence of this genus. In contrast to the
cross-sectional study, these longitudinal co-
horts showed that L. crispatus dominated dur-
ing pregnancy and that prominence of Lactoba-
cillus gasseri and/or L. iners during the ﬁrst
trimester may be associated with diminished
lactobacilli as pregnancy progressed (Verstrae- Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051 9 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org Hormone levels Lactation ???
??? Campylobacter spp.
in juvenile gut Non-pregnant Pregnant Follicular Luteal C.L.

Estradiol Progesterone Prolactin Metabolic demands Vaginal mircobiota
Diversity/richness Gut microbiota
Diversity/richness www.perspectivesinmedicine.org en mostly consisted of the CST I or III with odds
ratios of 2.986 and 2.136, respectively, and that
the vaginal microbiome of gravid women shift
toward these two CSTs as their pregnancy
progressed (Romero et al. 2014b). When the
stability of the vaginal microbiome was exam-
ined during pregnancy, the authors noted that
the vaginal microbiome of gravid subjects shift-
ed between CSTs dominated by lactobacilli but
rarely shifted to CST IV, which is marked by a
diminished abundance of Lactobacillus species
(Romero et al. 2014b). However, with a low
number and low ethnic diversity of subjects in
the study, further studies are needed to conﬁrm
these shifts of the vaginal microbiome toward
CSTs dominated by lactobacilli as pregnancy
progresses. Initial studies of the vaginal micro-
biome showed that African-American women
have a higher prevalence of vaginal CSTs con-
sisting of Lactobacillus species (Ravel et al. 2010),
which was further shown by this recent study
(Romero et al. 2014b). In a separate study, the
vaginal microbiome was examined longitudi-
nally during gestation using the V3V5 amplicon
of 16S rRNA in 12 subjects that were mostly
Caucasian (Walther-Anto´ nio et al. 2014). In
agreement with previous studies, these authors
showed that alpha diversity decreases as preg-
nancy progresses and that L. crispatus and
L. iners dominate the vaginal microﬂora (Fig.
2) (Walther-Anto´ nio et al. 2014). Intriguingly,
these authors suggest that maternal age may be
important for the dominance of L. crispatus or
L. iners, with, L. iners being dominant in older
gravidae (Walther-Anto´ nio et al. 2014). Al-
though this insight should be kept in mind for
future studies, this study had only two subjects
with advanced maternal age (34 –36) (Walther-
Anto´ nio et al. 2014). To take these studies
further, this group attempted to analyze their
data in conjunction with the Romero et al.
study; however, differences in primer sets and
sequencing platforms used in these separate
studies prevented in depth analysis (Romero
et al. 2014b; Walther-Anto´ nio et al. 2014).
Despite these challenges, the authors found
that, although alpha diversity of the vaginal
microbiome decreased with gestational age in
both African-American and Caucasian subjects, Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy African-American subjects had increased beta
diversity between gravid subjects whereas Cau-
casian gravidae did not (Walther-Anto´ nio et al.
2014). Thus, these studies highlight the need for
further longitudinal studies with large subject
enrollment and ethnic diversity. Additionally,
studies are needed with a high enrollment of
BV subjects or women with a dysbiotic vaginal
microbiome to lend further insight into vaginal
microbiome shifts and stability that are associ-
ated with pregnancy.

Despite the need for further investigation
into the role of the vaginal microbiome in as-
sociation with BV and preterm birth, a recent
study by Hyman et al. (2014) has examined
the vaginal microbiome in preterm birth. This
group used a prospective cohort study with 46
high-risk ( previous unexplained PTB) and 42
low-risk (all other gravid) subjects for PTB
gravidae enrolled (Hyman et al. 2014); however,
only 14 subjects were able to be sampled in each
trimester. Intriguingly, the investigators found
that the presence of lactobacilli did not distin-
guish term (.37 wk) from preterm (,37 wk)
subjects using Sanger sequencing methods.
However, low-risk subjects had a higher preva-
lence of lactobacilli when compared with high-
risk subjects (Hyman et al. 2014). Despite the
lack of association of lactobacilli with preterm
birth, measured alpha diversity was reported as
diminished when comparing Caucasian term
and preterm subjects (Hyman et al. 2014).
Among the two longitudinal subjects that ulti-
mately delivered preterm, their vaginal micro-
biomes were dominated by L. crispatus (Hyman
et al. 2014), which is in contrast to a previous
study demonstrating that L. crispatus is domi-
nant in healthy term pregnancies (Verstraelen
et al. 2009; Aagaard et al. 2012b). Moreover,
although two subjects in the Hyman et al. study
had outgrowths of Biﬁdobacterium and Urea-
plasma genera, separately, these genera are re-
ported in both normal pregnant subjects as well
as nonpregnant (Ravel et al. 2010; Aagaard et al.
2012b; Romero et al. 2014b). Similar ﬁndings
were found in an independent study by Romero
et al. In this prospective study, term (38 – 32 wk)
versus preterm (,34 wk) subjects were sam-
pled at the posterior fornix by an obstetrician
and sequenced using V1V3 primers (Romero
et al. 2014a). The authors found no associa-
tion between the CSTs of the vaginal micro-
biome and preterm birth, nor did they ﬁnd
any CST of the vaginal microbiome associated
with preterm subjects having acute chorioam-
nionitis (Romero et al. 2014a). In contrast to
the study by Hyman et al., this study found no
signiﬁcant difference in the alpha diversity of
the vaginal microbiome of term and preterm
subjects (Hyman et al. 2014; Romero et al.

When directly examining the intestinal mi-
crobiome of infants born via cesarean or vaginal
delivery, culture-based microbiological tech-
niques have shown differences in the coloniza-
tion of the neonatal
intestinal microbiome,
particularly of Biﬁdobacterium-like bacteria,
Lactobacillus-like bacteria, and Bacteriodes fra-
gilis (Gro¨nlund et al. 1999a). However, a sepa-
rate study by this group also determined that
bacterial enzymes were not altered in the stool
of infants based on mode of delivery (Gro¨nlund
et al. 1999b). Using culture-independent, PCR-
based techniques, Penders et al. also showed
that B. fragilis and Biﬁdobacterium were de-
creased in cesarean delivered infants in compar-
ison to vaginally delivered infants. However, this
study also showed differences in the intestinal Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy microbiome of infants based on formula-feed-
ing or breastfeeding (Penders et al. 2006). An
Italian study further investigated the intestinal
microbiome of infants based on mode of deliv-
ery using the V6V8 region of the 16S rRNA gene
in PCR-DGGE and PCR-temperature gradi-
ent gel electrophoresis (TGGE) assays (Biasucci
et al. 2008). This group determined that infants
born vaginally had increased diversity in their
intestinal microbiome when compared with ce-
sarean delivered infants. Again, infants born by
cesarean delivery appeared to have an absence of
Biﬁdobacterium in their intestinal microbiome
(Biasucci et al. 2008).

To date, few studies on this issue regarding
mode of delivery have used Next-Gen sequenc-
ing techniques. An initial study was performed
in Venezuela with nine gravid subjects, four giv-
ing vaginal birth and ﬁve having a cesarean de-
livery (Dominguez-Bello et al. 2010). This study
used the V2 region of the 16S rRNA gene and
showed that the infant microbiome most close-
ly resembled the mothers’ vaginal microbiome
following vaginal delivery. Similarly, if the in-
fant was born by cesarean delivery, the infant
microbiome most closely resembled the skin
microbiome (Dominguez-Bello et al. 2010).
Furthermore, a Canadian study using Next-
Gen sequencing techniques for the V5, V6, and
V7 regions of the 16S rRNA gene showed that
Escherichia shigella and Bacteroides were signiﬁ-
cantly diminished in the intestinal microbiome
of infants born by cesarean section (Azad et al.
2013). This study also found that infants with
the highest species richness and diversity of
their intestinal microbiome were born by emer-
gency cesarean section rather than by an elective
cesarean section or vaginally (Azad et al. 2013).
However, when followed out to 4 mo postpar-
tum, infants’ intestinal microbiome could be
differentiated primarily based on mode of feed-
ing. Speciﬁcally, infants that were formula-fed
had a higher prevalence of Peptostreptococca-
ceae and Verrucomicrobiaceae when compared
with breastfed infants (Azad et al. 2013). Thus,
mode of feeding may be more crucial than
mode of delivery in regards to the long-term
establishment of the microbiome. These ﬁnd-
ings suggest that the establishment of a stable Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051 13 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org A.L. Prince et al.

Which Microbiota First Populate the Infant? Further studies into the establishment of the
neonatal microbiome highlight this principle.
Jost et al. (2012) showed that the intestinal
microbiome of infants born vaginally and ex-
clusively breastfed decrease the amount of the
Firmicutes phylum, of which Lactobacillus be-
longs, over time while increasing the prevalence
of Bacteroides species. Thus, although these in-
fants were born vaginally, a high presence of
Firmicutes did not persist. Intriguingly, these
vaginally delivered infants could be classiﬁed
into two cohorts in this study: those that had
species of Bacteriodes present in their intestinal
microbiome and those that did not (Jost et al.
2012), and this trend was also seen in a separate
study (Palmer et al. 2007). This is in contrast to
previous studies ﬁnding that Bacteroides relative
abundance differed based on mode of delivery
(Gro¨nlund et al. 1999a; Penders et al. 2006).
However, Palmer et al. also determined that var-
iations in the Bacteroides species seen early in
neonatal life were less variant and more con-
sistent in the abundance by 1 yr of age. Addi-
tionally, the neonatal intestinal microbiome also
appeared more adult-like near the end of the ﬁrst
year of life (Palmer et al. 2007). This ﬁnding was
conﬁrmed in a study by Koenig et al. in which the
intestinal microbiome of an infant was moni-
tored for 2.5 yr. Here, the authors found that
the diversity of the intestinal microbiome in-
creased over time and with the introduction of
foods (Koenig et al. 2011). Also, Bacteroides spe-
cies were found to increase on the introduction
of vegetables (Koenig et al. 2011). Altogether,
this data indicate that the neonatal microbiome
is highly variable within the ﬁrst year of life.
Therefore, various exposures during this time
may have a signiﬁcant impact on the developing
microbiome.

2000; Michalowicz et al. 2006; Macones et al.
2010). Animal models have shown that bacteria
may be spread hematogenously to the placenta
(Han et al. 2004; Fardini et al. 2010), and re-
ports have suggested that oral bacteria may be
associated with pregnancy complications (Katz
et al. 2009; Han et al. 2010; Swati et al. 2012).
Fusobacterium nucleatum is an oral pathogen
that is frequently found in diagnostic cultures
following PTB, PPROM, and stillbirth (Romero
et al. 1989; Watts et al. 1992; Han et al. 2004,
2010; Cahill et al. 2005). Our ﬁnding of Fuso-
bacteria to be a relatively abundant taxon in the
placenta supports the hypothesis of hematoge-
nous spread from the oral cavity to the placenta
(Aagaard et al. 2014), and this theory is further
buttressed by the ﬁnding of bacteria in cord
blood of normal pregnancies (Jime´nez et al.
2005). Along these lines, bacteria can spread
from the intra-amnion outward to the chorion,
which indicates that hematogenous spread from
mother to infant may be occurring via cord blood (Kim et al. 2009). Thus, hematogenous
spread may promote colonization of the placen-
ta and the fetus, but further studies are needed
to examine this phenomenon. However, a po-
tential mechanism to compromise the ma-
ternal– fetal barrier has been illuminated. In a
mechanism akin to Listeria monocytogenes (Ba-
kardjiev et al. 2006; Le Monnier et al. 2007),
F. nucleatum expresses adhesin FadA that in-
teracts with E-cadherin, which compromises
cell– cell adhesion and membranes (Lecuit et
al. 2004; Ikegami et al. 2009; Fardini et al.
2011). However, further studies are necessary
to show deﬁnitively that hematogenous spread
from the oral cavity is possible for colonization
or infection of the placenta