9_PARAGRAPHS

Capnocytophaga,
Staphylococcus, Estrogen receptor-beta has been detected in the oral mucosa
and salivary glands (Valimaa et al., 2004), and some evidence
shows age-related hormonal changes in the exfoliated normal
buccal mucosa of women (Donald et al., 2013). Moreover, the
vaginal and buccal epithelia share some microscopic similarities.
As observed by Thompson et al. (2001), the patterns of surface
keratinization and the distribution and appearance of
the
lipid lamellae in the intercellular spaces were similar between
vaginal and buccal epithelial samples of postmenopausal women.
Therefore, given that many menopausal women also suﬀer from
oral discomforts in addition to climacteric symptoms (Meurman
et al., 2009), an understanding of the impact of female sex hormones on the characteristics of the oral microbiota may be
clinically relevant, especially during menopause. Some of the
main complaints from women in menopause include dry mouth
and tooth loss, and the existing data have focused on the salivary
microbial composition and the microbiota characteristics of the
gingival sulcus. Therefore, this review will explore the main
ﬁndings of the relationship between the oral microbiota and
menopause in saliva and periodontal support.

Fluctuating female sexual hormone levels in menopausal
women may represent key factors that respond to changes
detected in the oral cavity (Dutt et al., 2013). Menopause
is accompanied by decreased bone density, which may have Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 2 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1884 fmicb-08-01884 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:37 # 3 Vieira et al.

Periodontitis is a chronic inﬂammatory process that occurs
in response to an increase in Gram-negative bacteria in the
bioﬁlm (Ruby and Barbeau, 2002), aﬀecting the tissues that
surround and support the teeth. Speciﬁc bacterial species, such
as Porphyromonas gingivalis and Tannerella forsythensis, were
found to be important
in the etiology of periodontitis in
postmenopausal women (Brennan et al., 2007). In addition,
changes in periodontal status were found to be associated
with variations in sex hormone levels (Mascarenhas et al.,
2003), and the occurrence of periodontitis was reported to be
greater in postmenopausal women who did not receive hormone
replacement than in premenopausal women (Haas et al., 2009).
Therefore, from a clinical point of view, the roles of sex hormones
and hormone therapy in the prevalence of subgingival bacterial
infection in peri- and postmenopausal women are of great
interest.

In a cohort study that included 106 women aged 50–58 years,
hormone replacement therapy led to a decreased number of
positive samples showing the periodontal pathogens P. gingivalis,
Prevotella intermedia, and T.
forsythia from the subgingival
plaque (Tarkkila et al., 2010). Consistent with this result, a
previous study found improved periodontal probing depths and
tooth mobility in 190 randomized women who received hormone
therapy for 1 year (López-Marcos et al., 2005). Conversely,
Pilgram et al. (2002) investigated 135 women in a randomized,
controlled trial who received estrogen replacement for 3 years
and did not ﬁnd any changes in clinical parameters such as the
attachment of teeth or the bone mineral density of the lumbar
spine. In mice, estrogen seems to modulate IL-1 production
and participate in the resistance of females to disseminating
dentoalveolar infections, leading to the enhanced localization
of these infections (Youssef and Stashenko, 2017), which draws
attention to the potential role of sex-related hormones in the
modulation of oral mucosal infections.

THE INTERACTION BETWEEN GUT
MICROBIOTA AND FEMALE SEX
HORMONES As mentioned earlier, female sex hormones levels inﬂuence
the composition of the microbiota in many sites of the body,
especially the gut. Due to intimate contact with the larger gut
immune system, the gut microbiota has been shown to inﬂuence
many diseases outside of this organ (Figure 1). Accordingly,
imbalance of the gut microbiota, called dysbiosis, has been
extensively related to metabolic and immunological diseases.
Interestingly, the presence or absence of estrogen may be able
to alter the gut microbiota equilibrium and corresponding
disease pathways. Some autoimmune diseases aﬀect more often
women than men, including systemic lupus erythematosus (Jiang
et al., 2005), Sjogren’s syndrome (Patel and Shahane, 2014)
and rheumatoid arthritis (Oliver and Silman, 2009). Gender
diﬀerences have also been reported for the outcome of microbial
infections (Fischer et al., 2015). Interestingly, the onset of
autoimmune diseases, asthma (Akinbami et al., 2016) and other
diseases occurs after menarche or during the reproductive
period of women. Experimental ﬁndings in mice have shown
that
female sexual
hormones, and immunity are associated with the development
of autoimmune diseases (Yurkovetskiy et al., 2013, 2015),
including type 1 diabetes (Markle et al., 2013) and rheumatoid
arthritis (Wu et al., 2010). The non-obese diabetic (NOD)
mouse exhibits spontaneous, immune-mediated pancreatic beta
cell destruction causing type 1 diabetes (T1D) with a complex
genetic and environmental etiology. The NOD T1D incidence
shows a strong 2:1 female to male sex bias (Markle et al., 2013).
Interestingly, germ-free NOD female mice lack this gender bias
for diabetes. Additionally, after castration, males exhibit a similar
microbiota composition and T1D incidence to females (Markle
et al., 2013). In general, this study shows that the microbiome
is a causal factor and not simply a consequence of autoimmune
disease.

Obesity aﬀects 65% of postmenopausal women and is
associated with the onset of metabolic dysfunction (Leeners
et al., 2017). Multiple studies have suggested that postmenopausal
women exhibit increased total fat mass and abdominal fat and Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 3 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1884 fmicb-08-01884 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:37 # 4 Vieira et al.

Another link between the gut microbiome and menopausal
health is related to bone. Interesting, the gut microbiota has
also been found to inﬂuence bone homeostasis. Approximately
one in two women over age 50 will break a bone because of
osteoporosis. A study that involved twenty postmenopausal
women with a mean age of 65 years showed that the group
that consumed Lactobacillus helveticus-fermented milk had
increased serum calcium levels and reduced bone reabsorption
compared with those of the control milk consumption group
(Narva et al., 2004). Experimental studies have also demonstrated
similar results. For instance, L. reuteri treatment signiﬁcantly
protected ovariectomized mice from bone loss and increases
in bone marrow CD4+ T-lymphocytes, which promote
osteoclastogenesis (Britton et al., 2014). Another study that
investigated probiotic treatment for cortical bone loss found
two inﬂammatory cytokines, TNF-α
reduced expression of
and IL-1β, and increased expression of osteoprotegerin, a
potent inhibitor of osteoclastogenesis, in the cortical bone of
ovariectomized mice (Ohlsson et al., 2014). Additionally, sex
steroid deprivation has been reported to promote intestinal
permeability (Figure 1), and the oral administration of
L. rhamnosus GG (LGG) or VSL#3 (a combination of tree
probiotics) to estrogen-deﬁcient mice signiﬁcantly reinforced
intestinal barrier integrity and completely protected the mice
against sex steroid depletion-induced bone loss (Li et al., 2016).
Importantly, to conﬁrm the role of the gut microbiota in bone
health, another experiment also showed that germ-free mice are
protected against the bone loss induced by the absence of sex
steroids (Li et al., 2016).

We must mention that the gut microbiota may inﬂuence
the risk for breast cancer through eﬀects on endogenous
estrogens produced by adipose tissue in postmenopausal women
(Figure 1) (Key et al., 2003). A cross-sectional study on 60
healthy postmenopausal women found that women with a more
diverse gut microbiome and an abundance of four Clostridia
taxa exhibited an elevated urinary ratio of hydroxylated estrogen
metabolites to parent estrogens (Fuhrman et al., 2014), which
is related to the etiology of breast cancer (Flores et al.,
2012; Kwa et al., 2016). However, another study compared 48
postmenopausal breast cancer patients and 48 control patients
and observed that postmenopausal women with breast cancer
exhibited an altered composition and estrogen-independent
low diversity of their microbiota (Goedert et al., 2015). These
diﬀerent ﬁndings on gut microbiota diversity and breast cancer
could be explained by the fact that disease outcome or disease
the
stage can also aﬀect
consumption of the soy isoﬂavone daidzein, which is metabolized
by some bacteria of the microbiota to generate equol and
O-desmethylangolensin (ODMA), could represent a therapeutic
strategy for breast cancer prevention. Some, but not all, studies
have shown a lower risk of breast cancer associated with equol
production (Hullar et al., 2014). However, only approximately
30–50% of the population can metabolize daidzein (Frankenfeld
et al., 2004; Uehara, 2013; Nakatsu et al., 2014) to equol, likely the microbiota. In this scenario, FIGURE 1 | Female sexual hormones levels inﬂuence the composition of the
microbiota in many sites of the body, especially mouth and gut. The oral and
gut microbiota have been shown to inﬂuence many diseases, such as
osteoporosis, weight gain and lipid deposition, breast cancer and
periodontitis.

Few studies have investigated whether prebiotics and
probiotics can improve insulin sensitivity in postmenopausal
women or body fat in mice. The intake of ﬂaxseed mucilage, a
prebiotic, is known to improve insulin sensitivity and alter the
gut microbiota in obese postmenopausal women (Brahe et al.,
2015). Thus far, the implications of the gut microbiota with low Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 4 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1884 fmicb-08-01884 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:37 # 5 Vieira et al