Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 2 of 22

increasing body of evidence suggests that estrogens
also have important beneficial effects on body fat and
metabolism in males [10, 11].

The gut microbiota comprises trillions of bacteria that
contribute to nutrient acquisition and energy regulation
[12, 13]. Growing evidence indicates that obesity is
closely linked with low-grade chronic inflammation
(LGCI), which can lead to MS [14, 15]. In addition,
changes in the composition of the gut microbiota are
known to be associated with the development of obesity
and its associated metabolic disorders [16]. Interestingly,
an increased ratio of the major phyla Firmicutes and
Bacteroidetes (FIR/BAC ratio) and depletion of several
bacterial species (e.g., Akkermansia mucinophilia) can
promote the development of obesity in both dietary and
genetic models of obesity in mice [17–19]. Other studies
in animal models of obesity suggest that obesity-induced
gut dysbiosis caused by either environmental or genetic
factors increase populations of bacteria that produce the
endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) [14] and decrease
LPS-suppressing bacteria [20, 21]. This process leads to
impaired gut barrier integrity and release of LPS from
intestinal gram-negative bacteria into the bloodstream
[14, 22] which in turn leads to Toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4)-mediated metabolic endotoxemia (ME), LGCI and
insulin resistance in obese mice [23, 24]. Moreover,
chronic injection of LPS in mice causes mild obesity and
insulin resistance [23], highlighting a possible role for
microbiota-derived LPS in obesity-induced inflammation.
The causative role of the gut microbiota in the context
of MS is well characterized [14, 20, 21], but the role of
sexual
gut
microbiota in the context of MS, and the associated
mechanisms underlying such differences, are still un-
clear. Here, we report that sexual dimorphism in MS is
associated with estrogen-mediated changes in the gut
microbiome, ME and LGCI, and that 17β-estradiol
(17β-E)
treatment prevents MS in male and
ovariectomized (OVX) mice by altering gut microbiome
and intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP), a major gut
microbiota-modifying enzyme. Our results shed light on
distinct male and female profiles for gut microbiome,
IAP, and markers of ME and LGCI that may contribute
to sexual dimorphism in MS, revealing new possibilities
for preventing and controlling human obesity-related
metabolic dysfunction in males and postmenopausal
women.

dimorphism on the

composition of

(E2)

Results
Sex differences in ME and LGCI are associated with sexual
dimorphism in MS
We found that relative to males (n = 11), female mice (n =
11) had significantly lower levels of markers of WD-induced
obesity, including gross appearance of mice, intra-abdominal

and gonadal fat distribution, body weight gain, and white
adipose tissues accumulation) (Additional
file 1: Figure
S1a-c). Noticeably, although there were no differences in
energy intake between males and females (Additional file 1:
Figure S1d), relative to males, females had improved MS pa-
rameters such as glucose intolerance (glucose tolerance test
with area under the curve and HOMA-IR) (Additional file 1:
Figure S1e), non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (Additional file 1:
Figure S1F-I), and dyslipidemia (total serum cholesterol,
triglyceride, HDL-C, LDL-C, and atherogenic index) (Add-
itional file 1: Figure S1j-n). We then investigated whether
oral 17β-E (E2) administration ameliorated WD-induced
MS in male and ovariectomized (OVX) mice (n = 5 per
group). Interestingly, MS parameters were more evident in
OVX mice compared to normal female (F) mice, and the
administration of 17β-E significantly suppressed the devel-
opment of MS in the male (male+E2) and OVX (OVX+E2)
groups (Fig 1a–o and Additional
file 1: Figure S1y-z),
irrespective of energy intake (Additional file 1: Figure S1x).
Notably, there were no significant differences in MS param-
eters between the female and male+E2 groups (Fig. 1a–o
and Additional file 1: Figure S1y-z). This was accompanied
with elevated levels of serum 17β-E concentrations in male
+E2 and OVX+E2 groups treated with 17β-E compared to
control male and OVX groups respectively (Additional file 1:
Figure S1p). We investigated whether sexual dimorphism in
MS is associated with sex-specific differences in the markers
of ME [serum LPS, LPS-binding protein (LBP), soluble
CD14 (sCD14), and intestinal permeability] and LGCI
[tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α),
interleukin-1β (IL-1β),
IL-6, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and
IL-10], and whether estrogen plays a key role in this context.
Surprisingly, we found significant differences in the markers
of ME (Fig. 1q–t and Additional file 1: Figure S1o-r) and
LGCI (Fig. 1u–y and Additional file 1: Figure S1s-w) be-
tween WD-fed male and female mice. Lack of endogenous
estrogen support in the OVX mice induced significantly ele-
vated levels of markers of ME (Fig. 1q–t) and LGCI
(Fig. 1u–y) compared to the female group. Moreover, 17β-E
treatment reduced the occurrence of ME and LGCI in the
M+E2 and OVX+E2 groups to levels equal to those female
mice (Fig. 1q–r).

Gut microbiome mediates the development of metabolic
syndrome in a sex-specific manner
Given that metabolic endotoxemia is commonly derived
from gut dysbiosis, we next used high-throughput 16S
rRNA gene sequencing to determine whether sexual di-
morphism exist in gut microbiome, and whether 17β-E
treatment affected the microbiome composition. V3-V4
16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed on fecal sam-
ples collected from M, F, M+E2, OVX, and OVX+E2
groups (n = 5 per group) that were fed a WD. Principal
coordinate (PCoA) analysis of a common β-diversity

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 3 of 22

Fig. 1 Sexual differences in ME and LGCI are associated with sexual dimorphism in obesity and MS. Male (M), normal female (F), and ovariectomized
(OVX) female mice were divided in to five groups (M, F, M+E2, OVX, and OVX+E2; n = 5/group) and were fed western diet (WD) ± 17β-estradiol (E2) in
the drinking water for 6 weeks. Markers for sexual dimorphism in metabolic syndrome (MS) (a–o), metabolic endotoxemia (ME) (q–t), and low-grade
chronic inflammation (LGCI) (u–y) were studied. a Weekly body weight. b Body weight gain. c White adipose tissue (WAT) weight. d Glucose tolerance
test (GTT). e GTT area under curve (AUC). f Homeostatic model assessment-insulin resistance (HOMA-IR). g Liver weight. h Liver triglyceride. i Hematoxylin
and eosin-stained liver specimens showing histological evidences for fatty liver. j Fatty liver score. Serum levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (k), total
cholesterol (TC) (l), triglyceride (TG) (m), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) (n), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) (o), E2 levels (p),
lipopolysaccharides (LPS) (q), LPS-binding proteins (LBP) (r), and soluble CD14 (sCD14) (s). t Serum levels of FITC-dextran macromolecules indicating
intestinal permeability differences. Serum levels of cytokines such as TNF-α (u), IL-1β (v), MCP-1 (w), IL-6 (x), and IL-10 (y). Data are expressed as mean ± SE.
Box plots (box showing the median, and the 25th and 75th percentiles, and the whiskers of the graph show the largest and smallest values) were used.
Data with different superscript letters are significantly different (P < 0.05). Ordinary or repeated measures one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple
comparisons test

index (Bray-Curtis distance) applied on whole microbiota
abundance identified a distinct clustering of microbiota
composition between male and OVX female and F/OVX
+E2/M+E2 groups along the primary ordination axis (axis
1), results are shown in Fig. 2a and Additional file 1: Table

S1. Next, taxa which are primarily responsible for an ob-
served difference between groups were analyzed using the
SIMPER test (similarity percentage analysis), which identi-
fied 10 taxa that were annotated at the genus level. PCoA
showed that gram-negative LPS-producing Escherichia/

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 4 of 22

Fig. 2 Estrogen alters the gut microbiome. Male (M), normal female (F), and ovariectomized (OVX) female mice were divided in to five groups (M,
F, M + E2, OVX, and OVX+E2; n = 5/group) and were fed western diet (WD) ± 17β-estradiol (E2) in the drinking water for 6 weeks. a β-diversity analysis
of whole microbiota relative abundance (RA) using principal coordinate analysis (PCOA) with Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index (BCD) followed by
permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) significance test. b Similarity percentage (SIMPER) analysis with BCD was used to identify
the specific genera with the greatest contribution to the differences observed between the groups, followed by principal component analysis (PCA)
(variance-covariance type) showing the top 10 operational taxonomic unit (OTU) scores included as vectors. The magnitude and direction correspond
to the weights. c Analysis at the phylum level using RA (%). d Hierarchical clustering with a heat map shows the RA of representative OTUs (those with
greatest difference between five groups) group means from each family selected for P < 0.05, obtained with differential abundance analysis. The OTUs
are shown as OTU number, phylum and family. e Cladogram generated from linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) showing the
relationship between taxon (the levels represent, from the inner to outer rings, phylum, class, order, family, and genus). f–i Scatter plots showing the
phylum Proteobacteria, Firmicutes (FIR) to Bacteroidetes (BAC) ratio, Bifidobacterium (B) to Enterobacteriacea (E) ratio and RA of genus Akkermansia (%).
Data was shown as mean ± SEM. Data with different superscript letters are significantly different (P < 0.05). One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s
multiple comparisons test

Shigella largely contributed to M/OVX groups, whereas
LPS-suppressing Akkermansia muciniphila [14, 25] and Bifi-
dobacterium [14, 26] were associated with the female and

17β-E-treated M/OVX groups (Fig. 2b). At the phylum level,
the majority of the bacterial phyla identified in the fecal
samples were encompassed by Bacteriodetes, Firmicutes,

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 5 of 22

in accordance with the SIMPER test,

Proteobacteria, and Verrucomicrobia, as shown in Fig. 2c.
Furthermore, the relative abundance (RA) of taxa, which
showed false discovery rate (FDR)-corrected P value < 0.05
with differential expression analysis conducted on whole
microbiota profile, were expressed as heat map (Fig. 2d and
Additional file 1: Table S2), including hierarchical clustering
(HCN). HCN is a clustering technique for graphically sum-
marizing the inter-sample relationships in the form of a
dendrogram. HCN also clearly separated the male/OVX
samples as a single cluster from the other three groups (F,
M+E2, OVX+E2) (Additional file 1: Figure S2a). In order to
further identify microbial taxa that serve as biomarkers for
different groups, we performed liner discriminate analysis
(LDA) coupled with effect size measurements (LEfSe). A
cladogram (Fig. 2e) generated from LEfSe analysis showed
the relationship between taxon and biomarker taxa (LDA
score > 2 and a significance of P < 0.05 determined by the
Wilcoxon signed-rank test) (Additional file 1: Figure S2b).
Notably,
the
LPS-producing phylum Proteobacteria and its members
(class_γ-Proteobacteria, family_Enterobacteriacea and gen-
us_Escherichia/Shigella) were higher in the OVX group
(Additional file 1: Figure S2b). We also demonstrated that a
number of well-studied microbiota-based markers of obes-
ity and MS associated with LGCI were affected by estrogen.
These included the phylum Proteobacteria [14]; Firmicutes
to Bacteroidetes ratio (FIR/BAC ratio—a known marker of
obesity [14, 17]; Bifidobacterium/Enterobacteriaceae ratio
(B/E)—a well-established marker of colonization resistance
to opportunistic pathogens [27]; and the genus Akkerman-
sia, which has been shown to reduce fat mass gain and
WAT macrophage infiltration and improve gut barrier
function and glucose metabolism [28]. Sexual dimorphism
was clearly identified with respect to all four markers, with
significantly lower Proteobacteria abundance, decreased
FIR/BAC ratios, higher B/E ratios, and increased Akker-
mansia abundance in normal females compared to normal
male and OVX females (Fig. 2f–i). 17β-E treatment signifi-
cantly reduced Proteobacteria and elevated Akkermansia in
the male (M+E2) (Fig. 2f, i) and significantly reduced the
Proteobacteria and increased the B/E ratio in OVX fe-
males (OVX+E2) (Fig. 2f, h). In addition, resulting taxa
identified with pairwise comparison analyses at different
taxonomic levels are summarized in the Additional file 1:
Table S3. Next, we employed PICRUSt to predict the
metagenomes and determine the changes in microbial
metabolic pathways (KEGG) across different groups [29].
Male/OVX groups were segregated from the other three
groups using PCoA applied on predicted functional path-
ways (Additional file 1: Figure S2c). According to LEfSe
analysis, LPS-related functional pathways were signifi-
cantly lower in the female, M+E2 and OVX+E2 groups
compared to male and OVX groups (Additional file 1: Fig-
ure S2d-f). The α-diversity profile for groups reached

stable values as indicated by the observed plateaus seen
for each group in the Rarefaction curves (Additional file 1:
Figure S3a-e). Together, these results highlight the sex
specific shifts in gut microbiome that occurred upon WD
and 17β-E treatment.

cocktail

We next used fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT)
and antibiotic (ABX)-induced depletion to investigate
whether gut microbiota were necessary to mediate sex-
ual dimorphism in MS. FMT with fecal content from
donor male mice fed WD for 10 weeks was performed
on female 10-week-old recipient mice pretreated with an
[19]. Unexpectedly, male mice
antibiotic
fecal-transplant induced obesity (Fig. 3a–c) and glucose
intolerance (Fig. 3d and Additional file 1: Figure S3f )
and elevated serum TG (Fig. 3e), and markers of ME
(Fig. 3f–h) and LGCI (Fig. 3i) in female recipients, with
no differences between male and M → F groups (n = 5
per group). Moreover, fecal β-diversity microbiota ana-
lysis (Fig. 3j) and HCN with heat-map analysis (Fig. 3k)
showed that the M and M → F samples were clustered
together and were separated from the female control
group (n = 3 per group). M and M → F groups presented
with higher Proteobacteria and Firmicutes and lower
Verrucomicrobia and Bacteroidetes compared to females
(Fig. 3l). LEfSe showed γ-Proteobacteria and Enterobac-
teriacea for M and M → F groups analyzed as a single
cluster (Fig. 3m and Additional
file 1: Figure S3g).
Higher RA of both Proteobacteria and FIR/BAC ratios,
and lower B/E ratio and Akkermansia muciniphila abun-
dance (Additional file 1: Figure S2g-j) were also observed
with the M → F group, while there were no significant
differences in the α-diversity measures (Additional file 1:
Figure S3h-l). Principal component analysis (PCA) with
predicted metabolic pathways clustered the M and M →
F groups (Additional file 1: Figure S2k), and significantly
higher abundance of LPS-related functions were found
with LEfSe analysis (Additional file 1: Figure S2l). Finally,
all of the abovementioned results were associated with
undetectable (< 6.6 pg/mL) serum E2 levels in the M →
F(Additional file 1: Figure S3m) group after FMT.

To further explore the causative role of gut micro-
biota, we next depleted the gut microbiota [14] in mice
using a well-established ABX cocktail. Male and female
mice (n = 5/group) were fed WD for 10 weeks to induce
MS. As expected, we found appreciable sexual dimorph-
ism in the markers of ME (Fig. 4a), LGCI (Fig. 4b and
Additional
file 1: Figure S4a), and MS (Fig. 4c and
Additional file 1: Figure S4b-d). Mice then received the
ABX cocktail in drinking water for next 6 weeks. Strik-
ingly, in addition to elimination of sexual dimorphism in
markers of ME (Fig. 4a–d), LGCI
(Fig. 4e–h and
Additional file 1: Figure S4a), and MS (Fig. 4i–n and
Additional file 1: Figure S4b-d), female mice showed
significantly elevated levels of gut permeability (Fig. 4d),

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 6 of 22

Fig. 3 Male mice fecal microbiota-transplant transfers MS to female recipients. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) with fecal content from
donor male (M; n = 5) mice fed WD was performed on female recipient mice (F → M; n = 5) pretreated with an antibiotic cocktail. Normal female
(F; n = 5) mice were maintained as a control group. a–e Markers of obesity (baseline (BL) and after FMT body weight and body weight gain in
the end (a), fat and lean body mass (% body weight) (b), gross appearance (dorsal and ventral aspects have been shown to differentiate the
female from male sex) of male, female, and F → M mice (c), glucose tolerance test results (d), and serum triglyceride levels ®. f–h Markers of
metabolic endotoxemia such as serum lipopolysaccharide (LPS) concentration (f) and LPS-binding proteins (LBP) concentrations (g) and intestinal
permeability to FITC-dextran macro molecules (h). i Serum TNF-α. j β-diversity analysis using principal coordinate analysis (PCOA) with Bray-Curtis
dissimilarity index followed by PERMANOVA significance test. k Hierarchical clustering with a heat map shows the representative OTU (those with
greatest difference between groups) group means from each family selected for P < 0.05, obtained with differential abundance analysis. l Phylum-
level analysis using the relative abundance (RA). m Cladogram generated from LEfSe analysis showing the relationship between biomarker taxa
(the levels represent, from the inner to outer rings, phylum, class, order, family, and genus). ®®Data was shown as mean ± SEM. Data with different
superscript letters are significantly different (P < 0.05). Ordinary or repeated measures one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test

LGCI (Fig. 4e–h), body weight gain (Fig. 4i–j), glucose
intolerance (Fig. 4k and Additional
file 1: Figure b),
HOMA-IR (Fig. 4i), and serum TG (Fig. 4m). Interest-
ingly, female mice showed significantly lower serum E2
levels after ABX treatment compared to before ABX

treatment (Additional file 1: Figure S4e). In combination,
the results of these FMT and ABX experiments suggest
that the gut microbiome mediates sexual dimorphism in
the MS mainly through regulating the development ME
and LGCI.

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 7 of 22

Fig. 4 Antibiotic treatment alleviates sexual dimorphism in MS. 10-week-old male (n = 5) and female (n = 5) mice maintained on chow diet were
switched to a WD until the age of 20 weeks to induce sexual dimorphism in MS. Then, a broad-spectrum antibiotic cocktail (ABX) containing
ampicillin (1 g/L), vancomycin (500 mg/L), neomycin sulfate (1 g/L) (added to drinking water), and metronidazole (100 mg/kg) (orally gavaged
every 12 h) was administered for next 6 weeks to deplete the gut microbiota. a–d Sexual dimorphism in markers of metabolic endotoxemia
(serum LPS, LBP, sCD14, and intestinal permeability). e–h Markers of low-grade chronic inflammation (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, MCP-1, and IL-10). i–n
Features of metabolic syndrome (body weight, glucose tolerance test, insulin resistance (HOMA-IR), serum triglycerides and HDL-C). Data (M vs. F
and Before Abx vs. After Abx) were analyzed at the baseline (after 20 weeks of WD feeding) and after ABX treatment. Data was shown as mean ±
SEM. Data with different superscript letters are significantly different (P < 0.05). Ordinary or repeated measures two-way ANOVA followed by
Sidak’s multiple comparisons test

Isoflavones produce microbiome modifying effects similar
to estrogen and reverse MS in male mice
To explore whether estrogen-like compounds can produce
similar effects to those we found in the 17β-E-treated male,
we used isoflavones (ISO) such as genistein (G) and daid-
zein (D). Male mice (n = 10) were fed WD for 4 months to
induce severe obesity and MS and then treated with or
without G and D isoflavones for 5 weeks. Interestingly, ISO

treatment significantly reversed the WD-induced obesity
(Fig. 5a–c), glucose intolerance and HOMA-IR (Fig. 5d–f),
dyslipidemia (Fig. 5g–j), and NAFLD (including formation
of Mallory bodies and mild fibrosis induced by WD)
(Fig. 5k) despite similar energy intake between the male
(n = 4) and male+ISO (n = 6) groups (Additional file 1:
Figure S5a). As expected, the reversal of MS parameters
was associated with lower levels of markers of ME (Fig. 5l)

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 8 of 22

Fig. 5 (See legend on next page.)

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 9 of 22

(See figure on previous page.)
Fig. 5 Isoflavones produce similar microbiome-modifying effects as estrogens and reverse MS. Male mice with obesity and metabolic syndrome
features were divided into Male (n = 4) and Male+ISO (n = 6) groups. Male+ISO group received supplementation of both genistein (G) and
daidzein with a WD. a–k Metabolic syndrome markers such as gross appearance and body weight (a-b) and white adipose tissue (WAT) weight
(c), glucose tolerance test curves with area under the curve (AUC) (d, e) and insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) (f), serum total cholesterol, triglycerides,
LDL-C and HDL-C (g–j) histological evidences showing non-alcoholic fatty liver disease features (arrow heads indicating inflammatory cells
infiltration, Mallory bodies and mild fibrosis) (k). l Markers of metabolic endotoxemia (serum LPS, LBP, sCD14, and intestinal permeability). m
Markers of low-grade chronic inflammation (TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β, and IL-10). n β-diversity analysis using principal coordinate analysis (PCOA) with
Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index (BCD) followed by PERMANOVA significance test. o SIMPER with BCD analysis followed by principal component
analysis (PCA) (variance-covariance type) showing the top six operational taxonomic unit (OTU) scores included as vectors. p Analysis at the
phylum level using RA (%). q Hierarchical clustering with a heat map shows the relative abundance (RA) of representative OTUs (those with
greatest difference between groups) group means from each family selected for P < 0.05, obtained with differential abundance analysis. r–u Box
plots showing the Proteobacteria, Firmicutes (FIR) to Bacteroidetes (BAC) ratio, Bifidobacterium (B) to Enterobacteriacea (E) ratio, and RA of genus
Akkermansia. v RA of predicted microbial genes was identified using PICRUSt analysis followed by PCA (variance-covariance type) and the
resulting scores were included as vectors. w, x RA of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) biosynthesis and LPS biosynthesis proteins. y LDA scores derived
from LEfSe analysis conducted on predicted microbial genes identified by PICRUSt, showing the biomarker functions. Data was shown as mean ±
SEM. Data with different superscript letters are significantly different (P < 0.05). Student’s t test or repeated measures one-way ANOVA followed by
Tukey’s multiple comparison test

and LGCI
(Fig. 5m). Furthermore, we found higher
mRNA levels of estrogen receptor (ER)-α and no changes
with ER-β in the duodenal tissues of ISO-treated male
mice (Additional file 1: Figure S5b-c). Moreover, principal
coordinate β-diversity analysis applied on entire fecal
microbiome population distinctly clustered the Male+ISO
and Male samples on axis one (Fig. 5n). Interestingly, simi-
lar to 17β-E, SIMPER test showed a higher contribution of
Escherichia-Shigella to the M group whereas Akkermansia,
Bifidobacterium, and Bacteroides were associated with the
M+ISO group (Fig. 5o). At the phylum level, ISO treatment
significantly reduced the RA of Proteobacteria and in-
creased Actinobacteria and Verrucomicrobia (Fig. 5p). Dif-
ferential expression with HCN analysis also grouped the M
+ISO samples and the RA of major bacterial groups as
shown in the heat map (Fig. 5q). In addition, significantly
lower Proteobacteria levels (Fig. 5r), higher B/E ratios
(Fig. 5t), increased Akkermansia levels (Fig. 5u), and signifi-
cantly greater α-diversity measures (Additional file 1: Figure
S5b-f) were observed in the M+ISO group, although no dif-
ferences were observed with FIR/BAC ratios (Fig. 5s). PCA
of predicted functional metabolic pathways also segregated
the M+ISO group from the male samples (Fig. 5v). In
addition, the RA of LPS-related functional pathways were
significantly lower in M+ISO group compared to male
group (Fig. 5w, x), which was also confirmed by LEfSe
analysis (Fig. 5y). These data suggest that dietary supple-
mentation of phytoestrogens such as ISO may exert effects
similar to those of 17β-E on the microbiome, ME, and
LGCI in males to prevent MS.

Intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP) drives sexual
dimorphism in gut microbiota
It has been well established that endogenous antimicro-
bial peptides (eAMP) (e.g., IAP and Reg3γ) maintain
normal gut homeostasis and regulate gut microbiota
composition [14, 30]. Next, we examined the extent to

tissues of

which sexual dimorphism in gut microbiome was driven
by differences in AMP levels between males and females,
and whether estrogen status affected endogenous eAMP
production. Among the eAMPs analyzed (Fig. 6a, b and
Additional file 1: Figure S5i-j), we found significant dif-
ferences only in IAP between groups based on sex and
estrogen treatment (Fig. 6a, b). Recently, we and others
have shown the gut microbiome-modifying effects of in-
testinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP), especially with re-
spect to LPS-related and gram-positive bacterial groups
[14, 31–33]. In addition to in vitro cell culture studies,
the study groups (Fig. 2) were
duodenal
analyzed for IAP after 6 weeks of 17β-E treatment. We
found upregulated mRNA expression levels of Akp3 (a
major IAP isozyme) (Fig. 6a), downregulated expression
of the Akp6 IAP isozyme (Fig. 6b), higher villus-associ-
ated enterocytes expression of IAP with immunohisto-
chemical staining (Fig. 6c), elevated IAP protein levels
(Fig. 6d), and elevated IAP enzymatic activity in the duo-
denum (Fig. 6e) of female and 17β-E-treated male and
OVX groups compared to normal male and OVX mice.
Moreover, the stimulation of differentiated Caco2 cells
with 17β-E (10 nM) significantly elevated IAP levels in a
time-dependent manner (Fig. 6f ). Similarly, elevated
mRNA expression of Akp3 (Fig. 6g, with no detection of
expression of Akp6), higher immunochemical staining of
IAP (Fig. 6h, i), elevated IAP protein levels (Fig. 6j), and
elevated IAP activity (Fig. 6k) were observed in the duo-
denum of M+ISO group compared to male group after
5 weeks of ISO treatment. In addition, in vitro stimula-
tion of Caco2 cells with 25 μM concentration of either
genistein (G) or daidzein (D) or G+D combination also
resulted in increased IAP protein levels (Fig. 6l). We also
examined
using
of
L-phenylalanine (L-phe), a specific non-competitive in-
hibitor [14, 32, 34, 35] of IAP. L-phe (10 mM) pretreat-
ment of Caco2 cells blocked the elevation of IAP protein

inhibition

effects

IAP

the

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 10 of 22

Fig. 6 (See legend on next page.)

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 11 of 22

(See figure on previous page.)
Fig. 6 Intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP) mediates sexual dimorphism in gut microbiota in the context of MS. a, b mRNA expression of two
major IAP isozymes AKP3 and AKP6 in the duodenum of five groups (male, female, male+E2, OVX, and OVX+E2; n = 5 per group). c Immunohistochemical
(IHC) localization of IAP in the duodenum. The enlarged view of single villus (circled in the main figures) has also been placed under each picture with an
arrow head indicating the location of IAP in a circular fashion in the tip of small intestinal villus. d Western blot (WB) analysis showing the protein levels of
IAP. e Duodenal tissue total IAP activity. f WB analysis of IAP using cell lysates collected from differentiated Caco-2 cell with enterocytes-like features
after stimulating them (in vitro) with 17β-estradiol (10 nM) in a time-dependent manner. g AKP3 mRNA expression of male (M) and male +ISO (M
+ISO) groups. h, i Representative IHC staining pictures showing the IAP expression. j WB analysis showing the protein levels of IAP. k Total IAP activity.
l In vitro stimulation of Caco-2 cells with 25 μM concentration of either genistein (G) or daidzein (D) or G+D combination, followed by WB analysis of
IAP. m In vitro stimulation of Caco-2 cells in the presence or absence of L-phenylalanine (10 mM), G+D (25 μM), and 17β-E (10 nM), followed by WB
analysis of IAP. q-PCR-based quantification of Proteobacteria, Bifidobacterium (B) to Enterobacteriacea (E) ratio and relative abundance of Akkermansia
and Firmicutes (FIR) to Bacteroidetes (BAC) ratio (n–q), markers of metabolic endotoxemia (serum LPS, LBP and intestinal permeability) (r–t), low-grade
chronic inflammation (TNF-α) (u), and markers of metabolic syndrome (body weight and GTT) (v, w) in the male (M), female (F), and F+L-phe (10 mM)-
treated groups. Data was shown as mean ± SEM. Box plots (box showing the median, and the 25th and 75th percentiles, and the whiskers of the
graph show the largest and smallest values) were also used. Data with different superscript letters are significantly different (P < 0.05). Student’s t test or
ordinary or repeated measures one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test

the primary

IAP is one of

transcription factor (Additional

found with 17β-E and ISO treatment (Fig. 6m). Further
analysis using samples collected from in vivo (17β-E and
ISO experiments in mice) and in vitro (Caco-2 cells) ex-
periments indicated that both 17β-E and ISO signifi-
cantly upregulated the mRNA levels of nuclear
transcription factor KLF4 (gut-enriched Krüppel-like fac-
tor) (Additional file 1: Figure S5k-l). There was a clear
trend of increased mRNA levels of Cdx1 (caudal-type
homeobox-1)
file 1:
Figure S5m-n), both KLF4 and Cdx1 are major tran-
scription factors that target IAP [36]. To further ver-
ify whether
factors
responsible for the differences in the gut microbiota
between male and female C57BL/6 mice, we exam-
ined the effects of IAP inhibition on the status of key
microbiota changes. After 8 weeks of WD and L-phe
(10 mM) treatment, we found that the L-phe-treated female
mice exhibited a significant increase in LPS-producing Pro-
teobacteria, decrease of B/E ratio, increase of the relative
abundance (RA) of Akkermansia muciniphila and no
differences in FIR/BAC ratio (Fig. 6n–q) compared to the
untreated female (F) group (n = 5 per group). Accordingly,
the L-phe-treated female group showed significantly
higher
levels of markers of metabolic endotoxemia
(Fig. 6r–t), LGCI (Fig. 6u), and glucose intolerance (Fig. 6v
with no differences in body weight gain (Fig. 6w). These
results support the notion that sexual dimorphism in en-
dogenous IAP activity might partially drive differences in
gut microbiota between male and female, and 17β-E and
ISO-treated C57BL/6 mice.

Network interactions reveal host-microbiome interactions
(HMI) driven by estrogen status
Integrating significant microbial associations detected
from OTU tables with metadata measurements of interest
using correlation network analysis not only will provide us
with valuable insights into the dynamics of the interac-
tions between external factors and the microbial commu-
nity, but also can help us understand how the detected

relationships might change when additional variables are
taken into account [37]. The HMI network (Fig. 7a) was
first built from Spearman’s nonparametric rank correlation
coefficient (P < 0.05) between host parameters and micro-
bial genera. Each node was colored according to the “data
type” and sized based on “betweenness centrality,” which
quantifies the influence of a node in connecting other
nodes within network values. Edges (lines) represent sta-
tistically significant correlations, and are colored light
black for positive and blue for negative correlations. Next,
nodes were grouped as modules and the first three largest
modules of the network were taken to show the relation-
ship between specific genera and host parameters (Fig. 7b,
d). Partial least square (PLS) regression loading score plot
(Fig. 7e) illustrates the association of between host param-
eters (dependent variables colored blue) and microbial
genera (explanatory variables colored red). Samples from
five different groups were observations (green dots). Ac-
cordingly, a diagram illustrating a proposed mechanism
has been developed (Fig. 7f). Endogenous estrogens in
the female mice, exogenous supplementation of 17β-E
to male and ovariectomized female mice, and dietary
supplementation of ISO to male mice upregulate KLF4
transcription factor that target IAP, which, in turn, in-
creases the endogenous IAP activity in the gut. Ele-
vated IAP activity leads to decrease Proteobacteria and
FIR/BAC, increase B/E, and the abundance of Akker-
mansia genera, decreasing LPS-producing bacteria
(e.g., Proteobacteria) while increasing LPS-suppressing
bacteria (e.g., Bifidobacterium and Akkermansia muci-
nophila). These changes lower LPS production and IP,
resulting in reduced ME. The subsequent reduction of
inflammatory cytokines leads to the suppression of
LGCI and MS.

Discussion
To date, the mechanisms underlying the reported sexual
dimorphism in MS have remained enigmatic. The present
study demonstrates for the first time that sex-dependent

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 12 of 22

Fig. 7 Network interactions reveal host-microbiome interactions (HMI) driven by estrogen status. a–d The HMI network (a) was first built from
Spearman’s nonparametric rank correlation coefficient (P < 0.05) between host parameters and microbial genera. Each node was colored according to
the “data type” and sized based on “betweenness centrality,” which quantifies the influence of a node in connecting other nodes within network
values. Edges (lines) represent statistically significant correlations and are colored light black for positive and blue for negative correlations. Next, nodes
were grouped as modules (a set nodes connected to each other by many links, while connected by few links to nodes of other groups) and the first
three largest modules of the network were taken to show the relationship between specific genera and host parameters (b-d). e Partial least square
(PLS) regression loading score plot. The plot illustrates the association of between host parameters (dependent variables colored blue) and microbial
genera (explanatory variables colored red). Samples from five different groups were observations (green dots). Leave one-out cross-validation (LOO-CV)
was applied. The global goodness of fit (Q2cum) and the predictive quality of the models (R2Y and R2X cum) values were inserted on the top left
corner of the figure. f Diagram illustrating a proposed mechanism. Endogenous estrogens in the female mice, exogenous supplementation of 17β-
estradiol (17β-E) to male (M+17β-E) and ovariectomized female (OVX+17β-E) mice and dietary supplementation of isoflavones (ISO) to male mice
upregulate nuclear transcription factors (KLF4) that target IAP, which, in turn, increases the endogenous IAP activity in the gut. Elevated IAP activity
leads to decreased Proteobacteria and Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio (FIR/BAC), increased Bifidobacterium to Enterobacteriacea ratio (B/E), and the
abundance of Akkermansia genera, decreasing LPS-producing bacteria (e.g., Proteobacteria) while increasing LPS-suppressing bacteria (e.g., Bifidobacterium
and Akkermansia mucinophila). These changes lower LPS production (LPS biosynthesis and related proteins) and intestinal permeability, resulting in
reduced metabolic endotoxemia (serum LPS/LPS binding proteins/soluble CD14). The subsequent reduction of inflammatory cytokines leads to the
suppression of low-grade chronic inflammation and metabolic syndrome. AI, atherogenic index; TG, triglyceride; IAP, intestinal alkaline phosphatase;
E2, 17β-estradiol

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 13 of 22

effects on the gut microbiome mediate sexual dimorphism
in MS in C57BL/6 mice and sex-specific expression and
activity of IAP, a major gut microbiota-modifying factor
[31–33]. Given the causative role of ME originating from
dysbiotic gut microbiota and LGCI induced by ME in the
context of WD-induced obesity and MS [14–16], the
novel findings in our study are as follows: (1) sex-specific
differences in the gut microbiota composition (e.g., Proteo-
bacteria, FIR/BAC ratio, B/E ratio, and Akkermansia) and
functions (e.g., LPS biosynthesis and LPS-related proteins)
and markers of ME and LGCI induced by WD are associ-
ated with sexual dimorphism in MS. (2) Male mice are
markedly susceptible to ME and LGCI and female mice
are exclusively protected from ME and LGCI. (3) Gut
microbiota, especially LPS-related bacteria, mediate the
sexual dimorphism in MS, reflected by the fact that male
mice microbiota transplants induced ME, LGCI, and MS
in the female recipients and that ABX abolished the sexual
dimorphism and worsened the MS markers in female
mice. (4) 17β-E induces gut microbiome changes, which is
associated with lower susceptibility to WD-induced ME,
LGCI, and MS in the male and OVX mice. Moreover,
17β-E-induced gut microbiome changes and protection
against MS are associated with elevation of activity and
expression of IAP. (5) Estrogen-like compounds (e.g., iso-
flavones) had gut microbiome-modifying effects similar to
estrogens and prevented WD-induced ME, LGCI, and MS
in male mice by elevating IAP, indicating that dietary sup-
plementation of isoflavones could be a potential alterna-
tive to 17β-E to treat men and postmenopausal women
who are affected by obesity and MS. (6) IAP could largely
mediate the 17β-E and ISO-induced gut microbiome
changes, and this might be due to the E2-mediated upreg-
ulation of transcription factors that target IAP such as
KLF4 and CDX1.

It is important to note that the major gut micro-
biota findings (changes in Proteobacteria, FIR/BAC ra-
and Akkermansia)
tio, B/E ratio,
reported here
regarding sexual dimorphism have been studied ex-
tensively in animals and also in the humans in the
context of obesity and MS [17–19]. Data obtained
from animal models identified consistent differences
in the two major bacterial phyla, with a significant in-
crease in Firmicutes and decrease in Bacteroidetes
levels
to
wild-type mice despite similarities in their diet and
activity levels [16]. Consistent with pre-clinical data,
numerous human studies have consistently demon-
strated that the FIR/BAC ratio is specifically increased
in obese people [17–19]. Metabolic endotoxemia de-
rived from gut dysbiosis is central to the pathogenesis
of chronic low-grade inflammation, a factor underlying
many current chronic diseases [9, 22]. Metabolic endotox-
emia can be determined by the abundance of bacteria

obese mice

genetically

compared

in

of

the

fatty

acids

development

endotoxemia

affecting LPS production and gut barrier function. It is
therefore conceivable that the 17β-E-induced marked re-
ductions in LPS-producing bacteria (e.g., Proteobacteria)
and increases in LPS-suppressing bacteria (e.g., Bifidobac-
terium and A. mucinophila) [14, 25–27] significantly sup-
pressed
and
inflammation. Recent clinical studies have shown that
LPS-producing bacteria are abundant in obese subjects
with type 2 diabetes [14, 16, 38–40]. It has also been
shown that male mice fed a WD rich in milk fat and
of
omega-6
of
LPS-producing
LPS-suppressing Bifidobacterium spp [27, 41, 42].
Along these lines, the WD diet used in the present
study induced a dramatic increase in Proteobacteria and a
decrease in Bifidobacterium in male and OVX mice (Fig. 3
and 5). In this context, decreasing the abundance of LPS-
producing bacteria and increasing the LPS-suppressing
bacteria may be a key mechanism for the reduction of
metabolic endotoxemia. Another potential mechanism
contributing to the reduction of serum LPS may be a de-
crease in gut permeability, due to the observed elevation
of gut barrier-protecting bacteria such as Bifidobacterium
[14, 43] by estrogen in our study.

overgrowth
reduction

Proteobacteria

exhibit

and

In postmenopausal women and in female animal
models,
lower estrogen levels are associated with in-
creased visceral adiposity [10] and estrogen replacement
improves glucose-insulin homeostasis [44]. We have
shown here for the first time the effects of E2 replace-
ment on gut microbiota and metabolic endotoxemia in
OVX mice, which mimics the postmenopausal state.
There is growing evidence for a fundamental role of es-
trogen in the regulation of obesity and related metabolic
disorders in males [11, 45], and recent data from rodent
studies suggest that hepatic estrogen signaling has a key
role in the prevention of high-fat diet-induced insulin
resistance in males. However, it is not known whether
estrogen treatment in males protects MS by modulating
gut microbiota. Our novel results show that estrogen
treatment in males is associated with the modulation of
gut microbiota and improvement
in ME and LGCI,
which is associated with improvements in weight man-
agement and obesity-induced metabolic changes (Fig. 7),
supporting the concept that estrogen plays an important
role in the control of serum LPS levels by affecting
LPS-related gut microbiota.

functions [46, 47]. It

IAP is an endogenous antimicrobial peptide with nu-
is highly
merous physiological
expressed in the small
intestine, secreted from apical
enterocytes into the lumen in microvilli vesicles, and
travels to the large intestine [48]. IAP is known to inhibit
the growth of E. coli and gram-negative bacteria by de-
phosphorylating LPS located in the outer membrane [32,
48–51]. IAP is also able to dephosphorylate ATP [33],

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 14 of 22

which has been shown to reduce the survival of
gram-positive bacteria (46), and to support the growth
of gram-negative bacteria such as E. coli [52]. Oral IAP
supplementation has also been shown to prevent E. coli
overgrowth [53]. We recently found in our fat-1 mice
model (transgenic mice with elevated tissue n-6/n-3 fatty
acid ratio) that elevated endogenous IAP activity and ex-
pression is associated with lower levels of LPS-producing
bacteria and higher levels of LPS-suppressing bacteria
[14]. Moreover, we found that inhibition of IAP by phenyl-
alanine, a frequently used specific inhibitor of endogenous
IAP activity [14, 15, 34, 35], caused ME, LGCI, and MS by
increasing the growth of LPS-producing Proteobacteria
and reducing the growth of LPS-suppressing Bifidobacter-
ium spp in a mouse model of elevated endogenous IAP
activity [14, 15]. It is clear that IAP expression in the intes-
tine is a critical determinant of the gut microbiota profile.
Our findings indicate that IAP may be a primary factor
partially mediating the effects of estrogen on gut micro-
biota because IAP inhibition in the female mice led to the
development of ME, LGCI, and MS, associated with dra-
matic increase of Proteobacteria and reduction of the B/E
ratio and A. mucinophila abundance (Fig. 6n–q). The
mechanism by which estrogen may modulate IAP ex-
pression is possibly due to its regulatory effect on the
KLF4 transcription factor, which has been shown to
target IAP [36].

Isoflavones (ISO) are non-steroidal compounds that
can bind to both ER-α and ER-β due to their ability to
mimic the conformational structure of estradiol [54,
55], and thereby imitate the actions of estrogens on
target tissues [56]. Isoflavones are found in many le-
gumes and are particularly abundant in soy products.
Genistein (G) and daidzein (D), two major soy isofla-
vone glucosides, are present at high concentrations in
soybeans and soybean-derived products and are a
source of xenoestrogen exposure in both
major
humans (e.g., soy-based formula for infants, tofu) and
animals (most commercially available diets). G and D
are widely used as dietary supplements in the USA for
various presumed health benefits [57]. Ferguson et al.
[58] administered a low-dose endotoxin (LPS 1 ng/kg)
to induce postprandial
in
young, healthy volunteers and found that subjects with
a
against
diet were
inflammation-induced decline in insulin sensitivity.
Meals high in fat, or fat and simple carbohydrates, are
known to induce metabolic endotoxemia [59], as char-
acterized by increased circulating markers of inflam-
mation, and hypothesized to be linked to transient
bacteremia due to reduced gut barrier function [59].
Most importantly, ISO has been shown to have E2
mimetic effects in preventing ovariectomy-induced
metabolic dysfunctions [60], adipose deposition [61],

high-isoflavone

endotoxemia

protected

transient

hypertriglyceridemia, and hepatic status [62] in animal
studies. Isoflavones have been shown to improve intes-
tinal barrier integrity [63] and reduce colitis in animal
models [64] potentially through modulation of the gut
microbiome [65]. ISO may therefore confer protection
against diet-induced metabolic dysfunction and reduce
insulin resistance in males and
the development of
therefore supporting our
post-menopausal women,
proposal that ISO could be an effective alternative to
E2 treatment.

Although we claim to explain the metabolic sexual di-
morphism by effects of E2 through gut microbiota, we
acknowledge that many other studies in the field showed
that the major impact of estrogens on the metabolism
are through estrogen receptor expression in metabolic
tissues [66–69]. Clinical trials revealed that hormone re-
placement therapy (HRT) in postmenopausal women re-
duced the features of MS and inflammation [70].
Conversely, findings from Women’s Health Initiative clin-
ical trials (WHI-CT) [71] did not support use of HRT for
chronic disease prevention [72]. However, the WHI-CT
results were based on a group of women who were much
older than those normally treated with HRT and who had
other numerous risk factors [73]. Noticeably, there were
very limited surveys performed addressing the effects on
the metabolic syndrome components in postmenopausal
women [74]. Early treatment with low-dosage HRT in
healthy perimenopausal women was found to have benefi-
cial effects on the components of metabolic syndrome and
could decrease the risk of cardiovascular events [74] since
the absolute risk of CVD events were markedly lower in
younger, compared to older, women [71].

Although our results from FMT (Fig. 3) and antibiotics
(Fig. 4) experiments contradict the protective effect of en-
dogenous estrogen against obesity in female mice, it is
well known that antibiotic usage [75] or gut dysbiosis [76]
impacts estrogen metabolism mediated by microbiota
Consequently, changes in circulating levels of estrogen
(Additional file 1 Figure S3m and Additional file 1:
Figure S4e) were found in female mice that received
male microbiota transplants or antibiotic treatment.
We hypothesize that estrogen-mediated gut micro-
biome changes may be the cause for sex differences in
obesity and MS in this study. It is important to note
the estrogen-mediated sex differences and the role of
the microbiome have been linked in other disease con-
ditions (e.g., autoimmunity) [77]. The bacterial changes
reported here are similar to previous studies where ovari-
ectomy or estrogen supplementation was performed. A
study with OVX animals showed elevated Firmicutes to
Bacteroidetes ratio [78] and Escherichia coli [79] com-
pared to normal females. Likewise, it was shown that E2
supplementation elevated the relative abundance of Akker-
mansia and Bifidobacterium in the male and OVX mice

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 15 of 22

respectively [80–82]. Estrogen inhibited the overgrowth of
Proteobacteria and E. coli and decreased the levels of LBS
and LBP under simulated microgravity [83]. In addition,
E2 supplementation in male [84] or OVX mice [61] pre-
vented obesity and MS, and genistein prevented obesity
and metabolic dysfunction in the mice, which was similar
to E2 supplementation in the same study [60, 61].

Conclusions
Our novel data demonstrate that the gut microbiome
mediates sexual dimorphism in MS. Overall measures
of correlation, pairwise correlations, and multivariate
correlation analyses between the microbiota and host pa-
rameters that we performed provided novel insight into
the host–microbiota system in the context of sexual di-
morphism in WD-induced MS. Estrogen or estrogen-like
compounds induced elevated IAP levels likely by upregu-
lating the function of the KLF4 transcription factor that
targets IAP and subsequent gut microbiome changes
lower LPS production and gut permeability, resulting in
reduced ME and systemic LGCI with subsequent reduc-
tion in the susceptibility to develop WD-induced MS in
estrogen-treated males and post-menopausal women. Be-
cause exogenous estrogen administration to male causes
deleterious effects (e.g., feminization and cardiac dysfunc-
tion) [85], compounds with estrogen-like activity (e.g., iso-
flavones and 17α-estradiol
[85]) and non-feminizing
effects may represent an alternative approach to the man-
agement of obesity and MS in males. Understanding the
molecular basis of estrogen-mediated changes in IAP ac-
tivity and gut microbiome may provide new approaches to
the management of obesity-associated metabolic disease
in men and menopausal women with estrogen deficiency,
a condition that can last approximately 30 years of a
woman’s life [86].

Methods
Animals and diets
All the mice used in this study were wild-type (WT) on
a C57BL/6 background and bred at the Massachusetts
General Hospital (MGH) animal facility or purchased
from Charles River Laboratories. Mice were housed in
a biosafety level 2 room in hard top cages with two or
three mice per cage. Mice were maintained in a
temperature-controlled room (22–24 °C) with a 12-h
light/12-h dark diurnal cycle and allowed for food and
water ad libitum. Diets used in this study were either
normal chow diet (CD) (Laboratory Rodent Diet 5001)
from LabDiet or western diet (WD) (D12079B) from
Research diets, Inc., NJ, USA. All animal procedures in
this study were carried out in accordance with the
guidelines approved by the MGH Subcommittee on Re-
search Animal Care.

Animal experiments
Body weight and food intake were measured every week
for all mice. All food was replaced weekly to avoid con-
tamination. For collection of blood samples, mice were
fasted for 6 h during the light phase period and blood
was taken from the facial vein unless otherwise speci-
fied. After 6 h fasting, animals used in this study were
euthanized by i.p. injection of pentobarbital (200 mg/
kg). Several experiments with special treatments are de-
scribed below.

1) Determination of sexual dimorphism in metabolic

endotoxemia, low-grade chronic inflammation, and
metabolic syndrome: Male (M) WT (n = 11) and
female (F) (n = 11) mice were weaned and switched
to western diet (WD) until the age of 20 weeks to
induce severe WD-induced obesity and MS. Both
groups were subjected to analysis of markers of
metabolic endotoxemia (ME) (including LPS, LBP,
sCD14, and intestinal permeability), systemic low-
grade chronic inflammation (LGCI) (including
TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, MCP-1, and IL-10), and meta-
bolic syndrome (MS) (including weight gain, glu-
cose tolerance test with area under the curve,
insulin resistance index assessed by HOMA-IR,
serum lipid profile including total cholesterol (TC),
triglyceride (TG), low-density lipoprotein-C (LDL-
C) and high-density lipoprotein-C (HDL-C) and
atherogenic index, non-alcoholic fatty liver score
and serum aspartate transaminase (AST) and ala-
nine transaminase (ALT), and analysis of fecal
microbiota by 16S rRNA gene sequencing and
serum LPS levels by LAL assay. The mice were then
euthanized and white adipose tissue (WAT), which
includes visceral (vWAT), subcutaneous (sWAT),
and epididymal (eWAT) fat pads, and liver weights
were taken. A portion of the liver was stored in 10%
formalin for histological analysis. Tissues were snap
frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at − 80 °C
for future analyses.

2) Determination of 17β-estradiol effects on gut micro-
biome, metabolic endotoxemia, low-grade chronic
inflammation, and metabolic syndrome: Ten-week-
old male (M), female (F), and ovariectomized
(OVX) mice maintained on control diet were pur-
chased from Charles River Laboratories and divided
in to five groups (n = 5/group), and were fed WD
and 17β-estradiol (E2) from week 11 to week 17.
The five groups are (1) M, (2) F, (3) M+E2, (4)
OVX, and (5) OVX+E2. E2 (Sigma, USA) was pre-
pared and given to groups 3 and 5 in the drinking
water as described previously [87]. E2 was dissolved
in 95% ethanol (5 mg/mL). Solubilized E2 was
added to the drinking water to produce

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 16 of 22

concentration of 4000 ng E2/mL water with final
ethanol concentration of 0.1%. Groups 1, 2, and 4
received a normal drinking water bottle with 0.1%
ethanol. The water bottles were changed every week
for all the groups. After 6 weeks, mice were sub-
jected to analysis for markers of ME and systemic
LGCI and MS as mentioned in section 1. The mice
were then euthanized and WAT and liver weights
were taken. A portion of the liver and duodenum
was stored in 10% formalin for histological analysis.
Tissues were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and
then stored at − 80 °C for future analyses.

3) Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT): Mice from
each group were individually housed for receiving
antibiotic treatment to the end of the experiment.
Fecal microbiota in place of cecal microbiota was
transplanted for convenience and in order to
minimize the number of animals used as donors.
FMT with fecal content from donor male (M) mice
that were fed WD for 10 weeks was performed on
female 10-week-old mice [19]. Before the microbial
transplantation, recipient mice (M → F) were
treated with a 200 μL antibiotic cocktail (ampicillin,
1 g/l; metronidazole, 1 g/l; vancomycin, 0.5 g/l; neo-
mycin, 0.5 g/l) (Sigma, USA) administrated by oral
gavage once a day for 3 days. During the last 8 h of
antibiotic treatment, mice were fed a WD to facili-
tate subsequent colonization. Fresh fecal pellets
from donors were immediately weighed and placed
into Ringer’s solution and then diluted to 10 mg/
mL. Immediately after diluting the fecal materials,
fecal solutions were gavaged (200 μL per mouse) to
4-h-fasted female recipients. Control groups of mice
(males and females) were force-fed with 200 μL of
transfer buffer alone to eliminate the effects of gav-
age per se. Two days later, these mice received an-
other gavage to exclude possibility of any
unsuccessful inoculation. We conducted this FMT
procedure once a week for the next 3 weeks. After
the first microbiota gavage, all mice were fed a WD
for 20 weeks. Measurement of body composition
(fat mass) was performed using nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) technique (minispec Body Com-
position Analyzer based on Time Domain NMR)
that provides noninvasive and rapid measurement
without anesthetics. Fecal samples from these three
groups (M/F/M → F; n = 5 per group) were col-
lected after WD feeding for 20 weeks and three
fecal samples from each group were subjected to
16S rRNA sequencing.

4) Antibiotic (ABX) treatment: 10-week-old male (n =

5) and female (n = 5) mice maintained on chow diet
were switched to a WD until the age of 20 weeks to
induce sexual dimorphism in MS. After collecting

serum and stool for baseline measurements, both
males and females receiving a WD started receiving
a broad spectrum antibiotic cocktail (ABX) contain-
ing ampicillin (1 g/l), vancomycin (500 mg/l), neo-
mycin sulfate (1 g/l) (added to the drinking water),
and metronidazole (100 mg/kg) (orally gavaged
every 12 h) for 6 weeks to deplete the gut micro-
biota [88]. Validation of successful depletion of gut
microbiota after the antibiotic treatment was per-
formed as described previously [88]. Briefly, bacter-
ial cultivation (both aerobic and anaerobic bacteria)
of feces was performed on day 24 of the antibiotic
treatment mice as described previously [14]. The
detection limit of the assay (successful depletion)
was defined as 1 cfu/mg feces. In addition, the bac-
terial genomic DNA was extracted from fresh stool
samples of these mice and 16S rRNA gene copies
for all bacteria (Table S4) was measured with qPCR
method as described below. Both bacterial cultiva-
tion (cfu/mg feces) and qPCR results (Ct values)
were compared with results from pre-antibiotic
treatment fecal samples to confirm a significant de-
pletion of gut microbiota. Mice with antibiotic
treatment were subjected to analysis for markers of
ME and systemic LGCI and MS as mentioned in
section 1.

5) Analysis of the effects of isoflavones (ISO) on gut
microbiome, ME, LGCI, and MS: Ten-week-old
male (M) mice were fed a WD for 4 months to in-
duce MS and then divided into two groups: group
1: M, (n = 4), and group 2: M+ISO (n = 6). ISO such
as genistein and daidzein (Cayman, USA) were sup-
plemented at 0.1% in the WD, the M group was fed
a WD, and the M+ISO group was fed a WD supple-
mented with ISO for the next 5 weeks. Mice were
then subjected to analysis for markers of ME and
systemic LGCI and MS as mentioned in section 1.
The mice were then euthanized and white adipose
tissue (WAT) and liver weights were taken. A por-
tion of the liver and duodenum was stored in 10%
formalin for histological analysis. Tissues were snap
frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at − 80 °C
for future analyses.

6) Analysis of the effects of intestinal alkaline

phosphatase (IAP) inhibition on gut microbiome,
ME, LGCI, and metabolic abnormalities: To
determine the effects of inhibiting endogenous IAP
activity, 12-week-old WT mice on a WD were di-
vided into three groups ((male (M), female (F), and
F+L-phe)) (n = 5 per group) and allowed to drink
autoclaved water alone or water containing 10 mM
L-phenylalanine (L-phe) (Sigma, USA). After
8 weeks, the serum and fecal samples were collected
to analyze the markers of ME, LGCI, and MS.

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 17 of 22

Extraction of genomic DNA and profiling of the 16S rRNA
gene by next generation
Sequencing

Fecal DNA extraction and 16S rRNA gene sequen-
cing Bacterial genomic DNA was extracted from fresh
stool samples (100–180 mg) using the QIAamp DNA
Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA), following the man-
ufacturer’s instructions. To increase effectiveness, the lysis
temperature was increased to 95 °C. Eluted DNA was
treated with RNase and analyzed using a Nanodrop spec-
trophotometer (Biotek, Winooski, VT). Sample concentra-
tion and purity was determined by absorbance at 260 nm
and the A260/A280 ratio, respectively. DNA samples
packed with dry ice were shipped to APC Microbiome
Institute (University College Cork, Cork, Ireland), and
samples were sequenced as previously mentioned [37].
Briefly, V3–V4 amplicons for Illumina sequencing were
generated according to the 16S metagenomic sequencing
library protocol (Illumina). An initial PCR reaction utilized
primers specific for amplification of the V3–V4 region of
the 16S rRNA gene, (Forward primer 5′TCGTCGGCA
GCGTCAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGCCTACGGGNG
GCWGCAG; reverse primer 5′ GTCTCGTGGGCTCG
GAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGGACTACHVGGGTATC
TAATCC). PCR product clean-up and purification was
achieved using the Agencourt AMPure XP system (Lab-
plan, Dublin,
Ireland). A second PCR incorporated a
unique indexing primer pair for each sample (Illumina
Nextera XT indexing primers, Illumina, Sweden). The
products were again purified using the Agencourt AMPure
XP system. Samples were quantified using the Qubit broad
range DNA quantification assay kit (Bio-Sciences, Dublin,
Ireland). Following quantification, samples were pooled in
equimolar amounts (4 nM) and sequenced at Clinical
Microbiomcs, Copenhagen, Denmark, using Illumina
MiSeq 2 × 300 bp paired end sequencing.

a)Bioinformatics Three hundred-base pair paired-end
reads were assembled using FLASH with parameters of
a minimum overlap of 20 bp and a maximum overlap of
120 bp [89]. The QIIME suite of tools, v1.8.0, was used
for further processing of paired-end reads,
including
quality filtering based on a quality score of > 25 and re-
moval of mismatched barcodes and sequences below
length thresholds [90]. Denoising, chimera detection,
and operational taxonomic unit (OTU) grouping were
performed in QIIME using USEARCH v7 [91]. Taxo-
nomic ranks were assigned by alignment of OTUs using
PyNAST to the SILVA SSURef database release 111 [92].
Generation of α and β diversities and analysis and
visualization of principal coordinate analysis (PCoA)
plots were performed using PAST and XLSTAT software.
The α-diversity of each group was calculated based on

the annotated data using the diversity indices of the PAST
version 2.17 software program [93]. Based on a non-para-
metric two-sample t-test using the default number of
Monte Carlo permutations (999), comparative analyses of
the group-specific α-diversity indices were performed. Or-
dinations are the dimensional-reduction techniques which
are commonly used to visualize complex relationships
between communities between groups (β-diversity). Di-
mensional reduction of the Bray-Curtis distance between
microbiome samples using PCoA ordination method
(PAST software) was done and significant differences
among groups were tested with permutational multivari-
ate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA), a multivariate
non-parametric one-way ANOVA, which utilizes the
sample-to-sample Bray-Curtis distance matrix directly.
Taxa which were primarily responsible for an observed
difference between groups were identified by SIMPER
(similarity percentage analysis) method and their contri-
bution to groups (between and within groups) were ana-
lyzed using the PCA variance-covariance type ordination
(PAST software) method. Differential abundance analysis
(non-parametric ANOVA with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR-
corrected P values < 0.05) was performed on the RA of
microbiota data at different levels of taxonomy to identify
taxa with FDR-corrected P values < 0.05 (XLSTAT soft-
ware; Addinsoft, USA) [94] and then their RA (normalized
to percentage) were shown by a heat map with hierarchal
clustering (HCN) analysis [95] using GraphPad Prism ver-
sion 7.01 (La Jolla, CA). Linear discriminant analysis
(LDA) effect size (LEfSe) is a biomarker discovery and
explanation tool
for high-dimensional data. It couples
statistical significance with biological consistency and ef-
fect size estimation [96]. Microbiota-based biomarker
discoveries were done with LEfSe using the online galaxy
server (https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/galaxy/), and
the LDA scores derived from LEfSe analysis [96] were
used to show the relationship between taxon using a
cladogram (circular hierarchical tree) of significantly in-
creased or decreased bacterial taxa in the gut microbiota
between groups. Levels of the cladogram represent, from
the inner to outer rings, phylum, class, order, family, and
genus. Color codes indicate the groups, and letters indi-
cate the taxa that contribute to the uniqueness of the cor-
responding groups at an LDA of > 2.0. Unweighted
pair-group method with arithmetic means (UPGMA) hier-
archical clustering analysis diagram based on Bray-Curtis
distance matrix was obtained using PAST version 3.11.
Class trees were used to demonstrate similarity between
samples, the clustering tree branch length was a measure
of the cluster effect.

b)Putative metagenome identification Microbial func-
tions were predicted using 16S ribosomal RNA sequen-
cing and phylogenetic reconstruction of unobserved

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 18 of 22

states (PICRUSt) software (version 1.0.0) as described
[29]. The predicted genes and functions were aligned to
the KEGG database (version 66.1, May 1, 2013). PCA
and PERMANOVA statistics were applied to check
whether the groups were clustered according to pre-
dicted gene enrichments for microbial functions. LEfSe
analysis [96] was utilized to determine significant puta-
tive KEGG orthologs and pathway analyses [96].

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) concentration
Serum LPS concentrations were measured with a Toxin
Sensor Chromogenic Limulus Amebocyte Lysate (LAL)
Endotoxin Assay Kit (GenScript, Piscataway, NJ), follow-
ing the manufacturer’s instructions [15]. Briefly, serum
samples were diluted 10- to 50-fold with endotoxin-free
water, adjusted to the recommended pH, and heated for
10 min at 70 °C to minimize inhibition or enhancement
by contaminating proteins. LAL reagents were added to
serum and incubated at 37 °C for 45 min, and the ab-
sorbance was read at 545 nm. All samples were validated
for recovery and internal coefficient variation using
known amounts of LPS.

Intestinal permeability
Intestinal permeability was determined as previously de-
scribed [15]. Briefly, mice were gavaged with phosphate
buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.2) containing 600 mg/kg body
weight FITC-dextran (40 kDa, Sigma-Aldrich, USA).
Blood samples (120 μL) were collected after 90 min.
Serum was diluted with an equal volume of PBS, and
fluorescence intensity was measured using a fluorospec-
trophotometer (excitation wavelength 480 nm and emis-
sion wavelength 520 nm; Perkin-Elmer, Waltham, MA).
Serum FITC-dextran concentrations were calculated
from a standard curve of serially diluted FITC-dextran
in PBS.

Measurement of intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP)
level and activity
Small intestinal IAP specific activity (as it relates to pro-
tein) was measured as previously described [15] and
expressed as picomoles pNPP hydrolyzed/min/μg of pro-
tein. Briefly, thoroughly washed duodenal tissues were
homogenized with lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 10 mM
Tris·HCl, pH 7.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Nonidet
P-40, 10 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, including protease in-
hibitor mixture; Sigma) followed by incubation on ice
for 30 min. Thereafter, the homogenates were centri-
fuged twice at 4 °C at 15,000g for 15 min, and the super-
natants were collected to determine IAP activity as well
as protein concentration. The Coomassie Blue Protein
Assay (Bradford) kit from Fisher Scientific was used for
protein quantification. For IAP assay, 25 μL of super-
natant was mixed with 175 μL phosphatase assay reagent

containing 5 mM of p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP)
followed by determining optical density at 405 nm. The
specific activity of the enzyme was expressed as pico-
moles pNPP hydrolyzed/min/μg of protein. Protein con-
centration in a specific sample was determined using the
protein assay reagents from Fisher Scientific.

Cell culture experiments
The human colon carcinoma cell line (Caco-2) was ob-
tained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC)
(Rockville, MD) and cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Corning Inc., NY,
USA) containing 4.5 g/l glucose, 4 mmol/l L-glutamine,
and 1 mmol/l sodium pyruvate, and supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (Cell Applications, Inc., San
Diego, CA), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL
streptomycin (Gibco, NY, USA) in a humidified atmos-
phere of 5% CO2 at 37 °C. They were routinely subcul-
tured when they were about 80% confluent. The culture
medium was changed every other day. Cells were always
> 90% viable, as shown by trypan blue (Invitrogen, Carls-
bad, CA, USA) exclusion. Cells were passaged every 3–
4 days by treatment with 0.1% trypsin (Gibco) and 0.04%
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and then plated
at a density of 1.3–2 × 104 cells/cm2. Cells at passage
number 17 were used for the experiments. All assays
were done using only differentiated Caco-2. Cells were
seeded in to six-well plates at 2 × 104 cells per well and
treated with vehicle (ethanol or DMSO) or 10 nM
17β-estradiol (E2) for 24, 48, and 72 h or each 25 μM
genistein (G) or daidzein (D) or G+D mixture for 72 h.
In a
experiments, Caco-2 cells were
pre-treated with L-phenylalanine (10 mM) for 24 h and
then they were treated with either vehicle or each
25 μM G+D mixture or 10 nM E2 for 72 h. Medium
was removed and cells were washed twice with ice-cold
PBS, scraped, lysed in Trizol (Invitrogen), and stored at
− 80 °C until mRNA was isolated or homogenized with
200 μL radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer
(50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton
X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl
sulfate) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma),
incubated on ice for 30 min, centrifuged at 14,000g for
10 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was collected and
stored at − 80 °C for western blotting analysis.

subset of

Western blotting analysis of IAP
Western blotting on tissues and Caco-2 cell lysates was
performed as previously described [14]. After thawed,
the protein samples derived from Caco-2 cells, the ho-
mogenates were centrifuged at 15,000g at 4 °C for
15 min, and the supernatants were collected. The duo-
denum section of small intestinal tissues was harvested
and cut open longitudinally and luminal contents were

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 19 of 22

removed. The tissues were washed with PBS and ho-
mogenized with liquid nitrogen, and homogenates were
mixed with RIPA buffer, incubated on ice for 30 min,
and centrifuged at 14,000g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the
supernatant was collected. Protein concentration of
Caco-2 and tissue homogenates was quantified by the
Coomassie blue protein assay (Thermo Scientific, Rock-
ford, IL, USA) using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as the
standard. Proteins (30 μg) were resolved on SDS-PAGE
gels and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes
(Osmonics, Minnetonka, MN, USA). The membranes
were blocked with 5% nonfat dry milk in Tris-buffered
saline with 0.05% Tween 20 (TBS-T) for 1 h at room
temperature and then probed with IAP primary anti-
bodies (GTX27322, GeneTex, San Antonio, TX, USA) in
5% non-fat dry milk in TBS-T at 4 °C overnight. After
washing three times in TBS-T, the blots were further in-
cubated with the corresponding secondary antibodies
conjugated with horseradish peroxidase for 1 h at room
temperature (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz,
CA). Chemiluminescence was detected with Pierce ECL
western blotting substrate (Thermo Scientific, Rockford,
IL, USA) and visualized by ChemiDoc MP Imaging Sys-
tem (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).

Immunohistochemical analysis of IAP
Formalin-fixed duodenal tissues and IAP primary anti-
bodies (GTX27322, GeneTex) [14] were given to MGH
core (Boston, MA). Prepared IHC slides were analyzed
under light microscope and images of IAP staining and
localization was taken by using × 20 magnifications. All
pictures were taken with the same exposure conditions
without autoscaling.

RV coefficient
The RV coefficient was calculated between the microbial
genera (FDR-corrected P value < 0.05) and the host pa-
rameters (markers of ME, LGCI and MS). The RV coeffi-
cient
the Pearson
correlation coefficient [97].

is a multivariate generalization of

Correlation network analysis
Network-based analytical approaches have the potential
to help disentangle complex host-microbe interactions
[98]. Pairwise correlations between each microbiota
(genera that are present at < 0.1% relative abundance in
> 75% samples have been removed to avoid detecting
spurious correlations among low-abundance OTUs) and
host parameter (markers of ME, LGCI, and MS) were
calculated using Spearman’s nonparametric rank correl-
ation coefficient [99]. Using those significant (P < 0.05)
correlation coefficients, a correlation network (Fruchter-
man Reingold and label adjust layout) was built where
nodes represent either a microbiota or a host parameter.

For each microbiota and a host parameter, an undirected
edge was added between the corresponding nodes in the
correlation network. Edges (light black links indicate
positive and blue links indicate negative associations)
represent statistically significant correlations (P < 0.05).
Correlations were calculated using the PAST software
version 2.17 and the network was visualized in Gephi
Graph Visualization and Manipulation software version
0.9.2 [100]. Nodes were colored based on “data type”
and sized based on “betweeness centrality (BC).” BC is a
network centrality measure that quantifies the influence
of a node in connecting other nodes in a network. It rep-
resents the fraction of all shortest paths in the network
that pass through a given node. The nodes with the
highest BC are usually known as highly central or hubs.
A “module or component” in the network is a set of
nodes connected to each other by many links, while
connected by few links to nodes of other groups, so
modules are elementary units of any biological network,
and their identification and characterization provides us
with more information about the local interaction pat-
terns in the network and their contribution to the over-
all structure, connectivity, and function of the network.
Modules are biologically important when considered as
isolated, taxonomic, evolutionary, or functional modules.
High modularity indicates that the network has dense
connections within certain groups of nodes and sparse
connections between these groups.

Multivariate statistical analysis
Partial least square regression (PLS-R) was used to asso-
ciate the microbial composition to host parameters in-
cluding jackknife-based variable selection [98]. PLS-R is
recommended in cases of regression where the number
of explanatory variables is high, and where it is likely
that
the explanatory variables are correlated. Leave
one-out cross-validation (LOO-CV) was applied. The Q2
cumulated index (Q2cum) measures the global goodness
of fit and the predictive quality of the models. Q2cum is
also used to test
the model against
the validity of
over-fitting. The cumulated R2Y and R2X cum that cor-
responds to the correlations between the explanatory
(X) and dependent (Y) variables with the components
are very close to one with two components in all the
models. This indicates that the two components gener-
ated by the PLR-R summarize well both the Xs and the
Ys. The results are also presented in PLS scatter plots
for subject clustering and variables. The R2 (coefficient
of determination) indicates the % of variability of the
dependent variable (Y) which is explained by the
explanatory variables (X). Parameters (variable import-
ance in the projection values 1 or > 1.0) contributing to
the multivariate PLS models were compared with the
corresponding identified modules (Fig. 7b–d)
in the

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 20 of 22

correlation networks. All analyses were performed using
precise algorithm in the XLSTAT software version 2017.6.

Ethics approval
All animal procedures in this study were performed in accordance with the
ethical guidelines approved by the MGH Subcommittee on Research Animal Care.

Statistical analysis
Data was shown as mean ± standard error of mean
(SEM). Box-plots (box showing the median, and the
25th and 75th percentiles, and the whiskers of the graph
show the largest and smallest values) were also used to
express the data. Unpaired Student’s t test was per-
formed for experiments having only two groups. Either
ordinary or repeated measures one-way or two-way ana-
lysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s or Sidak’s mul-
tiple comparisons post-test were used for experiments
having more than two groups. If unequal variance was
detected, data were analyzed using non-parametric tests.
Differences were considered significant at P < 0.05. Stat-
including heat-map preparation, were
istical analyses,
performed using GraphPad Prism version 7.01 (Graph-
Pad Software, La Jolla, CA). Differential expression
analysis on 16S sequencing data was conducted using
XLSTAT software program [94]. Multivariate statistical
analyses and power analyses (alpha = 0.05; effect size =
0.8) were conducted using PAST (version 2.17) [93] and
XLSTAT (version 2017.6) software products.

Additional file

Additional file 1: Figure S1. Sexual dimorphism in the MS and ME and
LGCI. Figure S2. Hierarchical clustering and predicted functional analysis.
Figure S3. α-and β diversity analysis of fecal microbiota profile. Figure S4.
Markers of low-grade inflammation and metabolic syndrome. Figure S5. Di-
versity analysis and antimicrobial peptides mRNA expression. Figure S6. The
ingredients of Western diet. Table S1. Pairwise comparison of study groups
with permutational multivariate analysis of variance. Table S2. Differential
abundance analysis of fecal microbiota profile. Table S3. Pairwise differential
abundance analysis between groups. Table S4. Primer sets used for real--
time quantitative PCR. (DOC 13997 kb)

Acknowledgements
We thank Neil McKenna and Nicola Donelan (English language editors) for
proofreading this manuscript. The authors are also grateful to Marina Kang
for her editorial assistance and Jennifer Bian for her experimental assistance.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Funding
This study was supported by generous funding from Sansun Life Sciences and
the Fortune Education Foundation.

Availability of data and materials
OTU tables, raw data, taxonomy, FASTA files, scripts, PLS tables, and metadata
for 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis performed in this study have been made
publicly available in Figshare.

Author’s contributions
JXK and KK conceived and designed the study; KK conducted all the mouse
studies, collected serum and fecal and tissue samples, and performed biochemical
and host-microbiota interaction analyses; RR, KM, and CS performed the 16S
sequencing part of the study; CK, BW, and KK performed the predicted functional
analysis using 16S sequencing data; KK and JXK analyzed the metagenomic
sequencing data; AKB performed the histopathological analyses of liver samples;
KK and LH performed the cell culture experiments; KK and JXK wrote the
manuscript; All authors approved the final version of the manuscript.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author details
1Laboratory of Lipid Medicine and Technology, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 149 -13th
Street, Boston, MA 02129, USA. 2School of Microbiology, University College
Cork, Cork, Ireland. 3Teagasc Moorepark Food Research Centre, Fermoy, Co.,
Cork, Ireland. 4APC Microbiome Institute, University College Cork, Cork,
Ireland. 5Research Center for Nutrition and Food Safety, Institute of Military
Preventive Medicine, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing Key
Laboratory of Nutrition and Food Safety, Chongqing Medical Nutrition
Research Center, Chongqing, People’s Republic of China. 6Department of
Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Received: 23 June 2018 Accepted: 30 October 2018

k) References
1.

Cornier MA, Dabelea D, Hernandez TL, Lindstrom RC, Steig AJ, Stob NR, Van
Pelt RE, Wang H, Eckel RH. The metabolic syndrome. Endocr Rev. 2008;29(7):
777–822.
Lutsey PL, Steffen LM, Stevens J. Dietary intake and the development of the
metabolic syndrome: the atherosclerosis risk in communities study.
Circulation. 2008;117(6):754–61.
Franconi F, Seghieri G, Canu S, Straface E, Campesi I, Malorni W. Are the
available experimental models of type 2 diabetes appropriate for a gender
perspective? Pharmacol Res. 2008;57(1):6–18.
Hwang LL, Wang CH, Li TL, Chang SD, Lin LC, Chen CP, Chen CT, Liang KC,
Ho IK, Yang WS, et al. Sex differences in high-fat diet-induced obesity,
metabolic alterations and learning, and synaptic plasticity deficits in mice.
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010;18(3):463–9.
Corsetti JP, Sparks JD, Peterson RG, Smith RL, Sparks CE. Effect of dietary fat on
the development of non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus in obese Zucker
diabetic fatty male and female rats. Atherosclerosis. 2000;148(2):231–41.
Regitz-Zagrosek V, Lehmkuhl E, Weickert MO. Gender differences in the
metabolic syndrome and their role for cardiovascular disease. Clin Res
Cardiol. 2006;95(3):136–47.
Giles DA, Moreno-Fernandez ME, Stankiewicz TE, Graspeuntner S, Cappelletti
M, Wu D, Mukherjee R, Chan CC, Lawson MJ, Klarquist J, et al. Thermoneutral
housing exacerbates nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in mice and allows for
sex-independent disease modeling. Nat Med. 2017;23(7):829–38.
Guarner-Lans V, Rubio-Ruiz ME, Perez-Torres I, Banos de MacCarthy G.
Relation of aging and sex hormones to metabolic syndrome and
cardiovascular disease. Exp Gerontol. 2011;46(7):517–23.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9. Wajchenberg BL. Subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue: their relation to

the metabolic syndrome. Endocr Rev. 2000;21(6):697–738.

10. Carr MC. The emergence of the metabolic syndrome with menopause. J

Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88(6):2404–11.

11. Maffei L, Murata Y, Rochira V, Tubert G, Aranda C, Vazquez M, Clyne CD,
Davis S, Simpson ER, Carani C. Dysmetabolic syndrome in a man with a
novel mutation of the aromatase gene: effects of testosterone, alendronate,
and estradiol treatment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004;89(1):61–70.
12. Dethlefsen L, McFall-Ngai M, Relman DA. An ecological and evolutionary
perspective on human-microbe mutualism and disease. Nature. 2007;
449(7164):811–8.

13. Backhed F, Ding H, Wang T, Hooper LV, Koh GY, Nagy A, Semenkovich CF,
Gordon JI. The gut microbiota as an environmental factor that regulates fat
storage. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101(44):15718–23.
Kaliannan K, Wang B, Li XY, Kim KJ, Kang JX. A host-microbiome interaction
mediates the opposing effects of omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids on
metabolic endotoxemia. Sci Rep. 2015;5:11276.

14.

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 21 of 22

Kaliannan K, Hamarneh SR, Economopoulos KP, Alam SN, Moaven O, Patel
P, Malo NS, Ray M, Abtahi SM, Muhammad N, et al. Intestinal alkaline
phosphatase prevents metabolic syndrome in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 2013;110(17):7003–8.

36.

Lalles JP, Orozco-Solis R, Bolanos-Jimenez F, de Coppet P, Le Drean G,
Segain JP. Perinatal undernutrition alters intestinal alkaline phosphatase and
its main transcription factors KLF4 and Cdx1 in adult offspring fed a high-fat
diet. J Nutr Biochem. 2012;23(11):1490–7.

16. Chang CJ, Lin CS, Lu CC, Martel J, Ko YF, Ojcius DM, Tseng SF, Wu TR, Chen YY,

37. Robertson RC, Kaliannan K, Strain CR, Ross RP, Stanton C, Kang JX. Maternal

15.

17.

18.

Young JD, et al. Ganoderma lucidum reduces obesity in mice by modulating
the composition of the gut microbiota. Nat Commun. 2015;6:7489.
Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, Magrini V, Mardis ER, Gordon JI. An
obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy
harvest. Nature. 2006;444(7122):1027–31.
Koliada A, Syzenko G, Moseiko V, Budovska L, Puchkov K, Perederiy V,
Gavalko Y, Dorofeyev A, Romanenko M, Tkach S, et al. Association between
body mass index and Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio in an adult Ukrainian
population. BMC Microbiol. 2017;17(1):120.

19. Caesar R, Tremaroli V, Kovatcheva-Datchary P, Cani PD, Backhed F. Crosstalk

between gut microbiota and dietary lipids aggravates WAT inflammation
through TLR signaling. Cell Metab. 2015;22(4):658–68.

20. Cani PD, Possemiers S, Van de Wiele T, Guiot Y, Everard A, Rottier O, Geurts
L, Naslain D, Neyrinck A, Lambert DM, et al. Changes in gut microbiota
control inflammation in obese mice through a mechanism involving GLP-2-
driven improvement of gut permeability. Gut. 2009;58(8):1091–103.
21. Cani PD, Bibiloni R, Knauf C, Waget A, Neyrinck AM, Delzenne NM, Burcelin
R. Changes in gut microbiota control metabolic endotoxemia-induced
inflammation in high-fat diet-induced obesity and diabetes in mice.
Diabetes. 2008;57(6):1470–81.

22. Cani PD, Amar J, Iglesias MA, Poggi M, Knauf C, Bastelica D, Neyrinck AM,
Fava F, Tuohy KM, Chabo C, et al. Metabolic endotoxemia initiates obesity
and insulin resistance. Diabetes. 2007;56(7):1761–72.

23. Wellen KE, Hotamisligil GS. Inflammation, stress, and diabetes. J Clin Invest.

25.

24.

2005;115(5):1111–9.
Shi H, Kokoeva MV, Inouye K, Tzameli I, Yin H, Flier JS. TLR4 links innate
immunity and fatty acid-induced insulin resistance. J Clin Invest. 2006;
116(11):3015–25.
Li J, Lin S, Vanhoutte PM, Woo CW, Xu A. Akkermansia Muciniphila protects
against atherosclerosis by preventing metabolic Endotoxemia-induced
inflammation in Apoe−/− mice. Circulation. 2016;133(24):2434–46.
26. Cani PD, Neyrinck AM, Fava F, Knauf C, Burcelin RG, Tuohy KM, Gibson GR,
Delzenne NM. Selective increases of bifidobacteria in gut microflora
improve high-fat-diet-induced diabetes in mice through a mechanism
associated with endotoxaemia. Diabetologia. 2007;50(11):2374–83.
Kaliannan K, Wang B, Li XY, Bhan AK, Kang JX. Omega-3 fatty acids prevent
early-life antibiotic exposure-induced gut microbiota dysbiosis and later-life
obesity. Int J Obes. 2016;40(6):1039–42.
Everard A, Belzer C, Geurts L, Ouwerkerk JP, Druart C, Bindels LB, Guiot Y,
Derrien M, Muccioli GG, Delzenne NM, et al. Cross-talk between
Akkermansia muciniphila and intestinal epithelium controls diet-induced
obesity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110(22):9066–71.
Langille MG, Zaneveld J, Caporaso JG, McDonald D, Knights D, Reyes JA,
Clemente JC, Burkepile DE, Vega Thurber RL, Knight R, et al. Predictive
functional profiling of microbial communities using 16S rRNA marker gene
sequences. Nat Biotechnol. 2013;31(9):814–21.

27.

28.

29.

30. Ostaff MJ, Stange EF, Wehkamp J. Antimicrobial peptides and gut microbiota

in homeostasis and pathology. EMBO Mol Med. 2013;5(10):1465–83.

31. Malo MS, Alam SN, Mostafa G, Zeller SJ, Johnson PV, Mohammad N, Chen
KT, Moss AK, Ramasamy S, Faruqui A, et al. Intestinal alkaline phosphatase
preserves the normal homeostasis of gut microbiota. Gut. 2010;59(11):1476–84.

32. Campbell EL, MacManus CF, Kominsky DJ, Keely S, Glover LE, Bowers BE,

Scully M, Bruyninckx WJ, Colgan SP. Resolvin E1-induced intestinal alkaline
phosphatase promotes resolution of inflammation through LPS
detoxification. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107(32):14298–303.

33. Malo MS, Moaven O, Muhammad N, Biswas B, Alam SN, Economopoulos KP,

Gul SS, Hamarneh SR, Malo NS, Teshager A, et al. Intestinal alkaline
phosphatase promotes gut bacterial growth by reducing the concentration
of luminal nucleotide triphosphates. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol.
2014;306(10):G826–38.
Li LN, Wu YQ, Buchet R. Kinetic study on inhibition effects of dansyl-L-
phenylalanine and L-phenylalanine on calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase.
Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2009;29(10):2820–3.

34.

35. Ghosh NK, Fishman WH. On the mechanism of inhibition of intestinal

57.

alkaline phosphatase by L-phenylalanine. I Kinetic studies. J Biol Chem. 1966;
241(11):2516–22.

omega-3 fatty acids regulate offspring obesity through persistent
modulation of gut microbiota. Microbiome. 2018;6(1):95.

38. de La Serre CB, Ellis CL, Lee J, Hartman AL, Rutledge JC, Raybould HE.
Propensity to high-fat diet-induced obesity in rats is associated with
changes in the gut microbiota and gut inflammation. Am J Physiol
Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010;299(2):G440–8.
Sanz Y, Santacruz A, Gauffin P. Gut microbiota in obesity and metabolic
disorders. Proc Nutr Soc. 2010;69(3):434–41.

39.

40. Zhang C, Zhang M, Wang S, Han R, Cao Y, Hua W, Mao Y, Zhang X, Pang X, Wei
C, et al. Interactions between gut microbiota, host genetics and diet relevant to
development of metabolic syndromes in mice. ISME J. 2010;4(2):232–41.
41. Agus A, Denizot J, Thevenot J, Martinez-Medina M, Massier S, Sauvanet P,

Bernalier-Donadille A, Denis S, Hofman P, Bonnet R, et al. Western diet induces
a shift in microbiota composition enhancing susceptibility to adherent-Invasive
E. coli infection and intestinal inflammation. Sci Rep. 2016;6:19032.

42. Huang EY, Leone VA, Devkota S, Wang Y, Brady MJ, Chang EB. Composition
of dietary fat source shapes gut microbiota architecture and alters host
inflammatory mediators in mouse adipose tissue. JPEN J Parenter Enteral
Nutr. 2013;37(6):746–54.

43. Moya-Perez A, Neef A, Sanz Y. Bifidobacterium pseudocatenulatum CECT

7765 reduces obesity-associated inflammation by restoring the lymphocyte-
macrophage balance and gut microbiota structure in high-fat diet-fed mice.
PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0126976.

44. Nabulsi AA, Folsom AR, White A, Patsch W, Heiss G, Wu KK, Szklo M.

Association of hormone-replacement therapy with various cardiovascular
risk factors in postmenopausal women. The atherosclerosis risk in
communities study investigators. N Engl J Med. 1993;328(15):1069–75.
Finkelstein JS, Lee H, Burnett-Bowie SA, Pallais JC, Yu EW, Borges LF, Jones
BF, Barry CV, Wulczyn KE, Thomas BJ, et al. Gonadal steroids and body
composition, strength, and sexual function in men. N Engl J Med. 2013;
369(11):1011–22.
Lalles JP. Intestinal alkaline phosphatase: multiple biological roles in
maintenance of intestinal homeostasis and modulation by diet. Nutr Rev.
2010;68(6):323–32.
Lalles JP. Intestinal alkaline phosphatase: novel functions and protective
effects. Nutr Rev. 2014;72(2):82–94.
Shifrin DA Jr, McConnell RE, Nambiar R, Higginbotham JN, Coffey RJ, Tyska
MJ. Enterocyte microvillus-derived vesicles detoxify bacterial products and
regulate epithelial-microbial interactions. Curr Biol. 2012;22(7):627–31.
Koyama I, Matsunaga T, Harada T, Hokari S, Komoda T. Alkaline
phosphatases reduce toxicity of lipopolysaccharides in vivo and in vitro
through dephosphorylation. Clin Biochem. 2002;35(6):455–61.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50. Chen H, Wang W, Degroote J, Possemiers S, Chen D, De Smet S, Michiels J.
Arabinoxylan in wheat is more responsible than cellulose for promoting
intestinal barrier function in weaned male piglets. J Nutr. 2015;145(1):51–8.
51. Yang C, Zhu X, Liu N, Chen Y, Gan H, Troy FA 2nd, Wang B. Lactoferrin up-

regulates intestinal gene expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factors
BDNF, UCHL1 and alkaline phosphatase activity to alleviate early weaning
diarrhea in postnatal piglets. J Nutr Biochem. 2014;25(8):834–42.

52. Mempin R, Tran H, Chen C, Gong H, Kim Ho K, Lu S. Release of extracellular

ATP by bacteria during growth. BMC Microbiol. 2013;13:301.

53. De Lisle RC, Mueller R, Boyd M. Impaired mucosal barrier function in the
small intestine of the cystic fibrosis mouse. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.
2011;53(4):371–9.
Kuiper GG, Lemmen JG, Carlsson B, Corton JC, Safe SH, van der Saag PT, van
der Burg B, Gustafsson JA. Interaction of estrogenic chemicals and
phytoestrogens with estrogen receptor beta. Endocrinology. 1998;139(10):
4252–63.

54.

55. Al-Nakkash L. Genistein stimulates jejunal chloride secretion via sex-
dependent, estrogen receptor or adenylate cyclase mechanisms. Cell
Physiol Biochem. 2012;30(1):137–50.

56. Barnes S. Evolution of the health benefits of soy isoflavones. Proc Soc Exp

Biol Med. 1998;217(3):386–92.
Si H, Liu D. Genistein, a soy phytoestrogen, upregulates the expression of
human endothelial nitric oxide synthase and lowers blood pressure in
spontaneously hypertensive rats. J Nutr. 2008;138(2):297–304.

Kaliannan et al. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 22 of 22

58.

Ferguson JF, Ryan MF, Gibney ER, Brennan L, Roche HM, Reilly MP. Dietary
isoflavone intake is associated with evoked responses to inflammatory
cardiometabolic stimuli and improved glucose homeostasis in healthy
volunteers. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2014;24(9):996–1003.

59. Moreira AP, Texeira TF, Ferreira AB, Peluzio Mdo C, Alfenas Rde C. Influence
of a high-fat diet on gut microbiota, intestinal permeability and metabolic
endotoxaemia. Br J Nutr. 2012;108(5):801–9.
Kim JH, Kim YJ. Effects of genistein in combination with conjugated
estrogens on endometrial hyperplasia and metabolic dysfunction in
ovariectomized mice. Endocr J. 2015;62(6):531–42.

60.

61. Naaz A, Yellayi S, Zakroczymski MA, Bunick D, Doerge DR, Lubahn DB,

Helferich WG, Cooke PS. The soy isoflavone genistein decreases adipose
deposition in mice. Endocrinology. 2003;144(8):3315–20.

62. Panneerselvam S, Packirisamy RM, Bobby Z, Elizabeth Jacob S, Sridhar MG.
Soy isoflavones (Glycine max) ameliorate hypertriglyceridemia and hepatic
steatosis in high fat-fed ovariectomized Wistar rats (an experimental model
of postmenopausal obesity). J Nutr Biochem. 2016;38:57–69.
Suzuki T, Hara H. Role of flavonoids in intestinal tight junction regulation. J
Nutr Biochem. 2011;22(5):401–8.

63.

64. Moussa L, Bezirard V, Salvador-Cartier C, Bacquie V, Lencina C, Leveque M,

Braniste V, Menard S, Theodorou V, Houdeau E. A low dose of fermented soy
germ alleviates gut barrier injury, hyperalgesia and faecal protease activity in a
rat model of inflammatory bowel disease. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49547.
65. Rowland IR, Wiseman H, Sanders TA, Adlercreutz H, Bowey EA. Interindividual
variation in metabolism of soy isoflavones and lignans: influence of habitual
diet on equol production by the gut microflora. Nutr Cancer. 2000;36(1):27–32.

67.

66. Morselli E, Frank AP, Palmer BF, Rodriguez-Navas C, Criollo A, Clegg DJ. A
sexually dimorphic hypothalamic response to chronic high-fat diet
consumption. Int J Obes. 2016;40(2):206–9.
Liu S, Kilic G, Meyers MS, Navarro G, Wang Y, Oberholzer J, Mauvais-Jarvis F.
Oestrogens improve human pancreatic islet transplantation in a mouse
model of insulin deficient diabetes. Diabetologia. 2013;56(2):370–81.
68. Chambliss KL, Barrera J, Umetani M, Umetani J, Kim SH, Madak-Erdogan Z,
Huang L, Katzenellenbogen BS, Katzenellenbogen JA, Mineo C, et al.
Nonnuclear estrogen receptor activation improves hepatic steatosis in
female mice. Endocrinology. 2016;157(10):3731–41.

69. Madak-Erdogan Z, Katzenellenbogen BS. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor

70.

71.

modulation of estrogen receptor alpha-mediated gene regulation by a
multimeric chromatin complex involving the two receptors and the
coregulator RIP140. Toxicol Sci. 2012;125(2):401–11.
Salpeter SR, Walsh JM, Ormiston TM, Greyber E, Buckley NS, Salpeter EE. Meta-
analysis: effect of hormone-replacement therapy on components of the metabolic
syndrome in postmenopausal women. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2006;8(5):538–54.
Shufelt CL, Merz CN, Prentice RL, Pettinger MB, Rossouw JE, Aroda VR,
Kaunitz AM, Lakshminarayan K, Martin LW, Phillips LS, et al. Hormone
therapy dose, formulation, route of delivery, and risk of cardiovascular
events in women: findings from the Women’s Health Initiative observational
study. Menopause. 2014;21(3):260–6.

72. Manson JE, Chlebowski RT, Stefanick ML, Aragaki AK, Rossouw JE, Prentice

RL, Anderson G, Howard BV, Thomson CA, LaCroix AZ, et al. Menopausal
hormone therapy and health outcomes during the intervention and
extended poststopping phases of the Women’s Health Initiative
randomized trials. JAMA. 2013;310(13):1353–68.

73. Burger H. Hormone replacement therapy in the post-Women’s Health

74.

Initiative era. Report a a meeting held in Funchal, Madeira, February 24-25,
2003. Climacteric. 2003;6(Suppl 1):11–36.
Korljan B, Bagatin J, Kokic S, Berovic Matulic N, Barsic Ostojic S, Dekovic A.
The impact of hormone replacement therapy on metabolic syndrome
components in perimenopausal women. Med Hypotheses. 2010;74(1):162–3.

75. Donley TG, Smith RF, Roy B. Reduced oral contraceptive effectiveness with
concurrent antibiotic use: a protocol for prescribing antibiotics to women
of childbearing age. Compendium. 1990;11(6):392–6.

76. Baker JM, Al-Nakkash L, Herbst-Kralovetz MM. Estrogen-gut microbiome axis:

physiological and clinical implications. Maturitas. 2017;103:45–53.
77. Markle JG, Frank DN, Mortin-Toth S, Robertson CE, Feazel LM, Rolle-

Kampczyk U, von Bergen M, McCoy KD, Macpherson AJ, Danska JS. Sex
differences in the gut microbiome drive hormone-dependent regulation of
autoimmunity. Science. 2013;339(6123):1084–8.
Jin G, Asou Y, Ishiyama K, Okawa A, Kanno T, Niwano Y. Proanthocyanidin-
rich grape seed extract modulates intestinal microbiota in Ovariectomized
mice. J Food Sci. 2018;83(4):1149–52.

78.

79. Wang F, Yu P, Gui X, Wang Y, Xue C, Wang J. Sialoglycoprotein isolated

80.

from the eggs of Carassius auratus prevents bone loss: an effect associated
with the regulation of gut microbiota in ovariectomized rats. Food Funct.
2016;7(12):4764–71.
Javurek AB, Spollen WG, Johnson SA, Bivens NJ, Bromert KH, Givan SA,
Rosenfeld CS. Effects of exposure to bisphenol a and ethinyl estradiol on
the gut microbiota of parents and their offspring in a rodent model. Gut
Microbes. 2016;7(6):471–85.

81. Choi S, Hwang YJ, Shin MJ, Yi H. Difference in the gut microbiome between

Ovariectomy-induced obesity and diet-induced obesity. J Microbiol
Biotechnol. 2017;27(12):2228–36.

82. Chen KLA, Liu X, Zhao YC, Hieronymi K, Rossi G, Auvil LS, Welge M, Bushell C,
Smith RL, Carlson KE, et al. Long-term Administration of Conjugated Estrogen
and Bazedoxifene Decreased Murine Fecal beta-Glucuronidase activity without
impacting overall microbiome community. Sci Rep. 2018;8(1):8166.

83. Yang Y, Qu C, Liang S, Wang G, Han H, Chen N, Wang X, Luo Z, Zhong C,

Chen Y, et al. Estrogen inhibits the overgrowth of Escherichia coli in the rat
intestine under simulated microgravity. Mol Med Rep. 2018;17(2):2313–20.

85.

84. Dakin RS, Walker BR, Seckl JR, Hadoke PW, Drake AJ. Estrogens protect male
mice from obesity complications and influence glucocorticoid metabolism.
Int J Obes. 2015;39(10):1539–47.
Stout MB, Steyn FJ, Jurczak MJ, Camporez JG, Zhu Y, Hawse JR, Jurk D,
Palmer AK, Xu M, Pirtskhalava T, et al. 17alpha-estradiol alleviates age-
related metabolic and inflammatory dysfunction in male mice without
inducing feminization. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2017;72(1):3–15.
86. Vieira AT, Castelo PM, Ribeiro DA, Ferreira CM. Influence of Oral and gut

microbiota in the health of menopausal women. Front Microbiol. 2017;8:1884.
87. Gordon MN, Osterburg HH, May PC, Finch CE. Effective oral administration
of 17 beta-estradiol to female C57BL/6J mice through the drinking water.
Biol Reprod. 1986;35(5):1088–95.

88. Reikvam DH, Erofeev A, Sandvik A, Grcic V, Jahnsen FL, Gaustad P, McCoy
KD, Macpherson AJ, Meza-Zepeda LA, Johansen FE. Depletion of murine
intestinal microbiota: effects on gut mucosa and epithelial gene expression.
PLoS One. 2011;6(3):e17996.

89. Magoc T, Salzberg SL. FLASH: fast length adjustment of short reads to
improve genome assemblies. Bioinformatics. 2011;27(21):2957–63.
90. Caporaso JG, Kuczynski J, Stombaugh J, Bittinger K, Bushman FD, Costello
EK, Fierer N, Pena AG, Goodrich JK, Gordon JI, et al. QIIME allows analysis of
high-throughput community sequencing data. Nat Methods. 2010;7(5):335–6.
Edgar RC. Search and clustering orders of magnitude faster than BLAST.
Bioinformatics. 2010;26(19):2460–1.

91.

92. Quast C, Pruesse E, Yilmaz P, Gerken J, Schweer T, Yarza P, Peplies J,

Glockner FO. The SILVA ribosomal RNA gene database project: improved
data processing and web-based tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;41(Database
issue):D590–6.

93. Motta V, Trevisi P, Bertolini F, Ribani A, Schiavo G, Fontanesi L, Bosi P.

94.

Exploring gastric bacterial community in young pigs. PLoS One. 2017;12(3):
e0173029.
Kang C, Wang B, Kaliannan K, Wang X, Lang H, Hui S, Huang L, Zhang Y,
Zhou M, Chen M, et al. Gut microbiota mediates the protective effects of
dietary capsaicin against chronic low-grade inflammation and associated
obesity induced by high-fat diet. MBio. 2017;8(3).

95. Chevalier C, Stojanovic O, Colin DJ, Suarez-Zamorano N, Tarallo V, Veyrat-Durebex

98.

97.

96.

C, Rigo D, Fabbiano S, Stevanovic A, Hagemann S, et al. Gut microbiota
orchestrates energy homeostasis during cold. Cell. 2015;163(6):1360–74.
Segata N, Izard J, Waldron L, Gevers D, Miropolsky L, Garrett WS,
Huttenhower C. Metagenomic biomarker discovery and explanation.
Genome Biol. 2011;12(6):R60.
Smilde AK, van der Werf MJ, Bijlsma S, van der Werff-van der Vat BJ, Jellema
RH. Fusion of mass spectrometry-based metabolomics data. Anal Chem.
2005;77(20):6729–36.
Kelder T, Stroeve JH, Bijlsma S, Radonjic M, Roeselers G. Correlation network
analysis reveals relationships between diet-induced changes in human gut
microbiota and metabolic health. Nutr Diabetes. 2014;4:e122.
Jacobs JP, Goudarzi M, Singh N, Tong M, McHardy IH, Ruegger P,
Asadourian M, Moon BH, Ayson A, Borneman J, et al. A disease-associated
microbial and metabolomics state in relatives of pediatric inflammatory
bowel disease patients. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016;2(6):750–66.
100. Yu K, Mu C, Yang Y, Su Y, Zhu W. Segment-specific responses of intestinal
epithelium transcriptome to in-feed antibiotics in pigs. Physiol Genomics.
2017;49(10):582–91.

99.

