Diseases 2018, 6, 56

2 of 10

between the gut microbiome and CVDs to promote an understanding of the latest perspectives of the
role of the gut microbiome in CVDs. Moreover, we have raised several issues that should be considered
when interpreting previous evidence.

2. Trimethylamine-N-oxide and CVDs

A close relationship between the gut microbe-dependent production of trimethylamine-N-oxide
(TMAO), derived from speciﬁc dietary nutrients such as choline and carnitine, and future
cardiovascular events has been widely recognized [10]. Trimethylamine (TMA), which is produced by
the gut microbial enzymes TMA lyases, is a precursor of TMAO. TMAO can be measured by liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry. Elevated blood TMAO levels have been directly linked to poor
outcomes in patients with CVDs, such as coronary artery disease and acute and chronic heart failure
(Table 1) [11–16]. Tang et al., investigated the relationship between the fasting plasma levels of TMAO
and the incidence of major adverse cardiovascular events (death, myocardial infarction, or stroke)
during three years of follow-up in 4007 patients undergoing elective cardiac catheterization [13].
They found that the patients in the highest quartile for circulating TMAO levels had a 2.5-fold
increased risk of major adverse cardiovascular events, compared with the patients with values in
the lowest quartile. Of note, even after adjustment for traditional risk factors, an elevated TMAO
level could predict an increased risk of major adverse cardiovascular events [13]. Additionally, high
TMAO levels were observed in patients with stable heart failure compared to healthy subjects [11].
This result suggests that the gut microbiome may play a role in the development and progression of
heart failure. They also showed that elevated TMAO levels were associated with a 2.2-fold increase in
the risk of mortality, after an adjustment for traditional risk factors and the brain natriuretic peptide.
Moreover, the blood TMAO levels were associated with coronary plaque vulnerability, as assessed by
optical coherence tomography, and the long-term risks of cardiovascular events in patients with acute
coronary syndrome [14]. The latest metagenome-wide association study demonstrated the microbial
characterization of coronary artery disease (CAD) patients and showed that the gut microbial enzymes
that produce TMA were enriched in the patients with CAD compared to the healthy controls [17].

As different gut microbial compositions generate different levels of TMAO [18], higher blood
TMAO levels and an increased CVD risk can be attributed to a TMA-producing microbiome harboring
TMA lyases. These ﬁndings support the idea that prevention of CVD is feasible through gut microbial
modulation. However, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, based on TMA lyases,
was not sufﬁcient to predict the incidence of CAD (Area Under the Curve = 0.63). Moreover, a recent
clinical trial has shown that ﬁsh consumption increases the circulating TMAO levels, highlighting
the substantial limitations in our current understanding of the relationship between diet and gut
microbial TMAO production [18]. Moreover, all available clinical studies are cross-sectional studies
or cohort studies, not interventional studies. Further research is needed to elucidate whether TMAO
contributes directly to the progression of CVD or reﬂects the presence of a deleterious colonic microbial
metabolism, dietary habits, or renal tubular dysfunction. In addition, the distribution of TMAO levels
in the general population is unknown, and standard reference values are not currently available [19].
A detailed understanding of the biological role of TMAO in CVD patients is crucial for evaluating
the feasibility of developing drugs that affect the TMAO levels or the possibility of using TMAO as a
marker of CVD.

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

3 of 10

Table 1. Major clinical reports demonstrating the impact of circulating trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) levels on cardiovascular diseases (CVD).

Year

Study Population

Main Outcome

Results

Number of
Subjects

4007 in USA

Major cardiovascular events (myocardial
infarction, stroke), or death

720 in USA

All-cause mortality (death)

N. Engl. J. Med.

2013

2014

J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.

2015 J. Card Fail

Patients who were undergoing elective
diagnostic cardiac catheterization

Stable heart failure patients underwent
elective coronary angiographic evaluation

Chronic systolic heart failure with
comprehensive echocardiographic evaluation

112 in USA

Adverse clinical events
(death/transplantation)

2016 Heart

Acute heart failure

972 in UK

All-cause mortality (death) and a
composite of death or re-hospitalization
due to heart failure (death/HF)

2016

Am. J. Cardiol.

Coronary artery disease

26 in China

Coronary plaque vulnerability assessed by
optical coherence tomography

-

Follow-
Up Period

3 years

5 years

5 years

1 year

Increased TMAO levels were associated
with an increased risk of major adverse
cardiovascular events or death

Elevated TMAO levels portended higher
long-term mortality risk

Higher TMAO levels were associated with a
higher incidence of death/transplantation

Elevated levels were associated with a higher
incidence of death/HF

Plasma TMAO level was signiﬁcantly higher in
patients with plaque rupture than in those
without plaque rupture

2017 Clin. Chem.

Acute myocardial infarction

1079 in UK

2 years

TMAO levels were associated with death/MI

Composite of all-cause mortality and
re-infarction (death/myocardial infarction)

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

4 of 10

3. Other Gut Microbial Metabolites and CVD

There are a number of other gut microbial metabolites in addition to TMA. These metabolites have
also been reported to have a link to CVDs. Indoxyl sulfate is produced by gut microbial tryptophanases
that convert dietary tryptophan into indole, which is then converted to indoxyl and indoxyl sulfate in the
liver by the sequential actions of cytochrome P450 enzymes and sulfotransferase 1A1. Indoxyl sulfate has
been shown to have pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidant effects in cardiomyocytes and cardiac fibroblasts.
Furthermore, recent reports have shown that indole and indoxyl sulfate affect the arterial blood pressure
via peripheral and central mechanisms that depend on serotonin signaling in rats [20].

Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), produced by the colonic bacterial fermentation of dietary ﬁber,
contribute a signiﬁcant proportion of the daily energy requirement [21]. SCFAs, especially butyrate
and propionate, play an important role in regulatory T cell differentiation and intestinal tract immune
regulation. The increased production of acetate by the gut microbiota of rodents leads to the activation
of the parasympathetic nervous system, which promotes increased glucose-stimulated insulin secretion,
hyperphagia, and obesity. However, no reports have described the direct impact of SCFAs on the
incidence and progression of cardiovascular diseases [22].

The gut microbiome utilizes sulfur-containing compounds to produce hydrogen sulﬁde.
Hydrogen sulﬁde is an important biological mediator that is involved in various physiological
processes, including the regulation of arterial blood pressure [23]. Moreover, phenylacetylglutamine
is a product that is formed by the conjugation of phenylacetate and glutamine. High serum levels
of phenylacetylglutamine have been observed in patients with advanced chronic kidney disease,
and as a strong and independent risk factor for overall mortality and cardiovascular diseases [24].
P-cresyl sulfate, a secondary metabolism of p-cresol, is also a microbial metabolite. Increased levels of
p-cresyl sulfate are associated with worse outcomes in patients with chronic kidney disease [25].

These results suggest that gut microbial metabolites may play an important role in the
development of CVD. Further studies are warranted to elucidate the causal relationship between these
metabolites and CVD.

4. Alterations of the Gut Microbial Structure Associated with CVD

Several studies have been conducted to elucidate which gut bacterial species are involved in the
incidence and progression of CVD (Table 2) [17,26–28]. We were the ﬁrst to report that the incidence
of CAD was linked to an alteration of the gut microbial composition [28,29]. We have reported a
lower abundance of the phylum Bacteroidetes and a higher abundance of the order Lactobacillales
in patients with CAD compared to non-CAD patients with coronary risk factors, such as diabetes,
hypertension, or dyslipidemia, and healthy volunteers using terminal restriction fragment length
polymorphism analysis, which is one of the most well-established and reliable 16S rRNA-based
methods. The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, an indicator of dysbiosis, increased in the CAD patients
compared with the non-CAD controls. Interestingly, our data revealed that the CAD patients were
signiﬁcantly more likely to be categorized as enterotype III, which is characterized by low levels
of Bacteroides, compared with the non-CAD controls. Last year, a metagenome-wide association
study of fecal samples from 218 CAD patients and 187 healthy subjects from China was reported [17].
The abundance of Enterobacteriaceae was signiﬁcantly higher in the CAD patients compared to the
healthy subjects. The abundance of Streptococcus spp. was also signiﬁcantly higher in the patients
with CAD than in the healthy subjects. This may be due to the use of proton pump inhibitors in
CAD patients [30]. Consistent with our results, Bacteroides spp. were signiﬁcantly depleted in the
CAD patients. Given that Bacteroides spp. are known to have an important role in maintaining a
healthy gut ecosystem [31], and that the abundance of Bacteroides spp. was found to decrease in
patients with atherosclerotic ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack [27], Bacteroides spp. may
have the potential to regulate atherosclerosis progression. Furthermore, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii,
which exhibits anti-inﬂammatory effects [32], was also signiﬁcantly depleted in the CAD patients.
Of note, the co-abundance network structure differed between the two groups. The negative

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

5 of 10

correlations between Streptococcus spp. and Bacteroides spp. were observed only in the CAD patients.
On the other hand, the positive correlation between Bacteroides spp. and Erysipelotrichaceae bacterium
was seen only in the healthy subjects. These results implied that a peculiar inter-species relationship in
the gut microbiome may exist in CAD patients compared to healthy subjects.

Additionally, there are some studies that have demonstrated the relationship between the
gut microbiome and heart failure (HF). Kamo et al., ﬁrst reported the gut microbial difference in
Japanese heart failure patients [33]. They performed a 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis of fecal
samples from 12 HF patients and 12 age-matched healthy subjects. They further compared the gut
microbiome in HF patients according to age; the gut microbiome in the 12 HF patients younger than
60 years of age were compared with those of the 10 HF patients 60 years of age or older. Although
the richness and diversity of the gut microbiota were not signiﬁcantly different between the HF
patients and healthy subjects, Dorea and Clostridium were less abundant in the HF patients than
in the healthy subjects. Moreover, older HF patients had a lower abundance of Bacteroidetes and
a higher abundance of Proteobacteria compared to the younger HF patients. There is also a report
from China that shows a metagenomic analysis of fecal samples from patients with chronic HF [34].
They enrolled 53 HF patients and 41 controls with risk factors and compared the compositions of
their gut microbiomes. Ruminococcus, Acinetobacter, and Veillonella increased in the HF patients,
whereas Alistipes, Faecalibacterium, and Oscillibacter decreased.
In line with the previous report,
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii decreased in the HF patients compared to the controls. The results of
these studies suggest that an altered gut microbiome may have an impact on the development and
progression of heart failure. This evidence paves the way for further studies investigating the gut
microbiome in the prevention and management of CVD.

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

6 of 10

Table 2. Clinical reports demonstrating the gut microbiome in patients with CVD.

Year

Study Population

Country

Analysis

Results

2012 Nat. Commun.

12 patients with symptomatic atherosclerosis
(myocardial infarction or cerebrovascular events)
and 13 age- and sex-matched healthy individuals.

Sweden

Gut metagenome

Collinsella ↑, Eubacterium ↓, Roseburia ↓ in patients
with symptomatic atherosclerosis.

2015 J. Am.
Heart Assoc.

141 patients with stroke and transient ischemic attack
(stroke/TIA patients) and 94 asymptomatic controls.

China

16S rRNA V4 region

Enterobacteriaceae ↑, Proteobacteria ↑, Escherichia/Shigella ↑, Bacteroidetes ↓,
Bacteroidales ↓, Bacteroidaceae ↓, Bacteroides ↓ in stroke/TIA patients.

2016 J.
Atheroscler. Thromb.

39 coronary artery disease (CAD) patients,
30 age- and sex-matched no-CAD controls
with coronary risk factors, and 50 healthy
volunteers without coronary risk factors.

Japan

Terminal restriction fragment
length polymorphism

Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio ↑, Lactobacillales ↑, Bacteroides + Prevotella ↓ in CAD.

2017 Nat. Commun.

218 individuals with atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease (ACVD) and 187 healthy controls.

China

Gut metagenome

Enterobacteriaceae (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., and Enterobacter aerogenes),
Streptococcus spp., Lactobacillus salivarius, Solobacterium moorei, Atopobium parvulum,
Ruminococcus gnavus, Eggerthella lenta ↑, Roseburia intestinalis ↓, Faecalibacterium cf.
prausnitzii ↓, Bacteroides spp. ↓, Prevotella copri ↓, Alistipes shahii ↓ in ACVD.

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

7 of 10

5. Alternations in Gut Microbial Function Associated with CVD

In addition to the compositional characteristics, the functional characteristics of the gut
microbiome have been investigated in order to delineate the mechanisms related to the development
of CVD. Although metagenomic shotgun sequencing analysis is the main method to examine the
functional characteristics, methods are being developed to predict functional proﬁles from taxonomic
proﬁles. Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt)
is a bioinformatics software package designed to predict metagenomic functional content from the
16S rRNA gene [35]. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) modules are usually
used to construct a functional map of the gut microbiome [36].

The ﬁrst shotgun sequencing of the gut metagenome in patients with symptomatic atherosclerotic
plaques in their carotid arteries was a study with a small number of samples [27]. They showed
that genes that encode proteins involved in peptidoglycan synthesis were enriched, and those that
encode phytoene dehydrogenases were depleted in the patients compared to these genes in healthy
subjects. Considering that gut bacterial function differs even within the same strain, a metagenomic
shotgun sequencing study must provide us with further detailed information. Five years later, Jie et al.,
have reported a metagenomic shotgun sequencing study with 218 CAD patients and 187 healthy
subjects [30]. They revealed alterations in gut microbial functional modules in CAD patients, such as
the phosphotransferase system, amino acid transporters, vitamin metabolism, lipopolysaccharide
biosynthesis, and the activities of SCFAs and TMA lyases.

With regard to HF, Cui et al., have investigated the metabolic patterns of the gut microbiome
in patients with chronic HF to provide direct evidence and a comprehensive understanding of
gut microbial dysbiosis [34]. Fifty-three chronic HF patients (ischemic cardiomyopathy, n = 29;
dilated cardiomyopathy, n = 24) and 41 controls with risk factors were enrolled. They found
an elevation in the microbial genes for lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, tryptophan, and TMAO
generation in the chronic HF patients. This result provides a convincing explanation for the increased
plasma lipopolysaccharide levels in HF patients [37], because the main source of lipopolysaccharides
is the gut/gut microbiome. Moreover, increased expression of the genes for phosphotransferase
systems and decreased gene expression for the synthesis and transport of amino acids, nucleotide
sugar biosynthesis, and the iron transport system were observed in the HF patients compared with the
controls. These disease-dependent unique features in the functional capacity may give us clues for
novel therapeutic approaches.

6. Issues to Be Considered When Interpreting the Studies

Most clinical studies compare the gut microbial composition between patients and healthy controls.
Administration of medication has a substantial effect on the gut microbiome, and medication-matched
controls are required to elucidate the impact of the gut microbiome on disease progression. Moreover,
the studies mentioned above have provided useful characterization of the fecal microbial proﬁle
in patients with CVD; however, we are still struggling with these descriptive data. A speciﬁc gut
microbiome-based target to prevent CVD has yet to emerge, which is the greatest challenge that we
are currently facing. It may take a little more time to conduct a large cohort study or a translational
study to promote a deeper understanding of how the gut microbiome directly contributes to CVD.
While we already know that diet, prebiotics, probiotics, a speciﬁc IgA antibody, and enzymes can
modulate the gut microbiome and its function [38,39], these interventions for patients with CVD are
constrained by ethical considerations or funding limitations. In such cases, an in vitro fermentation
system simulating the human intestinal tract may help to evaluate the functionality or safety of these
interventions under highly reproducible conditions without the ethical issues [40]. Speciﬁcally, we can
culture feces from patients with prebiotics or probiotics in an in vitro fermentation system and analyze
how the gut microbiome, and its metabolites and functions, are changed after the intervention. Of note,
we have observed some discrepancies between the ﬁndings in humans and mice. These may be due to

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

8 of 10

the differences in the natural gut microbiome. It is important to pay attention to the complexities of
translating the ﬁndings from an animal model to humans.

7. Conclusions

In summary, recent evidence on the potential interaction between the gut microbiome and
cardiovascular diseases is intriguing. With increasing awareness of the relationship between the
gut microbiome and CVD, we have high expectations for the clinical application of gut microbiome
modulation. Further studies, focusing on a more speciﬁc and mechanistic understanding of the gut
microbiome in the pathogenesis of CVD, are necessary to develop novel diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies for CVD.

Author Contributions: T.Y. conceived and wrote the manuscript and made critical revisions. N.Y. conceived and
wrote the manuscript. K.H. searched the bibliography and made critical revisions.

Funding: This research was funded by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 24591114, 16K09516 (T.Y.) and 17K09497
(K.H.), The Japanese Circulation Society Translational Research Foundation (K.H.), Uehara Memorial Foundation
(K.H.), Takeda Scientiﬁc Foundation (T.Y.), Senshin Medical Research Foundation (T.Y.), Yakult Bioscience Research
Foundation (T.Y.), Hyogo Science and Technology Association (T.Y. and K.H.), and Kondou Kinen Medical
Foundation (T.Y.). Article Processing Charges was sponsored by MDPI.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.

References

1.

Turnbaugh, P.J.; Ley, R.E.; Mahowald, M.A.; Magrini, V.; Mardis, E.R.; Gordon, J.I. An obesity-associated gut
microbiome with increased capacity for energy harvest. Nature 2006, 444, 1027. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Macpherson, A.J.; Harris, N.L. Interactions between commensal intestinal bacteria and the immune system.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2004, 4, 478–485. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Zhao, L. The gut microbiota and obesity: From correlation to causality. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2013, 11, 639–647.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Imajo, K.; Fujita, K.; Yoneda, M.; Nozaki, Y.; Ogawa, Y.; Shinohara, Y.; Kato, S.; Mawatari, H.; Shibata, W.;
Kitani, H.; et al. Hyperresponsivity to low-dose endotoxin during progression to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
is regulated by leptin-mediated signaling. Cell Metab. 2012, 16, 44–54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Gevers, D.; Kugathasan, S.; Denson, L.A.; Vázquez-Baeza, Y.; Van Treuren, W.; Ren, B.; Schwager, E.;
Knights, D.; Song, S.J.; Yassour, M.; et al. The treatment-naïve microbiome in new-onset Crohn’s disease.
Cell Host Microbe 2014, 15, 382–392. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Tang, W.H.W.; Kitai, T.; Hazen, S.L. Gut Microbiota in Cardiovascular Health and Disease. Circ. Res. 2017,
120, 1183–1196. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ridker, P.M.; Danielson, E.; Fonseca, F.A.H.; Genest, J.; Gotto, A.M.J.; Kastelein, J.J.P.; Koenig, W.; Libby, P.;
Lorenzatti, A.J.; MacFadyen, J.G.; et al. Rosuvastatin to Prevent Vascular Events in Men and Women with
Elevated C-Reactive Protein. N. Engl. J. Med. 2008, 359, 2195–2207. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Benjamin, E.J.; Virani, S.S.; Callaway, C.W.; Chang, A.R.; Cheng, S.; Chiuve, S.E.; Cushman, M.; Delling, F.N.;
Deo, R.; de Ferranti, S.D.; et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2018 Update: A Report From the
American Heart Association. Circulation 2018. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shimokawa, H.; Miura, M.; Nochioka, K.; Sakata, Y. Heart failure as a general pandemic in Asia. Eur. J.
Heart Fail. 2015, 17, 884–892. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

10. Heidenreich, P.A.; Trogdon, J.G.; Khavjou, O.A.; Butler, J.; Dracup, K.; Ezekowitz, M.D.; Finkelstein, E.A.;
Hong, Y.; Johnston, S.C.; Khera, A.; et al. Forecasting the Future of Cardiovascular Disease in the
United States: A Policy Statement From the Am. Heart Association. Circulation 2011, 123, 933–944. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

11. Tang, W.H.; Wang, Z.; Fan, Y.; Levison, B.; Hazen, J.E.; Donahue, L.M.; Wu, Y.; Hazen, S.L. Prognostic value
of elevated levels of intestinal microbe-generated metabolite trimethylamine-N-oxide in patients with heart
failure: Reﬁning the gut hypothesis. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2014, 64, 1908–1914. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Suzuki, T.; Heaney, L.M.; Bhandari, S.S.; Jones, D.J.L.; Ng, L.L. Trimethylamine N-oxide and prognosis in
acute heart failure. Heart 2016, 102, 841–848. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

12.

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

9 of 10

16.

14.

13. Tang, W.H.; Wang, Z.; Levison, B.S.; Koeth, R.A.; Britt, E.B.; Fu, X.; Wu, Y.; Hazen, S.L. Intestinal microbial
metabolism of phosphatidylcholine and cardiovascular risk. N. Engl. J. Med. 2013, 368, 1575–1584. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Fu, Q.; Zhao, M.; Wang, D.; Hu, H.; Guo, C.; Chen, W.; Li, Q.; Zheng, L.; Chen, B. Coronary Plaque
Characterization Assessed by Optical Coherence Tomography and Plasma Trimethylamine-N-oxide Levels
in Patients With Coronary Artery Disease. Am. J. Cardiol. 2016, 118, 1311–1315. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Tang, W.H.W.; Wang, Z.; Shrestha, K.; Borowski, A.G.; Wu, Y.; Troughton, R.W.; Klein, A.L.; Hazen, S.L.
Intestinal Microbiota-Dependent Phosphatidylcholine Metabolites, Diastolic Dysfunction, and Adverse
Clinical Outcomes in Chronic Systolic Heart Failure. J. Card. Fail. 2015, 21, 91–96. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Suzuki, T.; Heaney, L.M.; Jones, D.J.; Ng, L.L. Trimethylamine N-oxide and Risk Stratiﬁcation after Acute
Myocardial Infarction. Clin. Chem. 2017, 63, 420–428. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Jie, Z.; Xia, H.; Zhong, S.-L.; Feng, Q.; Li, S.; Liang, S.; Zhong, H.; Liu, Z.; Gao, Y.; Zhao, H.; et al. The gut
microbiome in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 845. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Cho, C.E.; Taesuwan, S.; Malysheva, O.V.; Bender, E.; Tulchinsky, N.F.; Yan, J.; Sutter, J.L.; Caudill, M.A.
Trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) response to animal source foods varies among healthy young men and is
inﬂuenced by their gut microbiota composition: A randomized controlled trial. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2017, 61.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Schiattarella, G.G.; Sannino, A.; Toscano, E.; Giugliano, G.; Gargiulo, G.; Franzone, A.; Trimarco, B.;
Esposito, G.; Perrino, C. Gut microbe-generated metabolite trimethylamine-N-oxide as cardiovascular
risk biomarker: A systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis. Eur. Heart J. 2017, 38, 2948–2956.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

17.

19.

20. Hu´c, T.; Nowinski, A.; Drapala, A.; Konopelski, P.; Ufnal, M. Indole and indoxyl sulfate, gut bacteria
metabolites of tryptophan, change arterial blood pressure via peripheral and central mechanisms in rats.
Pharmacol. Res. 2018, 130, 172–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

21. Kimura, I.; Inoue, D.; Maeda, T.; Hara, T.; Ichimura, A.; Miyauchi, S.; Kobayashi, M.; Hirasawa, A.;
Tsujimoto, G. Short-chain fatty acids and ketones directly regulate sympathetic nervous system via G
protein-coupled receptor 41 (GPR41). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011, 108, 8030–8035. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Ohira, H.; Tsutsui, W.; Fujioka, Y. Are Short Chain Fatty Acids in Gut Microbiota Defensive Players for

Inﬂammation and Atherosclerosis? J. Atheroscler. Thromb. 2017, 24, 660–672. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

23. Tomasova, L.; Dobrowolski, L.; Jurkowska, H.; Wróbel, M.; Huc, T.; Ondrias, K.; Ostaszewski, R.; Ufnal, M.
[CrossRef]

Intracolonic hydrogen sulﬁde lowers blood pressure in rats. Nitric Oxide 2016, 60, 50–58.
[PubMed]

24. Poesen, R.; Claes, K.; Evenepoel, P.; de Loor, H.; Augustijns, P.; Kuypers, D.; Meijers, B. Microbiota-Derived
Phenylacetylglutamine Associates with Overall Mortality and Cardiovascular Disease in Patients with CKD.
J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.: JASN 2016, 27, 3479–3487. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

25. Gryp, T.; Vanholder, R.; Vaneechoutte, M.; Glorieux, G. p-Cresyl Sulfate. Toxins 2017, 9, 52. [CrossRef]

[PubMed]

26. Karlsson, F.H.; Fåk, F.; Nookaew, I.; Tremaroli, V.; Fagerberg, B.; Petranovic, D.; Bäckhed, F.; Nielsen, J.
Symptomatic atherosclerosis is associated with an altered gut metagenome. Nat. Commun. 2012, 3, 1245.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

27. Yin, J.; Liao, S.X.; He, Y.; Wang, S.; Xia, G.H.; Liu, F.T.; Zhu, J.J.; You, C.; Chen, Q.; Zhou, L.; et al. Dysbiosis of
Gut Microbiota With Reduced Trimethylamine-N-Oxide Level in Patients With Large-Artery Atherosclerotic
Stroke or Transient Ischemic Attack. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2015, 4, e002699. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

28. Emoto, T.; Yamashita, T.; Sasaki, N.; Hirota, Y.; Hayashi, T.; So, A.; Kasahara, K.; Yodoi, K.; Matsumoto, T.;
Mizoguchi, T.; et al. Analysis of Gut Microbiota in Coronary Artery Disease Patients: A Possible Link
between Gut Microbiota and Coronary Artery Disease. J. Atheroscler. Thromb. 2016, 23, 908–921. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

29. Emoto, T.; Yamashita, T.; Kobayashi, T.; Sasaki, N.; Hirota, Y.; Hayashi, T.; So, A.; Kasahara, K.; Yodoi, K.;
Matsumoto, T.; et al. Characterization of gut microbiota proﬁles in coronary artery disease patients using
data mining analysis of terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism: Gut microbiota could be a
diagnostic marker of coronary artery disease. Heart Vessels 2017, 32, 39–46. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

10 of 10

30.

32.

Jackson, M.A.; Goodrich, J.K.; Maxan, M.-E.; Freedberg, D.E.; Abrams, J.A.; Poole, A.C.; Sutter, J.L.; Welter, D.;
Ley, R.E.; Bell, J.T.; et al. Proton pump inhibitors alter the composition of the gut microbiota. Gut 2016,
65, 749–756. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

31. Wexler, A.G.; Goodman, A.L. An insider’s perspective: Bacteroides as a window into the microbiome.

Nat. Microbiol. 2017, 2, 17026. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sokol, H.; Pigneur, B.; Watterlot, L.; Lakhdari, O.; Bermúdez-Humarán, L.G.; Gratadoux, J.-J.; Blugeon, S.;
Bridonneau, C.; Furet, J.-P.; Corthier, G.; et al. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-inﬂammatory
commensal bacterium identiﬁed by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 2008, 105, 16731–16736. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

33. Kamo, T.; Akazawa, H.; Suda, W.; Saga-Kamo, A.; Shimizu, Y.; Yagi, H.; Liu, Q.; Nomura, S.; Naito, A.T.;
Takeda, N.; et al. Dysbiosis and compositional alterations with aging in the gut microbiota of patients with
heart failure. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0174099. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

34. Cui, X.; Ye, L.; Li, J.; Jin, L.; Wang, W.; Li, S.; Bao, M.; Wu, S.; Li, L.; Geng, B.; et al. Metagenomic and
metabolomic analyses unveil dysbiosis of gut microbiota in chronic heart failure patients. Sci. Rep. 2018,
8, 635. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

35. Langille, M.G.; Zaneveld, J.; Caporaso, J.G.; McDonald, D.; Knights, D.; Reyes, J.A.; Clemente, J.C.;
Burkepile, D.E.; Vega Thurber, R.L.; Knight, R.; et al. Predictive functional proﬁling of microbial communities
using 16S rRNA marker gene sequences. Nat. Biotechnol. 2013, 31, 814–821. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

36. Kanehisa, M.; Furumichi, M.; Tanabe, M.; Sato, Y.; Morishima, K. KEGG: New perspectives on genomes,

37.

pathways, diseases and drugs. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017, 45, D353–D361. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sharma, R.; Haehling, S.; Rauchhaus, M.; Bolger, A.P.; Genth-Zotz, S.; Doehner, W.; Oliver, B.;
Poole-Wilson, P.A.; Hans-Dieter, V.; Coats, A.J.S.; et al. Whole blood endotoxin responsiveness in patients
with chronic heart failure: The importance of serum lipoproteins. Eur. J. Heart Fail. 2005, 7, 479–484.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

38. Okai, S.; Usui, F.; Yokota, S.; Hori, I.Y.; Hasegawa, M.; Nakamura, T.; Kurosawa, M.; Okada, S.; Yamamoto, K.;
Nishiyama, E.; et al. High-afﬁnity monoclonal IgA regulates gut microbiota and prevents colitis in mice.
Nat. Microbiol. 2016, 1, 16103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

39. Mizoguchi, T.; Kasahara, K.; Yamashita, T.; Sasaki, N.; Yodoi, K.; Matsumoto, T.; Emoto, T.; Hayashi, T.;
Kitano, N.; Yoshida, N.; et al. Oral administration of the lactic acid bacterium Pediococcus acidilactici
attenuates atherosclerosis in mice by inducing tolerogenic dendritic cells. Heart Vessels 2017, 32, 768–776.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

40. Wilson, B.A.; Takagi, R.; Sasaki, K.; Sasaki, D.; Fukuda, I.; Tanaka, K.; Yoshida, K.-I.; Kondo, A.;
Osawa, R. A Single-Batch Fermentation System to Simulate Human Colonic Microbiota for High-Throughput
Evaluation of Prebiotics. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0160533.

© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

