118

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 40, No. 1

Figure 1. Main functions of bacteria in the gut. Bacteria benefit the host in many ways. Besides breaking down food compounds and synthesizing vitamins and other
nutrients, they play an important role in the development and training of the immune system (Hill and Artis 2010; Renz, Brandtzaeg and Hornef 2011; Sonnenberg
and Artis 2012). They provide colonization resistance (Kamada et al. 2013; Lawley and Walker 2013), protect against epithelial injury (Rakoff-Nahoum et al. 2004) and
promote angiogenesis (Stappenbeck, Hooper and Gordon 2002; Reinhardt et al. 2012) and fat storage (B ¨ackhed et al. 2004). They are also able to modulate bone-mass
density (Sj ¨ogren et al. 2012), modify the nervous system (Hsiao et al. 2013) and metabolize therapeutics into active compounds (Claus et al. 2011).

Defects in host genes controlling bacterial homeostasis or al-
terations of the gut microbiota composition have been associ-
ated with complex diseases, including inflammatory bowel dis-
ease (IBD), diabetes mellitus (Pflughoeft and Versalovic 2012)
and asthma (Maslowski et al. 2009). Although in some partic-
ular cases complex diseases have been linked with the pres-
ence of specific bacteria (e.g. Prevotella in reactive arthritis;
Scher et al. 2013), it seems likely that bacterial communities
and not specific bacteria determine susceptibility towards com-
plex diseases, a concept that has been introduced as the ‘the
pathobiome’ (Vayssier-Taussat et al. 2014). The identification and
manipulation of such disease-associated communities will un-
doubtedly be the topic of intensive research. Interestingly, the
composition of gut bacterial communities is genetically deter-
mined (Garrett et al. 2007; Brinkman et al. 2011; Lepage et al.
2011). Although a direct link between the microbiome and dis-
ease susceptibility is difficult to establish, proof of concept stud-
ies argue that manipulation of the microbiome represents an ap-
pealing treatment strategy. Gastrointestinal abnormalities can
be improved by probiotic treatment in autism spectrum disor-
ders (Hsiao et al. 2013), and fecal microbiota transplantation is
highly effective for the treatment of recurrent Clostridium difficile
infection (Van Nood et al. 2013). Likewise, disease phenotypes
can be transferred by microbiota transplantation. For example,
obesity can be transferred successfully using feces from obese
humans to lean mice, which was associated with decreased fer-
mentation of short-chain fatty acids, increased metabolism of
branched amino acids and decreased transformation of bile acid
species as compared to the lean phenotypes (Ridaura et al. 2013).
In addition, simply cohousing lean and obese animals prevented
the obese phenotype and was associated with transfer of Bac-
teroidales, suggesting a phenotypic impact of horizontal micro-
bial transfer (Ridaura et al. 2013).

Revolutionary advances in sequencing techniques and com-
putational biology tools to study the microbiome, referred to
as the collective genomes of microbiota, have greatly improved
our understanding of the microbiome composition (Raes and
Bork 2009; Relman 2011). A recent meta-analysis of studies using
16S rRNA gene sequencing of human fecal samples demon-
strated that samples clustered by large effect size characteristics
such as age, geography and western vs. non-western societies,
irrespective of the choice of PCR primers, sequencing platform
or DNA extraction techniques (Lozupone et al. 2013). Shotgun
sequencing of full microbial DNA or metagenomes is currently
a widely used approach that reveals more sequence-based in-
formation about microbial diversity than 16S rRNA sequencing,
although it remains a challenge to annotate gene sequences
with the genome of origin (Schloissnig et al. 2013). Moreover,
whereas precision at high-sequencing depth is required to dif-
ferentiate strains and species, it is often a matter of finding
the optimal balance between quantity and quality. Large-scale
metagenomic sequencing efforts, including those led by the hu-
man microbiome project (National Institutes of Health initiative)
and the metagenomics of the human intestinal tract (MetaHIT)
consortia have led to a number of conceptual landmark publi-
cations (Markowitz et al. 2010; Qin et al. 2010; Arumugam et al.
2011; Meth ´e et al. 2012; Ding and Schloss 2014). For example,
based on sequencing of fecal samples collected across nations,
the enterotype concept was raised, stating that the gut ecosys-
tem can be classified into three main types that dominate pa-
rameters such as age, gender and nationality (Arumugam et al.
2011). Meanwhile, such enterotypes have also been identified in
other mammals such as chimpanzees and wild/laboratory mice
(Moeller et al. 2012; Hildebrand et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2014).

Next to providing insights into the microbial architecture
and abundance, metagenomic shotgun sequencing also sheds

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

Laukens et al.

119

Figure 2. Experimental variables that influence microbiome analysis. During a typical experimental workflow (donor selection, sampling, DNA extraction, sequencing
and analysis of the data), variation is systematically introduced and complicates inter-experimental comparisons.

light on bacterial functionality. Such techniques have led to the
development of the first human intestinal gene catalog (Qin
et al. 2010) and enabled a better understanding of the link be-
tween obesity-associated comorbidities and reduced bacterial
richness (Cotillard et al. 2013; Le Chatelier et al. 2013). Although
predetermining functional effects to specific gene sets provides
first information about the functionality of a given microbiome,
these analyses do not always assess the true functionality of the
encoded genes in a specific environment. Metagenomic li-
braries, typically cloned into Escherichia coli vectors, permit func-
tional screening of microbiota in vitro (Troeschel et al. 2010). In
addition, the exact impact of the microbial presence on the host
can be studied using other ‘-omic’ approaches, providing a mul-
tifaceted view by combining metagenomics with metatranscrip-
tomics, metaproteomics or metabolomics (Raes and Bork 2009;
Holmes et al. 2012).

Despite the methodological progress, the reproducibility of
microbiome research and therefore its relevance in some re-
search areas remains an important issue. Slowly we begin to un-
derstand the pitfalls that are associated with such experimen-
tal design, and we acknowledge the need for standardizing. The
next paragraph deals with the most common variables that de-
termine the fate of microbiome analyses in a typical workflow
(see also Fig. 2).

VARIABLES IN EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN THAT
COMPLICATE INTEREXPERIMENTAL
COMPARISONS

The temporal stability of one’s gut microbiome remains a critical
question. Shotgun sequencing has revealed that over a five-year
period, an individual conserves on average 60% of ∼200 phylo-
types (highest taxonomic level) (Faith et al. 2013). At lower taxo-
nomic levels, e.g. at species level, each individual’s microbiome
may be as representative as a fingerprint (Schloissnig et al. 2013).
Yet, the stability of such a fingerprint remains unclear and its
identification possesses methodological challenges (Mart´ınez,
Muller and Walter 2013), considering age, gender, genotype, diet
and environmental factors related to the donor (Wu et al. 2011).
Spatial organization of bacterial communities across and
along the gastrointestinal tract complicates microbiome anal-
ysis. The sample type used to extract bacterial genetic informa-
tion is of crucial importance. Along the gastrointestinal tract,
a gradient of pH, bile acid concentrations, oxygen levels and
antibacterial products exists. More importantly, the microbial
composition of feces and intestinal tissue is intrinsically dif-
ferent, because they are dictated by the radial gradient of
oxygen and substrates provided by the host. Adjacent to the
mucosa, facultative anaerobes are able to grow because of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

120

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 40, No. 1

diffusion of oxygen from the underlying vessel network,
whereas viable luminal bacteria are strictly anaerobes (Alben-
berg et al. 2014). In addition, specific nutrients such as secreted
proteins or cell-death-derived peptides shape the mucosa-
associated microbiome. For ethical and practical reasons, it may
not always be feasible to collect tissue (biopsy) samples. In addi-
tion, fecal matter is usually collected to meet practical standards
for the donors in terms of storage and shipment, and some in-
vestigators use samples that were collected ‘anaerobically’.

Next, the DNA extraction protocol largely creates bias, as well
as the choice of PCR primers, number of PCR cycles and spe-
cific sequencing platform used (Brooks et al. 2015). The Micro-
biome Quality Control project (http://www.mbqc.org) was estab-
lished, aiming to identify the variation related to protocols and
techniques in microbiome analysis. Finally, analysis of the data,
starting with the extraction of usable sequences, and the use of
specific analytical or graphical methods to understand patterns
will drive the overall conclusions. It seems advisable to include
a standard level of analysis methods, looking systematically for
differences between a pre-defined set of taxonomic units, e.g.
phylum, genus and species level.

Although increasing evidence supports the use of microbiota
as a diagnostic or therapeutic tool, it is challenging to manage
parameters such as the host’s environment, age, physiology, ge-
netics and the presence of multiple known and unknown con-
founders in human trials. Furthermore, the number of possible
interventions in human subjects is limited and laborious. Given
careful experimental design, the microbiome can be controlled
and manipulated more easily in animal models compared to hu-
man studies. This review summarizes the tools, confounding
factors and obstacles in the study of the murine microbiome
and the principles of microbiome homeostasis to generate a
number of guidelines improving the reproducibility of animal
experiments.

TOOLS TO DISSECT THE ROLE OF THE GUT
MICROBIOME IN MICE

Most studies that address the causal relationship between the
presence of bacteria and host physiology have been based on
rather extreme changes in microbiota, such as the use of germ-
free (GF) mice, which are born and reared without exposure to
any live microbes, and treatment with broad-spectrum antibi-
otics. In contrast, the transfer of embryos, cross-fostering, gav-
age with feces or cohabitation of mice may represent more phys-
iologically relevant changes.

GF mice

The effect of bacteria on the host immune system is investigated
by breeding GF mice or by colonizing GF mice in gnotobiotic
experiments through monoassociation, conventionalizing or
transfer of microbial communities (Bleich and Hansen 2012). The
key advantage of GF mice is that inoculation with specific bac-
terial species allows to directly link a function with these bacte-
ria and is of major importance considering the therapeutic use
of bacteria. A limiting factor is the lack of a homeostatic com-
munity context that is likely to modify the functional impact
of gnotobiotic experiments. In addition, GF mice have exten-
sive defects in the development of gut-associated lymphoid tis-
sues and in antibody production (Round and Mazmanian 2009;
Olszak et al. 2012), which may significantly impact the studied
phenotype. It must be recognized that although GF mice are de-
void of live bacteria, food might contain autoclave-resistant mi-

crobial products, including pathogen-associated molecular pat-
terns (PAMPs), which can induce host responses.

GF animals were applied in the study of the involvement of
microbiota in diabetes, rheumatic arthritis and IBD (Bleich and
Hansen 2012). For example, although the severity of colitis in
the commonly used dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) model criti-
cally depends on the presence of bacteria (Kitajima et al. 2001),
GF mice develop more severe colitis as compared to convention-
alized mice. This suggests that bacteria may play a protective
role in the metabolism of DSS, or that GF mice respond less ef-
ficient because of their immature intestinal immune system.
Important mechanistic insights in colonization resistance, the
mechanism whereby a microbial community is protected from
colonization of new and often harmful bacteria, were raised by
the use of sequential introduction of Bacteroides species into GF
mice (Lee et al. 2013), showing that colonization of Bacteroides
is species-specific and saturable. Finally, since immune struc-
tures in GF mice remain immature, much of our understanding
of host–microbe interactions involved in the development of the
immune system arose from the study of GF animals and is dis-
cussed in more detail later in this review.

Humanized mice

An important limitation in murine microbial studies is the dif-
ference in bacterial composition between mice and humans.
Whereas in humans three enterotypes can be identified, only
two can be found in mice (Hildebrand et al. 2013; Wang et al.
2014). Although the microbiota similarity between mice and
humans at the phylum level is remarkable, at the species
level, many differences are found (Dethlefsen, McFall-Ngai and
Relman 2007). As in humans, the two most abundant bacte-
rial phyla in C57BL6/J mice are the Firmicutes (60–80% of se-
quences) and the Bacteroidetes (20–40%); however, 85% of the
murine sequences represent species that have not been detected
in humans (Ley et al. 2005). ‘Humanization’ of the mouse mi-
crobiome is frequently used to overcome this limitation, and
it was recently shown that mice humanized with different hu-
man donors generate a similar microbiome composition and
metabolomic profile compared to the donor, with preservation
of individual-specific features (Marcobal et al. 2013). However,
microbial species seem to be critically adapted to specific hosts.
Gut bacterial numbers and phylum abundance were similar in
mice containing mouse and human microbiota, but bacterial
species differed markedly (Chung et al. 2012). Mice harboring
human microbiota had low levels of mucosal CD4+ and CD8+
T cells, few dendritic cells and reduced antimicrobial peptide
expression. Even rat microbiota failed to fully expand intesti-
nal T-cell numbers in mice. Importantly, mice with mouse mi-
crobiota conferred better protection against Salmonella infection
than those with human microbiota. Together, these data sug-
gest a highly specific coexistence and mutual interaction be-
tween species-associated microbiota and the host immune sys-
tem, and that microbiota–host interactions in humans cannot
be completely mirrored in ‘humanized’ mice.

Antibiotic treatment

Antibiotics can be used to demonstrate that the mere presence
of bacteria contributes to a specific phenotype (Ochoa-Rep ´araz
et al. 2009; Elinav et al. 2011; Bauer et al. 2012). The value of
such observations is difficult to interpret because even com-
bined antibiotic treatment does not completely sterilize the in-
testine. Instead, antibiotics alter intestinal microbial diversity

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

and have a large impact on mucosa-associated bacterial com-
munities throughout the small and large intestines (Puhl et al.
2012). For example, broad-spectrum antibiotics change bacte-
rial populations in the murine large intestine, reducing the total
number of bacteria and diminishing local cytokine production
(Hill and Artis 2010). The age at which the treatment is adminis-
trated is important since antibiotic treatment of mice at the age
of weaning results in long-term alteration of their gut microbial
communities, which does not occur in adult animals (Cho et al.
2012; Cox et al. 2014). Importantly, antibiotic gavage with a 12-h
interval causes greater depletion of microbiota than adminis-
tration of the antibiotics in drinking water provided ad libitum
(Reikvam et al. 2011).

The dosing of antibiotics is another critical determinant of
microbiome composition. Subtherapeutic doses of antibiotics,
referring to doses below the minimum inhibitory concentration,
strongly increase the virulence of microbiota. The latter princi-
ple is standardly used to increase the growth rate of farm ani-
mals, and the earlier in life this treatment is provided, the big-
ger the effect. Similarly, in mice, the application of subtherapeu-
tic doses of various classes of antibiotics resulted in increased
adiposity, associated with metabolic shifts and increased
Firmicute abundance (Cho et al. 2012; Cox et al. 2014), highly sim-
ilar to what is observed in the ob/ob mice. In mice, weight evo-
lution can either be repressed or enhanced by antibiotics, de-
pending on the dosing, treatment duration and mouse strain
used. In general, weight increase by antibiotics was most ob-
vious when mice were fed with a semisynthetic diet, while
this effect was lost when they had more balanced pellet diets
(Dubos, Schaedler and Costello 1963). Thus, intestinal bacteria
may depress growth by competing for nutrients, especially when
the diet is somewhat deficient. In contrast, high doses of antibi-
otics early in life may severely impact microbiome composition
and metabolic state (Cox and Blaser 2015).

Despite the limitations, the use of antibiotics to study the role
of bacteria may lead to important insights. For example, long-
term antibiotic treatment of mice lacking T-bet, a transcription
factor which is essential for innate lymphoid cell (ILC) devel-
opment, completely cured these mice from spontaneous coli-
tis that normally arises in this genetic background (Garrett et al.
2007).

Transfer of microbiota

Transferring microbiota from one mouse to another can be per-
formed in several ways. Before birth, embryos can be transferred
to a foster mother. Right after birth, pups can be fostered by an-
other mother and when mice are older, bacteria can be trans-
ferred by gavage, intrarectal administration or by simply cohous-
ing the animals. During cohousing, animals may feed on feces
(also known as coprophagy) or more likely ingest feces by self-
grooming.

Artificial colonization of GF mice with specific pathogen-free
(SPF) flora partly reversed the response to restraint stress (de-
fined by an increase of plasma cortisol levels) when the flora
was introduced at 6 weeks of age but not at 14 weeks of age
(Sudo et al. 2004). Others demonstrated that gavage of 1-week-
old mice with a distinct microbiota did not result in colonization,
whereas inoculation of 3-week-old mice was successful (Hansen
et al. 2012). At a very young age, the microbiota originating from
the mother likely dominate the offspring microbiota. This idea
is supported by the observation that microbial colonization of
neonate GF mice resulted in normal numbers of iNKT cells in
lungs and colon, while they are typically elevated in GF mice. In

Laukens et al.

121

contrast, colonization of 8-week-old GF mice could not reverse
the elevated numbers of iNKT cells (Olszak et al. 2012). Accord-
ingly, the administration of probiotics might lead to optimal re-
sults only when given at early ages. The probiotic Lactobacillus
johnsonii strain La1, for example, was effective in inhibiting the
development of atopic dermatitis in NC/Nga mice only when ad-
ministered right after weaning (Inoue et al. 2007).

Although considerable literature exists about microbiota
transfer into GF animals, little is known about transferring mi-
crobiota into animals with non-GF intestines. Intuitively, one
would treat such animals with antibiotics to allow the introduc-
tion of the donor microbiota. However, antibiotic treatment is
not necessary to establish an exogenous microbiota (Manichanh
et al. 2010). In fact, antibiotic pretreatment even worsened the ef-
ficiency of engraftment. Transplantation has also been used in
mouse models of enteric infections. For example, mice infected
with C. difficile could be cured with feces from healthy mice
(Lawley et al. 2012), in accordance with the successful treatment
of human relapsing C. difficile colitis. In addition, a so-called coli-
togenic flora, retrieved from transgenic mice that spontaneously
develop colitis, can successfully transmit intestinal inflamma-
tion to wild-type mice (Garrett et al. 2007; Elinav et al. 2011). We
demonstrated that cohousing of mice from the age of 4 weeks
determines the sensitivity towards DSS-induced colitis, inde-
pendent of the specific genotype (Brinkman et al. 2013). Conse-
quently, randomly distributing and cohousing mutant and wild-
type mice in cages before the experiment could lead to loss of
phenotype as a result of microbiota transfer (Brinkman et al.
2013).

In conclusion, modification of microbial conditions within
the first weeks of life can disrupt the development of gut-
associated immunity. Between the age of weaning and young
adulthood (4–8 weeks of age), there is another window of oppor-
tunity to influence microbiome composition. Later in life, im-
munity is far less susceptible to change by microbial influence,
probably due to increased stability of microbiome homeostasis.
The use of specific tools for maximal efficacy of microbiome ma-
nipulation in relation to mouse development is summarized in
Fig. 3.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE MURINE GUT
MICROBIOME AND THE INTESTINAL IMMUNE
SYSTEM

Mammals are GF in utero; however, some reports indicate that
gut colonization may start before birth. Bacteria originating from
the mother have been observed in the meconium of human and
murine neonates (Jim ´enez et al. 2008) and bacterial translocation
from the gut lumen into the mammary glands during pregnancy
and during the first week of lactation has been reported (Perez
et al. 2007). However, it is generally accepted that colonization
occurs after exposure to bacteria in the birth canal and by con-
tact with the skin, feces and other environmental sources. The
mother’s milk primarily provides the initial protection against
invading pathogens (Hanson 2007; Fuhrer et al. 2010); however,
various studies have shown the presence of bacteria in milk,
which may also define the shaping of the microbiome (Ward et al.
2013).

In the human newborn’s gut, the original bacterial species
that populate are mainly facultative anaerobes,
including
Staphylococci (Morelli 2008). They consume oxygen leading to a
drop in redox potential, as such creating an appropriate en-
vironment for anaerobic colonization such as Clostridia and

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

122

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 40, No. 1

Figure 3. The development of the murine microbiota and the immune system over time. In utero, few, if any, bacteria are present in the mouse gut and the immune
system is not yet matured. Upon birth, the neonate is inoculated with microorganisms by the mother and the environment, and rapidly develops an immune system
that enables the pup to fight infections. Genetic background co-determines the composition of the microbiota, for example when the genotype increases intestinal
inflammation. After weaning, diet changes induce a novel surge in microbiota development and maturation of the immune response. At this time point, the microbiota
is fully established but still susceptible to changes in its composition by manipulation (e.g. diet) or natural influences. When the mouse reaches adulthood around
eight weeks, the microbiota displays a stable homeostatic state. At each of these four stages, the microbiota can be studied in conventional animals using the different
experimental approaches that are listed. ILCs: innate lymphoid cells; Treg: regulatory T cells.

Bifidobacteria. These early colonizers induce the expression of
mucins, the constituents of the mucus layer that forms a phys-
ical barrier between epithelial cells and the luminal content
(Bergstr ¨om et al. 2012). Accordingly, the thickness of the mucus
layer is decreased in GF rats and its composition differs dramat-
ically compared to conventionalized rats (Meslin, Fontaine and
Andrieux 1995). Especially in the first week after weaning, co-
inciding with the introduction of solid food, the pups are chal-
lenged by a rapidly changing microbiota until intestinal home-
ostasis is established, which generally occurs 11–17 days after
weaning (Schloss et al. 2012). The microbiota on day 17 closely
resembles the microbiota one year after weaning when mice are
kept under similar conditions. When the adult microbiome has
been established, the bacterial communities inhabiting the in-
testine are set and a clear distinction exists between the lumi-
nal and the mucus-adherent microbial populations. After con-
ventionalization of GF mice, microbial colonization of the colon
starts with the appearance of early colonizers on day 1, fol-
lowed by the slower establishment of a stable community. Inter-
estingly, homeostasis in the colon is reached within 8–16 days,
whereas establishment of homeostasis in the small intestine
takes about twice as long (El Aidy et al. 2012). Why the establish-
ment of this equilibrium in the ileum, which contains far less
bacteria compared to the colon, takes more time is speculative,
but indicates a higher complexity of the host–microbiome inter-
face in the ileal environment.

Before birth, pups have na¨ıve secondary lymphoid struc-
tures such as Peyer’s patches and mesenteric lymph nodes.
Maturation of the gut-associated immune compartment and
microvascular structures crucially depends on the presence of
bacteria and pattern recognition receptors after birth (Van de

Pavert and Mebius 2010; Hooper, Littman and Macpherson 2012).
For example, the presence of peptidoglycan, a constituent of
Gram-negative bacteria, is necessary to drive the genesis of gut
lymphoid follicles through NOD1 signaling in epithelial cells
(Bouskra et al. 2008). Another cell type that crucially regulates
lymphoid genesis in response to bacteria are RORct+ ILCs called
lymphoid tissue-inducer cells (Eberl 2012). These lymphoid cells
are present in the cryptopatches (the precursors of lymphoid
follicles) after birth and secrete large amounts of IL-22, which
is crucial for the containment of colonizing bacteria. Conse-
quently, mice deficient for RORct are extremely susceptible to
DSS due to a loss of containment of a homeostatic microbiota
(Lochner et al. 2011).

INTESTINAL HOMEOSTASIS OF THE MURINE
GUT MICROBIOME

Despite continuous exposure to bacteria and bacterial
constituents such as lipopolysaccharides and flagellin, the
intestinal mucosa maintains a homeostatic immunological en-
vironment. The host preserves a state of tolerance towards col-
onizing bacteria, inhibits bacterial overgrowth and at the same
time acts appropriately towards pathogens (Kamada et al. 2013;
Lawley and Walker 2013; Sommer and B ¨ackhed 2013).Vice versa,
the established adult microbiota provides protection against
potential pathogens via direct inhibition or nutrient depletion.
In addition, bacterial metabolites such as short-chain fatty acids
are well-known regulators of the host immune response (Macia
et al. 2012), and the generation of antigen-specific populations
of Treg cells in response to the commensal microbiota is thought

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

to provide post-thymic education of the immune system and
to generate tolerance (Lathrop et al. 2011; Renz, Brandtzaeg
and Hornef 2011). Immunosuppressive Treg cells are induced
in gut-draining lymph nodes and home to the gut where they
expand and produce a tolerant environment for a specific
antigen (Hadis et al. 2011).

Emerging evidence demonstrates an important role of innate
signaling in preserving a healthy microbiome through the in-
teraction of PAMPs with NOD-like receptors (NLRs), Toll-like re-
ceptors (TLRs) and ILCs (Hooper, Littman and Macpherson 2012).
NOD2, one of the first and most replicated risk factors for ileal
Crohn’s disease, recognizes intracellular muramyldipeptide, a
constituent of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacte-
ria, and induces proinflammatory cytokines and stimulates de-
fensin production in the ileum. Mice deficient in Nod2 are not
able to control Helicobacter hepaticus infection. In addition, a sig-
nificantly higher amount of Bacteroides and Firmicutes is found in
the terminal ileum of Nod2-deficient mice compared with their
wild-type littermates. Of note, this difference is less prominent
in fecal samples (Robertson et al. 2013), probably reflecting the
highest expression of Nod2 in Paneth cells of the ileum. Genetic
inactivation of the Nlrp6 inflammasome results in increase sus-
ceptibility to DSS and the generation of a colitogenic flora (Eli-
nav et al. 2011). In general, intestinal epithelial cells are hypore-
sponsive towards bacterial sensing which is mediated by, for
example, the single Ig IL-1-related receptor, inhibiting IL-1 sig-
naling. Genetic deletion of this receptor in mice renders them
highly susceptible to pathogen colonization as a direct conse-
quence of the loss of a homeostatic commensal flora (Sham et al.
2013). In addition, TLR-MyD88 signaling in response to commen-
sal bacteria critically regulates defensin production by Paneth
cells (Menendez et al. 2013). Of high importance in orchestrating
intestinal barrier function and innate sensing are ILCs, which
are the resident immune cell regulators at epithelial surfaces
that share many of the CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell functions (Son-
nenberg and Artis 2012). Like T cells, ILCs develop from com-
mon lymphoid precursors; however, they are not selected for
antigen specificity and do not express antigen receptors. As in-
nate sensors, they respond and divide rapidly upon stimulation.
ILCs regulate barrier integrity and therefore the direct physical
border between microbiome and underlying lamina propria cells
through secretion of cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor and
interferon.

GENETICS AND THE COMPOSITION OF THE
MURINE GUT MICROBIOME

Many inbred and outbred mouse strains with different genetic
backgrounds are available for animal studies. Since microbial
diversity is influenced by host genetic factors, studies of host
genetic effects on intestinal microbiota are accumulating. The
influence of these genetic factors is distinct from inheritance
of the microorganisms themselves by the so-called legacy ef-
fect (transmission between generations through the mother).
Several studies have determined the effect of host genetics on
the microbiome by comparing inbred laboratory strains (Friswell
et al. 2010; Campbell et al. 2012). Overall, the variation be-
tween strains was greater than individual differences within
each strain. We investigated the natural variability of microbiota
in five commonly used lab strains and confirmed the positive
correlation between genetic distance and microbiota distance
between mice (Hildebrand et al. 2013). Remarkably, one of the
two enterotype clusters showed reduced richness which corre-

Laukens et al.

123

lated with increased fecal calprotectin levels, which is a marker
for cellular damage that also indicates disease activity in IBD
(De Vos et al. 2013). A positive correlation between low richness
mice and calprotectin levels could therefore indicate low-grade
inflammation and it may be particularly relevant to test these
mice for susceptibility toward enteritis. After stratification for
enterotypes, the microbial variance between mice was driven
by interindividual changes, cage effects and genetics, explain-
ing 45, 32 and 20% of the variance, respectively.

Unexpectedly, individual mice from certain strains, for ex-
ample C3HRI, DBAJR and WSB, appear to be more similar in their
microbiota than other strains such as C57BL6/J (Friswell et al.
2010; Campbell et al. 2012). This indicates that host genetic fac-
tors contribute to different levels of conformity and explains
why sufficient backcrossing of strains is crucial for the repro-
ducibility of animal experiments. Moreover, a common practice
is the use of embryonic stem cells from the 129 mouse strain to
generate genetically engineered mice in which germ transmis-
sion can be scored by a chimeric fur. This methodology requires
sufficient backcrossing in a particular mouse strain to reduce
the mixed genetic background. Unfortunately, the genetic his-
tory of mutant mice is often ambiguous when mice are shared
between institutions (Sellers et al. 2012). Although a strain is
considered stable when backcrossed for 10 generations, original
129 genes that are too close to the mutated gene to be segre-
gated by recombination will persist in the backcrossed genome
(Simpson et al. 1997; Lusis, Yu and Wang 2007) and may cause
microbial differences compared to wild-type mice. Comparative
genomic analysis of 129 and C57BL/6J mouse strains revealed
indels and single nucleotide polymorphisms resulting in alter-
native or aberrant amino acid sequences in 1084 genes in the
129-strain genome. Annotating these passenger mutations to
the reported genetically modified congenic mice that were gen-
erated using 129-strain ES cells revealed that nearly all these
mice possess multiple passenger mutations potentially influ-
encing the phenotypic outcome. A Me-PaMuFind-It web tool
has been developed to estimate the number and possible ef-
fect of passenger mutations in transgenic mice of interest (Van-
den Berghe et al. 2015). A dramatic illustration of the problem of
passenger mutations recently reemerged when Casp1-null mice
were found to carry an inactivating passenger mutation in the
neighboring Casp11 gene (Kayagaki et al. 2011). Essentially, the
strong protection observed in Casp1-null mice against a lethal
lipopolysaccharide challenge was found to be mainly due to this
inactivating passenger mutation in the Casp11 gene.

The contribution of strain-specific differences in microbiota
composition to the strain-specific disease phenotypes might be
more important than previously thought (Kayagaki et al. 2011;
Vanden Berghe et al. 2013). Strain-specific phenotypic differ-
ences have been known for a long time and have been observed
in genetic models such as the IL-10 knockout mouse as well as in
DSS-induced colitis (M ¨ahler et al. 1998; Vidal et al. 2008; B ¨uchler
et al. 2012). These observations have fueled forward genetics re-
search to identify disease susceptibility genes. However, differ-
ences in microbiome composition could also explain why some
strains display a more severe phenotypic abnormality (B ¨uchler
et al. 2012).

Few papers describe murine gender differences in micro-
biota composition. A comparison of inbred lines revealed greater
similarity between pools of the same mouse line than between
pools of the same sex (Kovacs et al. 2011). By contrast, others
showed that gender differences in microbiota composition do
exist but that this observation is genotype dependent (Fushuku
and Fukuda 2008a; Gomez et al. 2012). The microbiomes of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

124

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 40, No. 1

weanling non-obese diabetic (NOD) male and female are indis-
tinguishable, but sex-specific differences in microbiome com-
position become evident at puberty and are most evident in
adult mice (Markle et al. 2013). Apparently, each gender har-
bors a unique susceptibility to factors that shape the microbiota
after birth. These authors demonstrated that the male micro-
biota provides testosterone-dependent protection from type 1
diabetes in the NOD mice.

Besides strain and gender differences, investigators have
studied the effects of the allelic absence of specific genes on
the intestinal microbiota by comparing knockout with wild-type
mice. These studies have demonstrated that deletion of a single
gene can cause substantial alterations in the microbiota (Vijay-
Kumar et al. 2010; Brinkman et al. 2011; Kellermayer et al. 2011;
Lynch et al. 2012). Still, even gene deletions that cause a remark-
able phenotypic abnormality, such as the Ob/Ob mouse, have
been shown to have a much weaker effect than a change in diet
on the microbial composition (Hildebrandt et al. 2009). In addi-
tion, the question remains whether the microbiota as a whole
or a specific bacterial community is responsible for phenotypic
differences in transgenic animals. For example, the spontaneous
colitis phenotype in mice lacking T-bet depends on the presence
of only 12 species (Powell et al. 2012).

Genotype-specific phenotypes can be microbiota dependent
and this dependence could lead to wrong conclusions when
phenotypes of different mutant lines of the same strain are
compared. For example, phenotypic differences between TLR-
deficient C57BL/6J mouse colonies mainly reflected a diver-
gence of the microbiota after extended isolated breeding of the
colonies (Ubeda et al. 2012). Thus, long-term breeding of separate
mouse lines that had been derived from the same strain appears
to result in marked changes in intestinal microbiota composi-
tion. This observation cautions for direct comparison of mutant
lines even when they are bred in the same facility. Therefore,
correct interpretation of study results requires reference litter-
mate mice that are bred from in-house heterozygous breedings.
Taken together, microbiota composition in genetically modified
mice may superimpose on the genetic effect causing a change
in host physiology.

VARIABLES THAT AFFECT GUT MICROBIOTA
COMPOSITION RELATED TO ANIMAL
HOUSING

Variation in the microbiological environment between research
institutions or commercial breeding facilities is a confounding
factor; however. the exact contribution to experimental out-
comes is poorly understood. The origin of the mice is extremely
important because laboratory mice are available as both outbred
stocks and inbred strains from various vendors. Viable counts
of the total bacterial load have revealed large differences in the
cecal microbiota among mice of the same strain from differ-
ent vendors (Hufeldt et al. 2010b). The presence of segmented
filamentous bacteria in the gut of mice of Taconic caused a
higher frequency of Th17 cells compared with mice from Jack-
son Laboratory who lacked these bacteria (Ivanov et al. 2009).
Other groups have also reported vendor-dependent differences
in disease outcome, but these studies did not focus on the mi-
crobiome. For example, variations in airway responsiveness in
C57BL6 mice obtained from five different vendors were reported
(Chang, Mitzner and Watson 2012). This type of variation is not
restricted to commercially available strains but also plays a role
when comparing studies performed in different animal labora-

tory sources (Ubeda et al. 2012). Recommendations for experi-
mental design that take into account the key variables that affect
gut microbiota composition with respect to housing conditions
are provided in Table 1.

Conventional housing vs. SPF and cage effects

The SPF concept was introduced in response to the increased
awareness of the effect of microorganisms on animal experi-
ments (Schaedler and Dubos 1962). Today, the SPF condition is
classically established by inoculating pups delivered by cesar-
ian section with the so-called altered Schaedler flora, a mixture
of eight bacterial strains (Dewhirst et al. 1999). To maintain the
SPF status, an increasing number of rodents are housed in indi-
vidually ventilated cages with limited shared environmental ex-
posure. A large survey showed that despite the use of SPF tech-
nology, many institutional colonies were burdened by infectious
agents (Jacoby and Lindsey 1998). The discrepancy in testing fre-
quency, methods and the number of animals tested hampers
a uniform standard for ‘SPFness’ (Pritchett-Corning, Cosentino
and Clifford 2009). Also of concern are the differences in func-
tional biochemical activities of the microbiota of mice raised
under SPF conditions or under conventional conditions (Norin
and Midtvedt 2010). In fact, SPF refers only to those pathogens
that are tested by each individual center and animal handling
is likely to introduce new bacteria. The microbiota of these SPF
mice is largely unknown and it is questionable if the SPF micro-
biota is representative of a functionally normal murine gut flora.
Therefore, the logistic, technical and financial challenges faced
with gnotobiotic conditions may not in all circumstances weigh
up to the improvements they may bring in reducing experimen-
tal variability.

One might expect that the development of spontaneous dis-
eases in transgenic or knockout mice will depend on whether
they are housed in an SPF or in a conventional environment.
Indeed, IL-10 knockout mice that were transferred from an SPF
environment to conventional conditions showed a significantly
greater incidence and severity of colitis than animals kept under
SPF conditions (Pedrosa et al. 2011). By contrast, TCR-α knock-
out mice kept in a conventional facility developed a considerably
milder colitis than mice kept in an SPF facility coinciding with
an increase in IgM production (Shimomura et al. 2008).

Cage effects in conventionally housed mice are dramatic. Iso-
genic mice from different litters that were cohoused at weaning
showed little variation in microbiota (Deloris et al. 2006). Con-
versely, if the litters were split among different cages at wean-
ing, a high divergence in microbiota profiles was observed after 3
weeks. The most convincing difference between cages is driven
by Helicobacter spp., a fast spreading species found in animal fa-
cilities (Taylor et al. 2007; Hildebrand et al. 2013).

Taken together, these examples urge us to use standardized
experimental conditions and to explicitly describe the animal
housing conditions in publications.

Diet

Diet is one of the most important environmental factors influ-
encing microbiome composition. Several research groups have
shown that maternal diet affects the colonization of the gut of
pups (Fujiwara, Watanabe and Sonoyama 2008; Buddington et al.
2010; Schaible et al. 2011). Interestingly, postnatal changes in
milk composition that are caused by a change in the mother’s
diet appear to be more important for the composition of the gut
microbiota of the pups than the prenatal diet of the mother (Du

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

Laukens et al.

125

Variable that influences
microbiota composition

Possible complication

Maternal transmission
Diet
Environment, stress
Stress
Cage effect

Genetic drift
Standardization fallacy
Logistic problems

Table 1. Guidelines to control variations in microbiota composition in mice.

Guideline

General guidelines

Selective breeding of siblings over several generations
Standardize diet and food autoclaving parameters
Keep mice together (same room, same rack) and do not relocate cages
Minimize noise, handling time, stress to set hierarchy
Maximize number of cages
Collect tissue or fecal pellets for microbiome analysis
Study the effect of treatment (excluding probiotics)

If possible, use isobiotic mice and keep in individually ventilated cages
Or homogenize the flora by cohousing mice 3–4 weeks before the start of
the experiment
Mix treatment groups within each cage
Study the effect of probiotics

Homogenize the flora and minimize genetic influences by switching mice
and distribute littermates over cages just before the start of the experiment
Maximize the number of cages
Study the effect of host genetics on a common microbial background

Use heterozygous littermates as reference group
Homogenize the flora by cohousing mice 3–4 weeks before the start of the
experiment
Study the effect of host genetics on microbiota composition

Use heterozygous littermates as reference group
Separate litters according to genotype after weaning, divide over several
cages (in case of subtle differences)
Cohouse wild type and mutant (in case of profound differences)

Origin of mice
Cage effect

Cage effect

Cage effect

Cage effect

Maternal transmission
Cage effect

Maternal transmission
Cage effect, age effect

Synchronization of microbiota

Cage effect

Synchronization of microbiota

et al. 2012). When comparing different types of lactation, e.g. ar-
tificial vs. mother’s milk, significant differences in the develop-
ment of the gut microbiota were observed in the lactating pups
(Carlisle et al. 2012; Zeng et al. 2012). These observations can be
explained by the fact that milk, even when collected aseptically,
is a source of bacteria that can colonize the gut of the pups (Ward
et al. 2013).

Little is known about the effect of the different brands of
standard animal feed on microbiota composition. Changing
standard feed brand did not appear to result in a change, but
changing its fat content did (Ma et al. 2012). High-fat diet causing
diet-induced obesity (DIO) in mice induces important changes
in the composition of the gut microbiota (Turnbaugh et al. 2008;
Ravussin et al. 2012). These changes appeared to be caused by
the diet itself, rather than resulting from obesity; however, diet
alone may not be the sole cause of obesity (B ¨ackhed et al. 2007).
Interestingly, GF mice are completely protected against dietary
obesity (B ¨ackhed et al. 2007), but they produce increased adipos-
ity upon gavage with fecal matter from mice with DIO. A change
in the microbiota promotes weight gain in DIO by interact-
ing with a lymphotoxin-dependent mucosal defense pathway
(Upadhyay et al. 2012). This pathway regulates the expression
of IL-22 from RORct+ ILCs and lymphotoxin β receptor knock-
out mice fail to express sufficient IL-22 to eliminate mucosal
pathogens (Tumanov et al. 2011). However, these mice are able
to resist DIO due to a profound change of their microbiota, char-
acterized by increased microbial diversity compared to wild-
type DIO mice. Therefore, susceptibility to obesity requires an
intact mucosal immunity that guides diet-induced changes to
the microbiota. Similarly, feeding mice a westernized, high-fat
diet changes gut microbial communities and accelerates age-
associated obesity (Poutahidis et al. 2013). Body weight gain was

completely abolished upon dietary supplementation with a pre-
biotic yogurt. Surprisingly, oral treatment with purified L. reuteri,
one of the bacteria found in this prebiotic yogurt, did not change
the gut microbiome composition or caloric intake but triggered
IL-10-producing Treg cells, which dampens obesity-associated
Th17 proinflammatory responses. Induction of Treg cells upon
feeding low doses of a particular antigen has been well known
as the driving mechanism of oral tolerance (Weiner et al.
2011).

Diet-induced changes in bile acid composition can also be
an important cause of modifications to the gut bacterial com-
munity. For example, a diet high in saturated fats increased
the abundance of the sulfite-reducing bacterium deltaproteobac-
terium (Devkota et al. 2012). This effect was achieved by promot-
ing taurine conjugation of bile acids, hence increasing the avail-
ability of organic sulfur and providing more favorable conditions
for sulfite-reducing microorganisms. Vice versa, the conversion
from primary to secondary bile acids by bacteria defines the
composition of the gut microbiome (Cowles et al. 2002); however,
it is difficult to establish which is cause or consequence.

Differences in animal feed might contribute to the lack of re-
producibility of animal model experiments between institutes,
and the type of feed should be mentioned upon publication. Of
note, because autoclaving may differentially alter the presence
or structure of PAMPs, the duration and temperature of auto-
claving or irradiation parameters should also be mentioned in
publications.

Stress factors

The effects of physical and psychological stress on the
functions of the gastrointestinal tract are widely recognized

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

126

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 40, No. 1

Table 2. Acute DSS-colitis and the role of the inflammasome components NRLP3 and caspase-1 in disease development.

Control

Littermates

Strain

Facility

%DSS

Effect

Microbiota studied

Reference

Genetic
modification

Nlrp3 knockout

Nlrp3 knockout

Nlrp3 knockout

Commercial
wild type
Commercial
wild type
Wild type

Nlrp3 knockout
Nlrp3 knockout
Casp1 knockout

Wild type
Wild type
Wild type

Casp1 knockout
Casp1 knockout

Wild type
Wild type

Casp1 knockout
Casp1 knockout
Casp1 knockout

Wild type
Wild type
Wild type

No

No

NC

NC
Yes
NC

NC
NC

NC
NC
No

NC: not communicated.

C57BL/6

SPF

Sensitized

Zaki et al. (2010)

NC

NC

C57BL/6
C57BL/6
C57BL/6

C57BL/6
C57BL/6

C57BL/6
C57BL/6
C57BL/6

NC

NC

SPF
NC
SPF

SPF
NC

NC
SPF
NC

2

2

4

4
3

5
2.5
2

2
5
3.5

Protected

No

Bauer et al. (2010)

Protected

Bauer et al. (2012)

Co-housing (2 weeks
together), antibiotics
Antibiotics, bacterial
count in stool
No
No
Co-housing (4 weeks
together)
No
No

Sensitized
Sensitized
Sensitized

Sensitized
Sensitized

No effect
Sensitized
Protected

No
No
No

Allen et al. (2010)
Hirota et al. (2011)
Elinav et al. (2011)

Zaki et al. (2010)
Dupaul-Chicoine
et al. (2010)
Hu et al. (2010)
Hirota et al. (2011)
Siegmund et al.
(2001)

(Konturek, Brzozowski and Konturek 2011). Bidirectional signal-
ing between the gastrointestinal tract and the central nervous
system, known as the brain-gut axis, appears to be vital for
maintaining immune homeostasis (Lyte 2013). The most reveal-
ing insights into the importance of the microbiota in animal be-
havior were obtained from comparison of GF mice with SPF mice
and by the use of antibiotics (Sudo et al. 2004; Bercik et al. 2011;
Neufeld et al. 2011). Stress-induced small bowel inflammation
can be elicited in rodents by placing them on a small platform
surrounded by water for 1 h daily. This results in stress-induced
visceral hyperalgesia and increased cortisol levels. Interestingly,
this hormone inhibits Nlrp6 expression, a component of the in-
flammasome that responds to commensal bacteria (Sun et al.
2013). Water-avoidance stress altered the gut microbiota, and co-
housed non-stressed mice developed enteritis.

In line with these findings, exposure to physical stress (e.g.
grid floors) or psychological stress (e.g. isolation) can change
the composition of the gut microbiome (Bangsgaard et al. 2012;
Bailey 2014). Environmental conditions and routine procedures
in the animal facility might induce unwanted stress responses.
Stressors can be light, sound, air quality/ventilation, tempera-
ture, relative humidity, the presence of humans and handling
(Castelhano-Carlos and Baumans 2009; Raff et al. 2011). Other
stressors include the presence of other animals and population
density. Transfer of mice from one room or facility to another
also has significant impact on the composition of the microbiota
(Fushuku and Fukuda 2008b; Olfe et al. 2010; Ma et al. 2012). These
stress factors need to be taken into account during the con-
struction and the Standard Operating Procedures of the animal
facility.

(Commisson to the Council and the European Parliament 2010).
To diminish the number of mice, regulations of animal care and
use require scientists to limit the use of experimental animals
and to avoid unnecessary duplication of experiments. This im-
plies the importance of controlling and standardizing conditions
for reproducibility in experiments performed in different animal
facilities. For this reason, the Animals in Research: Reporting
In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE) guidelines and the gold standard
publication checklist (GSPC) for animal studies have been devel-
oped (Hooijmans, Leenaars and Ritskes-Hoitinga 2010; Kilkenny
et al. 2010). However, not all authors currently follow these guide-
lines and older studies often lack the necessary experimental in-
formation (Baker et al. 2014). The scientific value of experimental
results that cannot be reproduced is questionable. For example,
the diversity of NOD mice in developing autoimmune disease
under different conditions prompted a group of researchers to
compile a questionnaire on this subject (Pozzilli et al. 1993). Be-
sides the different definitions of the disease, factors such as the
source of the mice, colony size, breeding protocol (age together,
brother/sister breeding), diet and SPF status/pathogenic control
seemed to be the most important variables between the partic-
ipating centers. As an example, we include a summary (Table 2)
of the contradictory phenotypes of Casp1 or Nlrp3 deficiency in
chemically induced colitis described by different groups and the
lack of uniform information that is provided in the cited papers.
Recently, as discussed above, it became clear that part of these
results may be explained by the presence of 129-derived pas-
senger mutations which remain associated with the transgene
locus of interest due to low recombination frequency of associ-
ated genes at short distance (Kayagaki et al. 2011; Vanden Berghe
et al. 2015).

DESIGNING ANIMAL EXPERIMENTS TO
INVESTIGATE THE MICROBIOME

Selective breeding

In 1959, Russell and Burch published The Principles of Humane Ex-
perimental Technique in which they classified humane techniques
for animal experimentation under the headings of replacement,
reduction and refinement—now commonly known as the three
Rs, which became important principles of in vivo experimenta-
tion. Most laboratory animals used in biomedical research are
mice, and about six million mice are used annually in the EU

Several groups studied the maternal transmission of micro-
biota. Although not all studies showed a maternal lineage effect
(Kovacs et al. 2011; Campbell et al. 2012), some studies
demonstrated that litters from sisters are more similar in com-
position than litters from non-related mothers (Hufeldt et al.
2010a) and that lineage influence could extend to more than one
generation (Ley et al. 2005). In addition, embryos from different

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

strains that were transplanted in a surrogate mother shared the
surrogate mother’s gut bacteria (Friswell et al. 2010). These ob-
servations suggest that the maternal environment has a dom-
inant influence on microbiota composition. Breeding pairs of
non-related mice that had a very similar microbiome composi-
tion did not increase gut microbiota similarity of the offspring,
again suggesting that maternal relatedness is crucial for micro-
biota similarity (Pang et al. 2012).

In brief, a simple way to increase microbial similarity is to
generate a more stable microbiome by selective breeding of sib-
lings over several generations. The downside of this approach
could be increased deviation of results obtained with similar
strains in other laboratories due to increased genetic drift, which
may make it more difficult to reproduce experiments at another
location.

Housing conditions

To minimize microbiota differences between mice, they should
be exposed to identical environmental conditions. Preferably,
mice should be kept in ventilated cages or they should be mixed
and housed in different cages before the start of the experiment.
The number of mice per cage needs to be carefully considered,
taking into account that hierarchy can be set and that animals
are not stressed because of seclusion.

It is important to harmonize the exposure of the animals to
stressors such as noise and handling and minimize cage effects.
In line with the existence of a susceptibility window, relocation
effects were largest when the mice were between 4 and 8 weeks
of age, and negligible at older ages (Friswell et al. 2010). Minimiz-
ing differences in microbiota variation would therefore require
maintaining mice that are part of an experiment in the same
type of cage, in the same rack and in the same room of a facil-
ity. As a critical note, many environmental conditions cannot be
equalized between laboratories and different sites will inevitably
standardize to different local environments and particularities.
Instead of achieving the desired result of increased reproducibil-
ity between different institutes, the standardization measures
would thus reduce reproducibility between different sites, which
is also known as the so-called standardization fallacy (W ¨urbel
2000). The only way to stop this vicious circle of extreme local
standardization (environmental factors, genetic factors, exper-
imental setup) and apparent variation of phenotypes between
different animal housings is introducing systematic variation of
parameters within one research institution (W ¨urbel 2000).

The optimal reference or control groups

Although it may seem obvious, the reference, usually the wild
type or placebo-treated group should be bought from the same
vendor, and controls for transgenic mice that are home bred
should be the heterozygous and/or wild-type littermates. Here,
littermates represent the true reference, particularly when ge-
netically modified strains are analyzed for quantitative phe-
notypes (Holmdahl and Malissen 2012). This will ensure simi-
larity of both the genetic background and the environment in
which the mice are kept. However, cohousing of mice with dif-
ferent genotypes (e.g. wild type and knockout) has been shown
to change the gut microbial composition, affecting their natu-
ral immunological responses to a treatment or a disease trigger
(Garrett et al. 2007; Elinav et al. 2011; Brinkman et al. 2013). Pend-
ing on the biological question one should take into consideration
different strategies to control for cohousing effects.

Laukens et al.

127

If the aim of the experiment is to rule out an effect of the
microbiota, mice should be switched between cages before the
actual experiment, in order to homogenize the flora. Mice that
are treated and placebo-treated mice should be cohoused during
the experiment. However, if the study aim is to determine the
effect of diet or probiotics, it is not possible to cohouse treated
and untreated animals during the experiment. Here, the number
of cages should be maximized, and littermates should be dis-
tributed over multiple cages to dilute possible genetic or cage
effects.

In case the aim of the study is to compare the role of the
genotype-specific microbiota in mice with different genotypes,
only profound effects will lead to statistical differences when
cohousing wild type and littermate mutant mice, since their
microbiota will synchronize. In case the effect is more subtle,
it is recommended to separate littermate controls according to
their genotype right after weaning for at least 30 days before
the experiment so that the mice can develop their inherent mi-
crobiota; however, they should be divided over several cages.
One month after weaning, mice reach adulthood and develop
a stable microbiota that is less susceptible to change (Sudo et al.
2004; Hansen et al. 2012). Taken together, experimental design
should be carefully considered depending on the question that is
raised. Ideally, in all experimental designs, the number of cages
should be maximized to dilute cage effects and samples should
be collected for retrospective microbiota analysis, to ensure a
homogenous microbiome composition in the test and reference
groups.

Collections of standardized microbiota

Establishing a collection of different standardized microbiotas
in isobiotic mice to be shared between institutions for repro-
ducible experimentation has been proposed (Hooper, Littman
and Macpherson 2012). This would require considerable effort,
but it may be interesting to generate isobiotic mice lines in
highly specialized animal facilities at the providing institutions.
This has only a minor logistical, technical and financial im-
pact on the receiving institution and should be seriously con-
sidered. Commercial vendors are already studying methods for
archiving microbiota for reproduction of studies in different
labs or at different times (P156, AALAS 63rd National Meeting
2012). Protocols for the sequential colonization of rodents us-
ing donors or pure cultures have been suggested by Taconic
(http://taconic.com/wmspage.cfm?parm1=289). Along the same
line, the European framework program 7 has setup common
projects to share mouse breeding facilities between different in-
stitutes (‘mouse hotels’), while the experiments are done locally.
Such a policy would already seriously prevent the problem of ex-
treme local standardization and local genetic drift.

CONCLUSIONS

Optimizing reproducibility of animal experiments to study host–
microbiome interactions between different research institutions
is crucial to draw sound conclusions. Increasing evidence sug-
gests that the microbial environment influences the innate
and adaptive immune system and largely determines the out-
come of such investigations, even in disease models where the
microbiome is not under investigation. Therefore, parameters
that influence the microbiota composition should be consid-
ered at all times and requires extensive description upon pub-
lication. Moreover, 129 derived genetically modified congenic
mice are affected by passenger mutations, interfering with the

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

128

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 40, No. 1

link between modified target gene and the microbiota compo-
sition phenotype. It is particularly important that journals de-
mand adherence to the ARRIVE guidelines in combination with
the GSPC checklist. The lack of defining confounding factors
can jeopardize the relevance of data, especially in research re-
lated to dysbiosis-induced disease and pre-clinical intervention
studies.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Dr Amin Bredan (IRC-VIB, DBMB UGent) for editing the
manuscript.

FUNDING

This work was supported by European grants (FP6 [MRTN-
CT-035624]; FP7 [FP7–200767]), Belgian grants (Interuniver-
sity Attraction Poles - IAP [6/18; IAP 7/32]), Flemish grants
(Research Foundation Flanders (FWO)
[G0226.09; G.0875.11;
G.0973.11; G.0531.16; G.0A45.12, G.0172.; G.0787.13; G0C3114], a
Methusalem grant [BOF09/01M00709]), Ghent University grants
(MRP, GROUP-ID consortium), a grant from the ‘Foundation
against Cancer’ [2012–188]) and grants from the Flanders Insti-
tute for Biotechnology (VIB). PV is senior full professor at Ghent
University and holder of a Methusalem grant [BOF09/01M00709],
from which BB is paid. JR is supported by the FWO, IWT and Brus-
sels Region (Innoviris), KU Leven and the Rega institute, as well
as FP7 [HEALTH-F4–2012–305312]. DL is paid by an FWO grant
[1298213N].

Conflict of interest. None declared.

REFERENCES

Albenberg L, Esipova TV, Judge CP, et al. Correlation between in-
traluminal oxygen gradient and radial partitioning of intesti-
nal microbiota. Gastroenterology 2014;147:1055–63.

Allen IC, TeKippe EM, Woodford RM, et al. The NLRP3 inflamma-
some functions as a negative regulator of tumorigenesis dur-
ing colitis-associated cancer. J Exp Med 2010;207:1045–56.
Arumugam M, Raes J, Pelletier E, et al. Enterotypes of the human

gut microbiome. Nature 2011;473:174–80.

B ¨ackhed F, Ding H, Wang T, et al. The gut microbiota as an en-
vironmental factor that regulates fat storage. P Natl Acad Sci
USA 2004;101:15718–23.

B ¨ackhed F, Ley RE, Sonnenburg JL, et al. Host-bacterial mutual-

ism in the human intestine. Science 2005;307:1915–20.

fluence of genetic and environmental factors. Dig Dis 2012;30
(Suppl 1):82–90.

Bauer C, Duewell P, Mayer C, et al. Colitis induced in mice with
dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) is mediated by the NLRP3 in-
flammasome. Gut 2010;59:1192–9.

Bercik P, Denou E, Collins J, et al. The intestinal microbiota affect
central levels of brain-derived neurotropic factor and behav-
ior in mice. Gastroenterology 2011;141:599–609.

Bergstr ¨om A, Kristensen MB, Bahl MI, et al. Nature of bacterial
colonization influences transcription of mucin genes in mice
during the first week of life. BMC Res Notes 2012;5:402.

Bleich A, Hansen AK. Time to include the gut microbiota in
the hygienic standardisation of laboratory rodents. Comp Im-
munol Microb 2012;35:81–92.

Bouskra D, Br ´ezillon C, B ´erard M, et al. Lymphoid tissue genesis
induced by commensals through NOD1 regulates intestinal
homeostasis. Nature 2008;456:507–10.

Brinkman BM, Becker A, Ayiseh RB, et al. Gut microbiota af-
fects sensitivity to acute DSS-induced colitis independently
of host genotype. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2013;19:2560–7.

Brinkman BM, Hildebrand F, Kubica M, et al. Caspase deficiency
alters the murine gut microbiome. Cell Death Dis 2011;2:
e220.

Brooks JP, Edwards DJ, Harwich MD, et al. The truth about
metagenomics: quantifying and counteracting bias in 16S
rRNA studies. BMC Microbiol 2015;15:66.

B ¨uchler G, Wos-Oxley ML, Smoczek A, et al. Strain-specific coli-
tis susceptibility in IL10-deficient mice depends on complex
gut microbiota-host interactions. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2012;18:
943–54.

Buddington RK, Williams CH, Kostek BM, et al. Maternal-to-
infant transmission of probiotics: concept validation in mice,
rats, and pigs. Neonatology 2010;97:250–6.

Campbell JH, Foster CM, Vishnivetskaya T, et al. Host genetic and
environmental effects on mouse intestinal microbiota. ISME
J 2012;6:2033–44.

Carlisle EM, Poroyko V, Caplan MS, et al. Murine gut mi-
crobiota and transcriptome are diet dependent. Ann Surg
2012;257:287–94.

Castelhano-Carlos MJ, Baumans V. The impact of light, noise,
cage cleaning and in-house transport on welfare and stress
of laboratory rats. Lab Anim 2009;43:311–27.

Chang HY, Mitzner W, Watson J. Variation in airway responsive-
ness of male C57BL/6 mice from 5 vendors. J Am Assoc Lab
Anim 2012;51:401–6.

Cho I, Yamanishi S, Cox L, et al. Antibiotics in early life al-
ter the murine colonic microbiome and adiposity. Nature
2012;488:621–6.

B ¨ackhed F, Manchester JK, Semenkovich CF, et al. Mechanisms
underlying the resistance to diet-induced obesity in germ-
free mice. P Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:979–84.

Chung H, Pamp SJ, Hill JA, et al. Gut immune maturation de-
pends on colonization with a host-specific microbiota. Cell
2012;149:1578–93.

Bailey MT. Influence of stressor-induced nervous system ac-
tivation on the intestinal microbiota and the impor-
tance for immunomodulation. Adv Exp Med Biol 2014;817:
255–76.

Baker D, Lidster K, Sottomayor, et al. Two years later: jour-
nals are not yet enforcing the ARRIVE guidelines on re-
porting standards for pre-clinical animal studies. PLoS Biol
2014;12:e1001756.

Bangsgaard Bendtsen KM, Krych L, Sørensen DB, et al. Gut micro-
biota composition is correlated to grid floor induced stress
and behavior in the BALB/c mouse. PLoS One 2012;7:e46231.

Bauer C, Duewell P, Lehr HA, et al. Protective and Aggravating
effects of Nlrp3 inflammasome activation in IBD Models: in-

Claus SP, Ellero SL, Berger B, et al. Colonization-induced host-gut
microbial metabolic interaction. MBio 2011;2:e00271–10.
Commisson to the Council and the European Parliament.
Sixth report on the statistics on the number of animals
used for experimental and other scientific purposes in
the Member States of the European Union. COM 511 fi-
nal, Brussels, 2010. Archive of European Integration (AEI,
http://aei.pitt.edu/33392).

Cotillard A, Kennedy SP, Kong LC, et al. Dietary intervention im-
pact on gut microbial gene richness. Nature 2013;500:585–8.
Cowles RL, Lee JY, Gallaher DD, et al. Dietary stearic acid al-
ters gallbladder bile acid composition in hamsters fed cereal-
based diets. J Nutr 2002;132:3119–22.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

Laukens et al.

129

Cox LM, Blaser MJ. Antibiotics in early life and obesity. Nat Rev

Endocrinol 2015;11:182–90.

Cox LM, Yamanishi S, Sohn J, et al. Altering the intestinal mi-
crobiota during a critical developmental window has lasting
metabolic consequences. Cell 2014;158:705–21.

De Vos M, Louis EJ, Jahnsen J, et al. Consecutive fecal calpro-
tectin measurements to predict relapse in patients with
ulcerative colitis receiving infliximab maintenance therapy.
Inflamm Bowel Dis 2013;19:2111–7.

Deloris Alexander A, Orcutt RP, Henry J, et al. Quantitative PCR
assays for mouse enteric flora reveal strain-dependent dif-
ferences in composition that are influenced by the microen-
vironment. Mamm Genome 2006;17:1093–104.

Dethlefsen L, McFall-Ngai M, Relman DA. An ecological and
evolutionary perspective on human-microbe mutualism and
disease. Nature 2007;449:811–8.

Devkota S, Wang Y, Musch MW, et al. Dietary-fat-induced tau-
rocholic acid promotes pathobiont expansion and colitis in
Il10-/- mice. Nature 2012;487:104–8.

Dewhirst FE, Chien CC, Paster BJ, et al. Phylogeny of the defined
murine microbiota: altered Schaedler flora. Appl Environ Mi-
crob 1999;65:3287–92.

Gomez A, Luckey D, Yeoman CJ, et al. Loss of sex and age driven
differences in the gut microbiome characterize arthritis-
susceptible 0401 mice but not arthritis-resistant 0402 mice.
PLoS One 2012;7:e36095.

Hadis U, Wahl B, Schulz O, et al. Intestinal tolerance requires gut
homing and expansion of FoxP3 +regulatory T cells in the
lamina propria. Immunity 2011;34:237–46.

Hansen CH, Nielsen DS, Kverka M, et al. Patterns of early gut col-
onization shape future immune responses of the host. PLoS
One 2012;7:e34043.

Hanson LA. Session 1: feeding and infant development breast-
feeding and immune function. Proc Nutr Soc 2007;66:384–96.
Hildebrand F, Nguyen TL, Brinkman B, et al. Inflammation-
associated enterotypes, host genotype, cage and inter-
individual effects drive gut microbiota variation in common
laboratory mice. Genome Biol 2013;14:R4.

Hildebrandt MA, Hoffmann C, Sherrill-Mix SA, et al. High-fat diet
determines the composition of the murine gut microbiome
independently of obesity. Gastroenterology 2009;137:1716–24
e1–2.

Hill DA, Artis D. Intestinal bacteria and the regulation of immune

cell homeostasis. Annu Rev Immunol 2010;28:623–67.

Ding T, Schloss PD. Dynamics and associations of micro-
bial community types across the human body. Nature
2014;509:357–60.

Hirota SA, Ng J, Lueng A, et al. NLRP3 inflammasome plays a
key role in the regulation of intestinal homeostasis. Inflamm
Bowel Dis 2011;17:1359–72.

Du Y, Yang M, Lee S, et al. Maternal western diet causes inflam-
matory milk and TLR2/4-dependent neonatal toxicity. Gene
Dev 2012;26:1306–11.

Dubos R, Schaedler RW, Costello RL. The effect of antibacterial
drugs on the weight of mice. J Exp Med 1963;117:245–57.
Dupaul-Chicoine J, Yeretssian G, Doiron K, et al. Control of
intestinal homeostasis, colitis, and colitis-associated col-
Immunity
orectal cancer by the inflammatory caspases.
2010;32:367–78.

Eberl G. Development and evolution of RORγ t+ cells in a mi-

crobe’s world. Immunol Rev 2012;245:177–88.

El Aidy S, van Baarlen P, Derrien M, et al. Temporal and spatial
interplay of microbiota and intestinal mucosa drive estab-
lishment of immune homeostasis in conventionalized mice.
Mucosal Immunol 2012;5:567–79.

Elinav E, Strowig T, Kau AL, et al. NLRP6 inflammasome reg-
ulates colonic microbial ecology and risk for colitis. Cell
2011;145:745–57.

Faith JJ, Guruge JL, Charbonneau M, et al. The long-term stability
of the human gut microbiota. Science 2013;341:1237439.
Friswell MK, Gika H, Stratford IJ, et al. Site and strain-specific
variation in gut microbiota profiles and metabolism in ex-
perimental mice. PLoS One 2010;5:e8584.

Holmdahl R, Malissen B. The need for littermate controls. Eur J

Immunol 2012;42:45–7.

Holmes E, Li JV, Marchesi JR, et al. Gut microbiota composition
and activity in relation to host metabolic phenotype and dis-
ease risk. Cell Metab 2012;16:559–64.

Hooijmans CR, Leenaars M, Ritskes-Hoitinga M. A gold stan-
dard publication checklist to improve the quality of ani-
mal studies, to fully integrate the Three Rs, and to make
systematic reviews more feasible. Altern Lab Anim 2010;38:
167–82.

Hooper LV, Littman DR, Macpherson AJ.

Interactions be-
tween the microbiota and the immune system. Science
2012;336:1268–73.

Hsiao EY, McBride SW, Hsien S, et al. Microbiota modulate behav-
ioral and physiological abnormalities associated with neu-
rodevelopmental disorders. Cell 2013;155:1451–63.

Hu B, Elinav E, Huber S, et al. Inflammation-induced tumorigen-
esis in the colon is regulated by caspase-1 and NLRC4. P Natl
Acad Sci USA 2010;107:21635–40.

Hufeldt MR, Nielsen DS, Vogensen FK, et al. Family relationship
of female breeders reduce the systematic inter-individual
variation in the gut microbiota of inbred laboratory mice. Lab
Anim 2010a;44:283–9.

Fuhrer A, Sprenger N, Kurakevich E, et al. Milk sialyllactose in-
fluences colitis in mice through selective intestinal bacterial
colonization. J Exp Med 2008;207:2843–54.

Hufeldt MR, Nielsen DS, Vogensen FK, et al. Variation in the gut
microbiota of laboratory mice is related to both genetic and
environmental factors. Comp Med 2010b;60:336–47.

Fujiwara R, Watanabe J, Sonoyama K. Assessing changes in com-
position of intestinal microbiota in neonatal BALB/c mice
through cluster analysis of molecular markers. BrIT J Nutr
2008;99:1174–7.

Fushuku S, Fukuda K. Gender difference in the composition of
fecal flora in laboratory mice, as detected by denaturing gra-
dient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). Exp Anim 2008a;57:489–93.
Fushuku S, Fukuda K. Inhomogeneity of a in separately reared
laboratory mice, as detected by denaturing gradient gel elec-
trophoresis (DGGE). Exp Anim 2008b;57:95–9.

Garrett WS, Lord GM, Punit S, et al. Communicable ulcerative col-
itis induced by T-bet deficiency in the innate immune sys-
tem. Cell 2007;131:33–45.

Inoue R, Nishio A, Fukushima Y, et al. Oral treatment with probi-
otic Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC533 (La1) for a specific part
of the weaning period prevents the development of atopic
dermatitis induced after maturation in model mice, NC/Nga.
Brit J Dermatol 2007;156:499–509.

Ivanov II, Atarashi K, Manel N, et al. Induction of intestinal
Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria. Cell 2009;139:
485–98.

Jacoby RO, Lindsey JR. Risks of Infection among Laboratory Rats
and Mice at Major Biomedical Research Institutions. ILAR J
1998;39:266–71.

Jim ´enez E, Mar´ın ML, Mart´ın R, et al. Is meconium from healthy
newborns actually sterile? Res Microbiol 2008;159:187–93.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

130

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 40, No. 1

Kamada N, Chen GY, Inohara N, et al. Control of pathogens
and pathobionts by the gut microbiota. Nat Immunol 2013;14:
685–90.

Macia L, Thorburn AN, Binge LC, et al. Microbial influences on
epithelial integrity and immune function as a basis for in-
flammatory diseases. Immunol Rev 2012;245:164–76.

Kayagaki N, Warming S, Lamkanfi M, et al. Non-canonical
caspase-11. Nature
activation targets

inflammasome
2011;479:117–21.

Kellermayer R, Dowd SE, Harris RA, et al. Colonic mucosal
DNA methylation,
immune response, and microbiome
patterns in Toll-like receptor 2-knockout mice. FASEB J
2011;25:1449–60.

Kilkenny C, Browne W, Cuthill IC, et al. Animal research: report-
ing in vivo experiments: the ARRIVE guidelines. Brit J Pharma-
col 2010;160:1577–9.

M ¨ahler M, Bristol IJ, Leiter EH, et al. Differential susceptibility of
inbred mouse strains to dextran sulfate sodium-induced col-
itis. Am J Physiol 1998;274:G544–51.

Manichanh C, Reeder J, Gibert P, et al. Reshaping the gut micro-
biome with bacterial transplantation and antibiotic intake.
Genome Res 2010;20:1411–9.

Marcobal A, Kashyap PC, Nelson TA, et al. A metabolomic
view of how the human gut microbiota impacts the host
metabolome using humanized and gnotobiotic mice. ISME J
2013;7:1933–43.

Kitajima S, Morimoto M, Sagara E, et al. Dextran sodium
sulfate-induced colitis in germ-free IQI/Jic mice. Exp Anim
2001;50:387–95.

Markle JG, Frank DN, Mortin-Toth S, et al. Sex Differences in the
gut microbiome drive hormone-dependent regulation of au-
toimmunity. Science 2013;339:1084–8.

Konturek PC, Brzozowski T, Konturek SJ. Stress and the
consequences, diagnos-
clinical
J Physiol Pharmacol

gut: pathophysiology,
tic approach and treatment options.
2011;62:591–9.

Kovacs A, Ben-Jacob N, Tayem H, et al. Genotype is a stronger
determinant than sex of the mouse gut microbiota. Microb
Ecol 2011;61:423–8.

Lathrop SK, Bloom SM, Rao SM, et al. Peripheral education of the
immune system by colonic commensal microbiota. Nature
2011;478:250–4.

Lawley TD, Clare S, Walker AW, et al. Targeted restoration of the
intestinal microbiota with a simple, defined bacteriotherapy
resolves relapsing Clostridium difficile disease in mice. PLoS
Pathog 2012;8:e1002995.

Lawley TD, Walker AW. Intestinal colonization resistance. Im-

munology 2013;138:1–11.

LeChatelier E, Nielsen T, Qin J, et al. Richness of human
gut microbiome correlates with metabolic markers. Nature
2013;500:541–6.

Lee SM, Donaldson GP, Mikulski Z, et al. Bacterial colonization
factors control specificity and stability of the gut microbiota.
Nature 2013;501:426–9.

Lepage P, H ¨asler R, Spehlmann ME, et al. Twin study indi-
cates loss of interaction between microbiota and mucosa
of patients with ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2011;141:
227–36.

Ley RE, B ¨ackhed F, Turnbaugh P, et al. Obesity alters gut microbial

ecology. P Natl Acad Sci USA 2005;102:11070–5.

Ley RE, Peterson DA, Gordon JI. Ecological and evolutionary
forces shaping microbial diversity in the human intestine.
Cell 2006;124:837–48.

Lochner M, Ohnmacht C, Presley L, et al. Microbiota-induced
tertiary lymphoid tissues aggravate inflammatory disease
in the absence of RORgamma t and LTi cells. J Exp Med
2011;208:125–34.

Lozupone CA, Stombaugh J, Gonzalez A, et al. Meta-analyses
of studies of the human microbiota. Genome Res 2013;2:
1704–14.

Lusis AJ, Yu J, Wang SS. The problem of passenger genes in trans-

genic mice. Arterioscl Throm Vas 2007;27:2100–3.

Markowitz VM, Chen IM, Palaniappan K, et al. The integrated mi-
crobial genomes system: an expanding comparative analysis
resource. Nucleic Acids Res 2010;38:D382–90.

Mart´ınez I, Muller CE, Walter J. Long-term temporal analysis of
the human fecal microbiota revealed a stable core of domi-
nant bacterial species. PLoS One 2013;8:e69621.

Maslowski KM, Vieira AT, Ng A, et al. Regulation of inflammatory
responses by gut microbiota and chemoattractant receptor
GPR43. Nature 2009;461:1282–6.

Menendez A, Willing BP, Montero M, et al. Bacterial stimula-
tion of the TLR-MyD88 pathway modulates the homeostatic
expression of ileal Paneth cell α-defensins. J Innate Immun
2013;5:39–49.

Meslin JC, Fontaine N, Andrieux C. Variation of mucin distribu-
tion in the rat intestine, caecum and colon: effect of the bac-
terial flora. Comp Biochem Phys A 1995;123:235–9.

Meth ´e BA, Nelson KE, Pop M, et al. A framework for human mi-

crobiome research. Nature 2012;486:215–21.

Moeller AH, Degnan PH, Pusey AE, et al. Chimpanzees and hu-
mans harbour compositionally similar gut enterotypes. Nat
Commun 2012;3:1179.

Morelli L. Postnatal development of intestinal microflora as in-

fluenced by infant nutrition. J Nutr 2008;138:1791S–5S.

Neufeld KA, Kang N, Bienenstock J, et al. Effects of intesti-
nal microbiota on anxiety-like behavior. Commun Integr Biol
2011;4:492–4.

Norin E, Midtvedt T. Intestinal microflora functions in labora-
tory mice claimed to harbor a ‘normal’ intestinal microflora.
Is the SPF concept running out of date? Anaerobe 2010;16:
311–3.

Ochoa-Rep ´araz J, Mielcarz DW, Ditrio LE, et al. Role of gut com-
mensal microflora in the development of experimental au-
toimmune encephalomyelitis. J Immunol 2009;183:6041–50.
Olfe J, Domanska G, Schuett C, et al. Different stress-related phe-
notypes of BALB/c mice from in-house or vendor: alterations
of the sympathetic and HPA axis responsiveness. BMC Physiol
2010;10:2.

Olszak T, An D, Zeissig S, et al. Microbial exposure during early
life has persistent effects on natural killer T cell function.
Science 2012;336:489–93.

Lynch SV, Goldfarb KC, Wild YK, et al. Cystic fibrosis transmem-
brane conductance regulator knockout mice exhibit aberrant
gastrointestinal microbiota. Gut Microbes 2012;4:41–7.

Pang W, Stradiotto D, Krych L, et al. Selective inbreeding does not
increase gut microbiota similarity in BALB/c mice. Lab Anim
2012;46:335–7.

Lyte M. Microbial endocrinology in the microbiome-gut-brain
axis: how bacterial production and utilization of neurochem-
icals influence behavior. PLoS Pathog 2013;9:e1003726.

Pedrosa E, Lor ´en V, Cabr ´e E, et al. Bacteria and spontaneous ex-
perimental colitis: immunological changes. Eur J Clin Invest
2011;41:1047–53.

Ma BW, Bokulich NA, Castillo PA, et al. Routine habitat change: a
source of unrecognized transient alteration of intestinal mi-
crobiota in laboratory mice. PLoS One 2012;7:e47416.

Perez PF, Dor ´e J, Leclerc M, et al. Bacterial imprinting of the
neonatal immune system: lessons from maternal cells? Pe-
diatrics 2007;119:e724–32.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

Laukens et al.

131

Pflughoeft KJ, Versalovic J. Human microbiome in health and dis-

ease. Ann Rev Pahtol 2012;7:99–122.

Poutahidis T, Kleinewietfeld M, Smillie C, et al. Microbial repro-
gramming inhibits Western diet-associated obesity. PLoS One
2013;8:e68596.

Powell N, Walker AW, Stolarczyk E, et al. The transcription
factor T-bet regulates intestinal inflammation mediated by
interleukin-7 receptor+ innate lymphoid cells.
Immunity
2012;37:674–84.

Pozzilli P, Signore A, Williams AJ, et al. NOD mouse colonies
around the world–recent facts and figures. Immunol Today
1993;14:193–6.

Pritchett-Corning KR, Cosentino J, Clifford CB. Contemporary
prevalence of infectious agents in laboratory mice and rats.
Lab Anim 2009;43:165–73.

Puhl NJ, Uwiera RR, Yanke LJ, et al. Antibiotics conspicuously af-
fect community profiles and richness, but not the density of
bacterial cells associated with mucosa in the large and small
intestines of mice. Anaerobe 2012;18:67–75.

Qin J, Li R, Raes J, et al. A human gut microbial gene catalogue
established by metagenomic sequencing. Nature 2010;464:
59–65.

Scher JU, Sczesnak A, Longman RS, et al. Expansion of intesti-
nal Prevotella copri correlates with enhanced susceptibility
to arthritis. Elife 2013;2:e01202.

Schloissnig S, Arumugam M, Sunagawa S, et al. Genomic vari-
ation landscape of the human gut microbiome. Nature
2013;493:45–50.

Schloss PD, Schubert AM, Zackular JP, et al. Stabilization of
the murine gut microbiome following weaning. Gut Microbes
2012;3:383–93.

Sellers RS, Clifford CB, Treuting PM, et al. Immunological varia-
tion between inbred laboratory mouse strains: points to con-
sider in phenotyping genetically immunomodified mice. Vet
Pathol 2012;49:32–43.

Sham HP, Yu EY, Gulen MF, et al. SIGIRR, a negative regulator
of TLR/IL-1R signalling promotes Microbiota dependent re-
sistance to colonization by enteric bacterial pathogens. PLoS
Pathog 2013;9:e1003539.

Shimomura Y, Mizoguchi E, Sugimoto K, et al. Regulatory role of
B-1 B cells in chronic colitis. Int Immunol 2008;20:729–37.
Siegmund B, Lehr HA, Fantuzzi G, et al. IL-1 beta -converting en-
zyme (caspase-1) in intestinal inflammation. P Natl Acad Sci
USA 2001;98:13249–54.

Raes J, Bork P. Molecular eco-systems biology: towards an
understanding of community function. Nat Rev Microbiol
2008;6:693–9.

Simpson EM, Linder CC, Sargent EE, et al. Genetic variation
among 129 substrains and its importance for targeted mu-
tagenesis in mice. Nat Genet 1997;16:19–27.

Raff H, Bruder ED, Cullinan WE, et al. Effect of animal fa-
cility construction on basal hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
and renin-aldosterone activity in the rat. Endocrinology
2011;152:1218–21.

Rakoff-Nahoum S, Paglino J, Eslami-Varzaneh F, et al. Recog-
nition of commensal microflora by toll-like receptors
intestinal homeostasis. Cell 2004;118:
is required for
229–41.

Ravussin Y, Koren O, Spor A, et al. Responses of gut microbiota
to diet composition and weight loss in lean and obese mice.
Obesity 2012;20:738–47.

Reikvam DH, Erofeev A, Sandvik A, et al. Depletion of murine
intestinal microbiota: effects on gut mucosa and epithelial
gene expression. PLoS One 2011;6:e17996.

Reinhardt C, Bergentall M, Greiner TU, et al. Tissue factor and
PAR1 promote microbiota-induced intestinal vascular re-
modelling. Nature 2012;483:627–31.

Relman DA. Microbial genomics and infectious diseases. New

Engl J Med 2011;365:347–57.

Renz H, Brandtzaeg P, Hornef M. The impact of perinatal im-
mune development on mucosal homeostasis and chronic in-
flammation. Nat Rev Immunol 2011;12:9–23.

Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, et al. Gut microbiota from twins
discordant for obesity modulate metabolism in mice. Science
2013;341:1241214.

Robertson SJ, Zhou JY, Geddes K, et al. Nod1 and Nod2 signaling
does not alter the composition of intestinal bacterial com-
munities at homeostasis. Gut Microbes 2013;4:222–31.

Round JL, Mazmanian SK. The gut microbiota shapes intestinal
immune responses during health and disease. Nat Rev Im-
munol 2009;9:313–23.

Schaedler RW, Dubos RJ. The fecal flora of various strains of
mice. Its bearing on their susceptibility to endotoxin. J Exp
Med 1962;115:1149–60.

Schaible TD, Harris RA, Dowd SE, et al. Maternal methyl-
donor supplementation induces prolonged murine offspring
colitis susceptibility in association with mucosal epige-
netic and microbiomic changes. Hum Mol Genet 2011;20:
1687–96.

Sj ¨ogren K, Engdahl C, Henning P, et al. The gut microbiota regu-
lates bone mass in mice. J Bone Miner Res 2012;27:1357–67.
Sommer F, B ¨ackhed F. The gut microbiota–masters of host de-
velopment and physiology. Nat Rev Microbiol 2013;11:227–38.
Sonnenberg GF, Artis D. Innate lymphoid cell interactions with
microbiota: implications for intestinal health and disease.
Immunity 2012;37:601–10.

Stappenbeck TS, Hooper LV, Gordon JI. Developmental regula-
tion of intestinal angiogenesis by indigenous microbes via
Paneth cells. P Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:15451–5.

Sudo N, Chida Y, Aiba Y, et al. Postnatal microbial coloniza-
tion programs the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system
for stress response in mice. J Physiol 2004;558:263–75.

Sun Y, Zhang M, Chen C, et al. Stress-induced corticotropin-
releasing hormone-mediated NLRP6 inflammasome inhibi-
tion and transmissible enteritis in mice. Gastroenterology
2013;144:1478–87.

Taylor NS, Xu S, Nambiar P, et al. Enterohepatic Helicobacter
species are prevalent in mice from commercial and academic
institutions in Asia, Europe, and North America. J Clin Micro-
biol 2007;45:2166–72.

Troeschel SC, Drepper T, Leggewie C, et al. Novel tools for the
functional expression of metagenomic DNA. Methods Mol Biol
2010;668:117–39.

Tumanov AV, Koroleva EP, Guo X, et al. Lymphotoxin controls the
IL-22 protection pathway in gut innate lymphoid cells during
mucosal pathogen challenge. Cell Host Microbe 2011;10:44–53.
Turnbaugh PJ, B ¨ackhed F, Fulton Let al. Diet-induced obesity is
linked to marked but reversible alterations in the mouse dis-
tal gut microbiome. Cell Host Microbe 2008;3:213–23.

Ubeda C, Lipuma L, Gobourne A, et al. Familial transmission
rather than defective innate immunity shapes the dis-
tinct intestinal microbiota of TLR-deficient mice. J Exp Med
2012;209:1445–56.

Upadhyay V, Poroyko V, Kim TJ, et al. Lymphotoxin regulates
commensal responses to enable diet-induced obesity. Nat Im-
munol 2012;13:947–53.

vande Pavert SA, Mebius RE. New insights into the development

of lymphoid tissues. Nat Rev Immunol 2010;10:664–74.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

132

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 40, No. 1

van Nood E, Vrieze A, Nieuwdorp M, et al. Duodenal infusion of
donor feces for recurrent Clostridium difficile. New Engl J Med
2013;368:407–15.

Vanden Berghe T, Goethals A, Demon D, et al. An inactivating
caspase-11 passenger mutation muddles sepsis research. Am
J Resp Crit Care 2013;188:120–1.

Vanden Berghe T, Hulpiau P, Martens L, et al. Passenger mu-
tations confound interpretation of all genetically modified
congenic mice. Immunity 2015;43:200–9.

Vayssier-Taussat M, Albina E, Citti C, et al. Shifting the paradigm
from pathogens to pathobiome: new concepts in the light of
meta-omics. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 2014;4:29.

Wang J, Linnenbrink M, K ¨unzel S, et al. Dietary history con-
tributes to enterotype-like clustering and functional metage-
nomic content in the intestinal microbiome of wild mice. P
Natl Acad Sci USA 2014;111:E2703–10.

Ward TL, Hosid S, Ioshikhes I, et al. Human milk metagenome: a
functional capacity analysis. BMC Microbiol 2013;13:116.
Weiner HL, da Cunha AP, Quintana F, et al. Oral tolerance. Im-

munol Rev 2011;241:241–59.

Wu GD, Chen J, Hoffmann C, et al. Linking long-term dietary pat-
terns with gut microbial enterotypes. Science 2011;334:105–8.
W ¨urbel H. Behaviour and the standardization fallacy. Nat Genet

2000;26:263.

Vidal SM, Malo D, Marquis JF, et al. Forward genetic dissection
of immunity to infection in the mouse. Annu Rev Immunol
2008;26:81–132.

Zaki MH, Boyd KL, Vogel P, et al. The NLRP3 inflammasome pro-
tects against loss of epithelial integrity and mortality during
experimental colitis. Immunity 2010;32:379–91.

Vijay-Kumar M, Aitken JD, Carvalho FA, et al. Metabolic syn-
drome and altered gut microbiota in mice lacking Toll-like
receptor 5. Science 2010;328:228–31.

Zeng B, Yuan J, Li W, et al. The effect of artificial rearing on
gut microbiota in a mouse pup-in-a-cup model. Exp Anim
2012;61:453–60.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

