T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327 

317

given  ecosystem.  Yet,  since  all  these  analyses  depend  on  the  qual-
ity  of  databases  that  integrate  information  gained  from  genomic,
chemical,  and  functional  studies,  they  will  beneﬁt  from  future
experiments  carried  out  with  cultured  representatives.  In  many
instances,  comparative  analysis  of  patient  and  healthy  control
cohorts  revealed  that  shifts  in  the  microbiome  are  associated  with
human  diseases  (Berry  and  Reinisch,  2013).  However,  to  causally
link  microbiome  signatures  identiﬁed  in  clinical  surveys,  robust
experimental  in  vitro  and  in  vivo  models  are  required  to  enable
systematic  experimental  manipulation  of  the  microbiota.

The  laboratory  mouse  is  currently  the  primary  experimen-
tal  model  organism  in  preclinical  research.  A  large  variety  of
genetically-engineered  strains  and  mouse  models  for  human  dis-
eases  exist  (Eppig  et  al.,  2015),  and  mouse  strains  can  be  relatively
easily  re-derived  germ-free  (Macpherson  and  McCoy,  2015),  which
has  set  the  stage  for  the  establishment  of  gnotobiotic  models  (i.e.
mice  colonized  with  deﬁned  bacterial  strains  or  mixtures).  Gno-
tobiology  (Greek:  gnosis:   knowledge;  bios:  life;  logos:  study)  has  a
long-standing  tradition  in  this  ﬁeld  of  research  because  it  is  instru-
mental  to  test  causal  relationships  between  microbes  and  their
host  (Nuttal  and  Thierfelder,  1895;  Orcutt  et  al.,  1987;  Trexler
and  Reynolds,  1957).  Of  course,  a  signiﬁcant  number  of  differ-
ences  exist  between  human  and  mice  that  must  be  taken  into
account  when  interpreting  data,  in  particular  differences  in  gut
physiology  and  the  immune  system  (Mestas  and  Hughes,  2004),  but
also  dietary  habits,  behavior  and  living  environment.  In  addition,
maintenance  of  germ-free  mice  is  demanding  and  requires  special-
ized  equipment  and  experienced  staff.  Despite  these  challenges,
gnotobiotic  mice  are  widely  used  and  can  in  combination  with
“omics”  technologies  and  genetic  engineering  provide  important
mechanistic  insights  into  the  molecular  mechanisms  underlying
microbe–microbe  and  microbe–host  interactions.

Recently,  the  cultivation  of  bacteria  experienced  a  great
upswing.  So  far,  effort  has  been  focused  on  the  establishment
of  culture  collections  of  human-  and  plant-associated  microbial
ecosystems  (Bai  et  al.,  2015;  Fodor  et  al.,  2012;  Hugon  et  al.,  2015;
Rettedal  et  al.,  2014).  These  collections  are  essential  to  carry  out
microbial  reconstitution  experiments  in  germ-free  model  orga-
nisms.  However,  to  investigate  microbiota  evolution  and  functions
including  host-speciﬁcity,  the  scientiﬁc  community  needs  public
bacterial  collections  derived  from  mice,  which  presently  do  not
exist.  In  this  review,  we  revisit  current  knowledge  of  the  mouse
gut  microbiota,  the  relevance  of  mouse  models  for  microbe–host
interactions  studies,  and  give  an  outlook  on  future  challenges  and
opportunities  in  the  ﬁeld.

2.  Humanized  mice  from  a  microbial  perspective:  Hybrid
models  of  clinical  relevance

A

  number  of  pioneering  studies  have  employed  human-derived
Escherichia  coli  and  Bacteroides  spp.  as  model  organisms  to  elucidate
key  principles  of  microbe–host  interactions  in  gnotobiotic  mice.
These  bacteria  can  be  genetically  manipulated  and  allow  functional
genetic  analysis.  E.  coli,  the  workhorse  of  traditional  and  modern
microbiology  and  genetics,  is  the  most  abundant  facultative  anaer-
obic  commensal  of  the  human  gut  (Bachmann,  1996).  Over  the  last
decade,  the  groups  of  Conway  and  Cohen  (2015)  studied  E.  coli  car-
bohydrate  utilization  and  competition  in  the  intestine  in  detail.  A
seminal  study  by  Hapfelmeier  and  colleagues  used  an  auxotrophic
E.  coli  mutant  strain  to  generate  a  gnotobiotic  mouse  model  for
reversible  bacterial  colonization  (Hapfelmeier  et  al.,  2010).  The
growth  of  this  mutant  strain  depends  on  exogenous  supplemen-
d-alanine  and  meso-diaminopimelic  acid,
tation  of  the  amino  acids 
which  are  not  provided  by  the  germ-free  murine  host.  Thus,  the
mutant  only  transiently  colonizes  the  gut  after  which  the  mice

re-establish  a  completely  germ-free  state.  This  model  allows  a
number  of  fundamental  principles  underlying  bacterial  induction
of  mucosal  immune  responses  to  be  addressed.

Using  Bacteroides  spp.,  several  fundamental  principles  under-
lying  host–microbe  interactions  have  been  elucidated.  Bacteroides
thetaiotaomicron  (B.  theta)  and  Bacteroides  fragilis  are  highly  abun-
dant  and  ubiquitous  obligate  anaerobic  members  of  the  human  gut
microbiota  (Moore  and  Holdeman,  1974;  Qin  et  al.,  2010).  Their
genomes  encode  a  vast  number  of  enzyme  systems  that  mediate
degradation  of  polysaccharides  derived  from  the  diet  and  mucosal
secretions  (Xu  et  al.,  2003),  which  shapes  the  mutualistic  relation-
ship  between  Bacteroides  spp.  and  their  human  host  (Comstock,
2009).  Mono-colonization  of  mice  with  B.  theta  induces  pronounced
changes  in  host  mucosal  gene  expression  (Hooper  and  Gordon,
2001).  Speciﬁcally,  B.  theta  can  modify  host  epithelial  differen-
tiation  in  a  way  that  supports  its  own   growth:  it  promotes  the
production  of  fucosylated  glycans  by  the  host  and  in  turn  uses
them  as  nutrient  sources  (Bry  et  al.,  1996).  Intriguingly,  this  pro-
cess  is  dependent  on  the  capacity  of  B.  theta  to  utilize  fucose,
reﬂecting  the  mutualistic  nature  of  commensal-host  relationships.
B.  fragilis  produces  a  polysaccharide  with  immune  modulatory
activities  (Mazmanian  et  al.,  2005)  that  prevents  gut  inﬂammation
(Mazmanian,  2008)  and  promotes  tolerogenic  immune  responses
by  signaling  on  Foxp3(+)  regulatory  T  cells  through  TLR2  (Round
et  al.,  2011).

In  addition  to  mono-colonization  experiments,  interaction  of  B.
theta  with  other  strains  has  been  studied  in  detail  by  transcriptome
proﬁling.  B.  theta  was   shown  to  adapt  to  the  presence  of  Eubac-
terium  rectale  or  the  probiotic  strains  Biﬁdobacterium  longum  and
Lactobacillus  casei  by  expanding  the  breadth  of  its  carbohydrate
utilization  (Mahowald  et  al.,  2009;  Sonnenburg  et  al.,  2006).  Co-
colonization  with  methanogenic,  sulfate-reducing,  and  acetogenic
bacteria  also  yielded  valuable  insights  into  the  metabolism  of  these
generally  lowly  abundant  members  of  mammalian  gut  ecosys-
tems  (Rey  et  al.,  2010,  2013;  Samuel  and  Gordon,  2006).  Taken
together,  these  paradigm  studies  illustrate  how  members  of  the
microbiota  are  able  to  adapt  their  substrate  utilization  in  response
to  one  another  and  engage  in  cross-feeding,  which  are  fundamen-
tal  principles  also  operating  in  complex  ecosystems.  Besides  the
species  mentioned  above,  numerous  other  commensal  bacteria
(the  majority  of  which  is  derived  from  humans)  have  been  used
to  interrogate  microbe–host  interactions  in  gnotobiotic  models
(Table  1).  Although  models  harboring  only  few  bacteria  have  been
very  helpful,  care  must  be  taken  when  interpreting  data.  In  sim-
pliﬁed  bacterial  communities,  the  context  of  a  fully  diverse  and
competitive  bacterial  ecosystem  is  lacking.  Several  studies  have
therefore  started  using  deﬁned  bacterial  consortia  of  higher  com-
plexity  (Table  1).

Germ-free  mice  can  also  be  used  to  investigate  functions  of
complex  human-derived  microbiota.  Human  fecal  microbiota  or
culture  collections  can  be  stably  transplanted  into  germ-free  mice
(Goodman  et  al.,  2011;  Kibe  et  al.,  2005;  Turnbaugh  et  al.,  2009;
Wos-Oxley  et  al.,  2012).  The  microbiota  in  these  models  is  complex
and  thus  not  fully  characterized,  and  therefore  these  models  are
not  gnotobiotic.  Nevertheless,  they  allow  mining  the  human  micro-
biome  for  speciﬁc  functions  and  address  microbiota-speciﬁc  effects
on  the  immune  system  and  metabolome  and  study  inter-individual
differences  (Ahern  et  al.,  2014;  Marcobal  et  al.,  2013).  Moreover,
mice  with  a  humanized  microbiota  make  it  possible  to  test  whether
a
  complex  human  disease  phenotype  can  be  transmitted  by  micro-
biota  transplantation  (Ridaura  et  al.,  2013;  Subramanian  et  al.,
2014).  Hence,  mice  colonized  with  human  gut  microbiota  are  very
helpful  to  test  the  clinical  relevance  of  dysbiotic  communities
associated  with  diseases.  However,  it  remains  unclear  how  well  dif-
ferent  human  gut  bacterial  taxa  establish  in  the  mouse  intestinal
milieu.

318 

T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327

Table  1
Examples  of  human-  and  mouse-derived  bacterial  species  and  consortia  use  in  gnotobiotic  mice.

Phylum 

Species 

References

Actinobacteria

Bacteroidetes

Firmicutes

Proteobacteria

Biﬁdobacterium  adolescentis 
Biﬁdobacterium  biﬁdum
Biﬁdobacterium  infantis 
Biﬁdobacterium  longum 

Propionibacterium  acnes 
Propionibacterium  granulosum 
Alistipes  shahii 
Bacteroides  acidifaciens
Bacteroides  fragilis 

Bacteroides  thetaiotaomicron 

Bacteroides  vulgatus 
Bacteroides  spp. 
Bacteroides  dorei,  Bacteroides  eggerthii,  Bacteroides  ﬁnegoldii,
Bacteroides  massiliensis,  Bacteroides  ovatus,  Bacteroides
salanitronis,  Bacteroides  uniformis
Parabacteroides  johnsonii,  Parabacteroides  merdae 
Bacillus  sp. 
Blautia  hydrogenotrophica 
Clostridium  butyricum 
Corynebacterium  pseudodiphtheriticum 
Enterococcus  faecalis 
Enterococcus  faecium
Eubacterium  rectale 
Faecalibacterium  prausnitzii  (colonizes  only  together  with
E.   coli)
Lactobacillus  casei 
Lactobacillus  reuteri,  Lactobacillus  acidophilus
L.  reuteri 
Lactobacillus  rhamnosus,  L.  casei
Lactobacillus  spp. 
Lactococcus  lactis 
Marvinbryantia  formatexigens 
Rothia  nasimurium 
Ruminococcus  obeum
SFB  (Candidatus  Arthromitus) 
Staphylococcus  aureus 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis,  S.  lentus,  S.  xylosus 
Staphylococcus  saprophyticus 
Veillonella  spp.,  Peptostreptococcus  asaccharolyticus,
Peptostreptococcus  magnus,  Lachnospiraceae  sp.,   Clostridium
perfringens,  Clostridium  histolyticum,  Coprobacillus  sp.,
Fusobacterium  nucleatum,  Fusobacterium  mortiferum,
Clostridium  ramosum
Acinetobacter  baumannii,  Acinetobacter  lwoﬁi 
Bilophila  wadsworthia 
Desulfovibrio  piger 
Enterobacter  cloacae 
Escherichia  coli 

Fukuda  et  al.  (2011),  Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015),  Wittmann  et  al.  (2013)
Grimm  et  al.  (2015)
Fukuda  et  al.  (2011)
Fukuda  et  al.  (2011),  Marcobal  et  al.  (2015),  Sonnenburg  et  al.
(2006)
Naik  et  al.  (2015)
Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015)
Devkota  et  al.  (2012)
Berry  et  al.  (2013)
Huang  et  al.  (2011),  Mazmanian  et  al.  (2008),  Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015),
Vetizou  et  al.  (2015)
Kamada  et  al.  (2012),  Kashyap  et  al.  (2013),  Li  et  al.  (2015),  Ng  et  al.
(2013),  Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015),  Sonnenburg  et  al.  (2005)
Bohn  et  al.  (2006),  Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015),  Waidmann  et  al.  (2003)
Wu   et  al.  (2015)
Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015)

Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015)
Balish  and  Warner  (2002)
Rey  et  al.  (2010)
Takahashi  et  al.  (2004)
Naik  et  al.  (2015)
Balish  and  Warner  (2002),  Ocvirk  et  al.  (2015),  Steck  et  al.  (2011)
Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015)
Mahowald  et  al.  (2009)
Miquel  et  al.  (2015)

Balish  and  Warner  (2002),  Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015)
Balish  and  Warner  (2002)
Krumbeck  et  al.  (2015)
Kozakova  et  al.  (2015),  Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015)
Krumbeck  et  al.  (2015),  Sonnenburg  et  al.  (2006)
Balish  and  Warner  (2002)
Rey  et  al.  (2010)
Naik  et  al.  (2015)
Hsiao  et  al.  (2014)
Gaboriau-Routhiau  et  al.  (2009),  Ivanov  et  al.  (2009)
Naik  et  al.  (2015)
Naik  et  al.  (2015)
Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015)
Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015)

Seﬁk  et  al.  (2015)
Devkota  et  al.  (2012)
Rey  et  al.  (2013)
Macpherson  and  Uhr  (2004)
Balish  and  Warner  (2002),  De  Paepe  et  al.  (2011),  Li  et  al.  (2015),
Lima-Filho  et  al.  (2004),  Schumann  et  al.  (2012)
Waidmann  et  al.  (2003)
Berry  et  al.  (2013),  Derrien  et  al.  (2011),  Ganesh  et  al.  (2013)
Samuel  and  Gordon  (2006)

Verrucomicrobia 
Archaea 

E.  coli 
Akkermansia  muciniphila 
Methanobrevibacter  smithii 

Communities 

Members 

3-Member  community 
4-Member  community 

7-Member  community 

8-Member  community 

8-Member  community 

8-Member  community 
10-Member

community

12-Member

community

E.  coli,  Lactobacillus  johnsonii,  B.  longum 
Ruminococcus  gnavus,   B.  thetaiotaomicron,  Clostridium
hathewayi,   Clostridium  orbiscindens
B.  longum  subsp.  longum,  B.  vulgatus,  E.  coli,  E.  faecalis,  F.
prausnitzii,   Lactobacillus  plantarum,  Ruminococcus  gnavus
B.  thetaiotaomicron,  Bacteroides  caccae,  B.  ovatus,  Collinsella
aerofaciens,  Clostridium  symbiosum,  E.  coli,  E.  rectale,  M.
formatexigens
Anaerostipes  caccae,  B.  thetaiotaomicron,  B.  longum,  Blautia
producta,  C.  butyricum,  C.  ramosum,  E.  coli,  Lactobacillus
plantarum
Altered  Schaedler  Flora 
B.  thetaiotaomicron,  B.  ovatus,  B.  caccae,  B.  hydrogenotrophica,  C.
aerofaciens,  Clostridium  symbiosum,  D.  piger,  E.  coli,  E.  rectale,  M.
formatexigens
Bacteroides  caccae,  B.  cellulosyticus,  B.  ovatus,  B.
thetaiotaomicron,  B.  uniformis,  B.  vulgatus,  Clostridium
spiroforme,  Clostridium  scindens,  C.  aerofaciens,  Dorea
longicatena,  Parabacteroides  distasonis,  R.obeum

References

Denou  et  al.  (2009)
Crost  et  al.  (2010)

Eun  et  al.  (2014)

Rey  et  al.  (2013)

Becker  et  al.  (2011)

Dewhirst  et  al.  (1999)
Faith  et  al.  (2011)

McNulty  et  al.  (2013)

T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327 

319

Table   1  (Continued)

Communities 

15-Member

community

17-Member

community

33-Member

community

Unknown

Members 

B.  caccae,  B.  ovatus,  B.  thetaiotaomicron,  B.  uniformis,  B.  vulgatus,
B.   cellulosilyticus,  C.  aerofaciens,  C.  scindens,  C.  spiroforme,  D.
longicatena,  E.  rectale,  F.  prausnitzii,  P.  distasonis,  R.  obeum,
Ruminococcus  torques
Strains  belonging  to  Clostridium  clusters  IV,  XIVa  and  XVIII 

References

McNulty  et  al.  (2011)

Atarashi  et  al.  (2013)

Bacterial  strains  isolated  from  human  stool 

Martz  et  al.  (2015)

Clostridium  mix

Atarashi  et  al.  (2011)

The  table  contains  a  non-comprehensive  list  of  bacteria  and  corresponding  references  since  1999  (as  it  can  be  difﬁcult  to  track  the  identity  and  origin  of  bacteria  in  earlier
studies).   Bacteria  are  sorted  by  phyla,  alphabetic  order,  and  complexity  of  communities.  Readers  should  refer  to  the  given  references  to  obtain  strain  designation.  The  upper
part   of  the  table  refers  to  experiments  with  single  strains.  Each  bacterial  species  was  used  for  mono-colonization  whenever  several  species  are  listed  for  one  given  reference.
Grey   boxes  highlight  work  performed  using  mouse-derived  bacteria,  which  is  clearly  outnumbered  by  the  number  of  colonization  experiments  done  with  human-derived
bacteria.

Perpetuum

3. 
microbiota

 

mobile:  The  host  shapes  and  is  shaped  by  the

Whether  a  microorganism  is  capable  of  growing  in  a  given  envi-
ronment  mainly  depends  on  the  physicochemical  conditions  (e.g.
pH,  temperature,  redox  potential,  oxygen  tension)  and  substrate
availability.  Animals  harbor  a  wide  range  of  digestive  systems  for
an  efﬁcient  extraction  of  nutrients  from  their  respective  diet.  There-
fore,  the  intestinal  tract  of  herbivores,  carnivores,  and  omnivores
display  considerable  anatomical  and  physiological  differences.
Gut  microbial  communities  have  adapted  to  these  local  condi-
tions  and  co-evolved  with  their  hosts,  e.g.  bacterial  diversity  was
found  to  be  higher  in  herbivores  than  in  carnivores  or  omnivores
(Ley  et  al.,  2006).  Reciprocal  microbiota  transplantation  from  ﬁsh
into  mice  and  vice  versa  led  to  drastic  changes  in  the  relative
abundance  of  major  community  members:  the  donor  microbiota
changed  in  the  recipient  host  in  a  way  that  it  resembled  the  typ-
ical  microbiota  of  the  recipient  host,  as  far  as  possible  with  the
given  inoculum  (Rawls  et  al.,  2006).  A  comprehensive  series  of
“xenomicrobiota”  transplantation  experiments  demonstrated  that
microbial  consortia  originating  from  the  human,  ﬁsh,  and  insect
gut,  and  even  from  environmental  samples  are  capable  of  col-
onizing  the  mouse  intestine  (Seedorf  et  al.,  2014).  Nonetheless,
the  composite  “xenomicrobiota”  established  in  recipient  hosts
were  eventually  out-competed  by  an  autochthonous  murine  gut
microbiota,  indicating  that  the  murine  gut  is  a  highly  selective
environment  for  bacterial  colonization.

Several  reports  demonstrated  that  host-species  phylogeny  can
be  congruent  with  the  relationship  of  their  respective  gut  micro-
bial  communities  (Ley  et  al.,  2008b;  Ochman  et  al.,  2010).  This
illustrates  that  vertical  transmission  plays  a  role  in  community
assembly,  rather  than  being  assembled  strictly  de  novo  from  the
environment.  Evidence  exists  that  this  co-diversiﬁcation  results  in
the  emergence  of  host  speciﬁcity.  Striking  molecular  evidence  for
microbial  host  speciﬁcity  was  provided  by  Jens  Walter  and  col-
leagues  who  performed  colonization  experiments  using  different
strains  of  the  commensal  species  Lactobacillus  reuteri  (Frese  et  al.,
2011).  These  authors  showed  that  L.  reuteri  strains  isolated  from
mice  were  capable  of  bioﬁlm  formation  in  the  murine  forestomach,
while  human,  pig  and  chicken  isolates  failed  to  do  so.  This  differ-
ence  was  also  reﬂected  in  pronounced  genomic  differences  among
strains  from  distinct  hosts.  L.  reuteri  mutants  in  genes  encoding
cell  surface  structures  exhibited  reduced  colonization  efﬁciency,
showing  that  the  colonization  phenotype  was  directly  linked  to  the
expression  of  speciﬁc  bacterial  signals  involved  in  cellular  adhe-
sion.

Host  factors  including  bile  acids,  mucin,  antimicrobial  peptides,
and  IgA  can  also  inﬂuence  colonization  processes  and  microbiota
architecture.  For  instance,  bile  acids  are  metabolites  synthetized
in  the  liver  and  secreted  into  the  small  intestine  via  the  bile  to

help  lipid  absorption.  Intricate  interactions  between  bile  acids  and
the  gut  microbiota  are  exempliﬁed  by  anti-microbial  properties  of
certain  bile  acids,  and  by  their  conversion  via  deconjugation,  dehy-
droxylation,  and  dehydrogenation  reactions  catalyzed  by  speciﬁc
bacterial  species  (Devlin  and  Fischbach,  2015;  Ridlon  and  Bajaj,
2015).  As  bile  acids  undergo  entero-hepatic  circulation  and  reach
(cid:2)M)   in  the  intestinal
substantial  concentrations  (up  to  hundreds  of 
lumen,  variations  in  their  concentrations  and  diversity  can  affect
microbiota  structure  and  function  (Islam  et  al.,  2011).  Differences
in  bile  acid  pools  between  humans  and  mice  exist,  which  certainly
contributes  to  changes  in  their  gut  microbiota  (Sayin  et  al.,  2013;
Seedorf  et  al.,  2014).

The  immune  system  is  also  an  important  modulator  of  gut
microbial  ecology.  Antimicrobial  peptides  constitute  an  important
arm  of  the  innate  immune  barrier  and  are  actively  involved  in
shaping  gut  microbial  communities.  Altered  production  of  Paneth
cell-derived  antimicrobial  peptides  can  be  an  important  mediator
of  a  mouse-strain  speciﬁc  microbiota  (Gulati  et  al.,  2012).  Lack  of
defensins  was  shown  to  alter  microbiota  composition  and  cause
overgrowth  of  pathobionts  (Salzman  et  al.,  2010).  Moreover,  IgA,
an  effector  molecule  of  adaptive  immune  responses,  is  induced  in
response  to  bacterial  colonization  and  actively  shapes  the  micro-
biota  (Kubinak  et  al.,  2015).

Mucus  is  another  important  host  component  that  acts  as  a
substrate  for  gut  bacteria  and  can  thereby  shape  microbial  ecosys-
tem  architecture.  Intestinal  goblet  cells  secrete  large  quantities  of
mucins,  which  are  heavily  glycosylated,  high  molecular  weight  pro-
teins  that  spread  over  the  entire  gut  mucosa  and  thereby  form
  barrier  to  luminal  microbes  (Johansson  et  al.,  2015).  However,
a
mucins  also  offer  niches  that  favor  colonization  by  speciﬁc  bacte-
ria  able  to  metabolize  glycoproteins  (Berry  et  al.,  2013).  It  has  been
demonstrated  that  changes  in  mucin  composition  (including  their
glycosylation)  alter  gut  bacterial  populations  (Rausch  et  al.,  2011;
Staubach  et  al.,  2012),  and  vice  versa  (Jakobsson  et  al.,  2015).

These  examples  underscore  the  intricate  interactions  between
gut  bacterial  communities  and  host-derived  factors,  which  are  per
se  inﬂuenced  by  host  gene  expression.  Over  the  last  decade,  the
impact  of  the  host  genome  on  gut  microbiota  composition  has  been
  major  subject  of  interest.  Genome-wide  mapping  approaches,
a
such  as  quantitative  trait  locus  (QTL)  mapping,  have  shown  that
speciﬁc  genetic  variants  are  linked  to  variation  in  certain  bacte-
rial  populations  (Benson  et  al.,  2010;  Wang  et  al.,  2015).  However,
when  investigating  interactions  between  individual  host  genetic
traits  and  the  gut  microbiome,  the  comparison  of  knockout  ani-
mals  and  their  wildtype  counterparts  can  be  affected  by  a  number
of  confounding  factors  (e.g.  cage  effects,  maternal  transmission).
This  emphasizes  the  need  for  careful  data  interpretation  and  for
the  establishment  of  guidelines  for  proper  experimental  design,
e.g.  considering  the  use  of  littermate  controls  (Laukens  et  al.,
2015).

320 

T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327

Mutualistic  relationships  between  host  species  and  their  gut
microbe  are  the  result  of  long-term  co-evolution  driven  by  bac-
terial,  host-derived,  and  environmental  factors.  As  outlined  above,
speciﬁc  bacterial  functions  such  as  the  expression  of  adhesion  pro-
teins  or  the  induction  of  host-derived  substrates  used  subsequently
for  growth  can  confer  colonization  advantages  (Bry  et  al.,  1996;
Frese  et  al.,  2011).  Also,  the  host  immune  system  can  shape  the
microbiota  and  speciﬁc  bacteria  can  shape  the  immune  system,
resulting  in  a  complex  cross-talk  equilibrium  (Atarashi  et  al.,  2013;
Chung  et  al.,  2012;  Hooper  et  al.,  2012;  Ivanov  et  al.,  2009).  Mouse
models  have  been  very  useful  for  dissecting  molecular  mecha-
nisms  underlying  these  microbe–host  interactions.  However,  it
is  now  clear  that  many  host  and  bacterial  factors  that  inﬂuence
these  interactions  are  host  species-speciﬁc.  In  contrast  to  the  well-
known  differences  in  gut  physiology  between  humans  and  mice
(e.g.  intestinal  architecture,  physicochemical  properties,  immune
system,  diet),  there  is  to  date  surprisingly  little  knowledge  on  the
speciﬁcity  of  their  gut  microbiomes.

4.  Composition  of  the  mouse  gut  microbiota

Ley  et  al.  (2008a)  were  the  ﬁrst  to  compare  fecal  microbiota  of
numerous  animal  species  using  next  generation  sequencing  tech-
nologies,  but  mice  were  not  included  in  this  study.  Earlier  work
by  the  same  authors  reported  high  similarities  at  the  phylum  level
between  the  murine  and  human  gut  microbiota  (Ley  et  al.,  2005,
2006).  In  order  to  provide  a  comprehensive  picture  of  bacterial
phyla  composition  in  the  mouse  gut,  we  processed  6034  mouse  16S
rRNA  amplicon  datasets  retrieved  from  the  Sequence  Read  Archive,
one  of  the  public  repositories  for  high-throughput  sequencing  data
(Leinonen  et  al.,  2011).  Seven  phyla  (Actinobacteria,  Bacteroidetes,
Deferribacteres,  Firmicutes,   Proteobacteria,   Tenericutes,  and  Verru-
comicrobia)  were  found  in  more  than  10%  of  samples  (4797  after
ﬁltering)  and  were  thus  considered  as  common  inhabitants  of  the
mouse  intestine  (Fig.  1).  Firmicutes,   Bacteroidetes,  and  Proteobacteria
were  most  dominant,  with  median  relative  abundance  of  47.8,  28.8,
and  2.0%  total  reads,  respectively.  Members  of  the  phylum  Firmi-
cutes  are  clearly  the  most  prevalent  murine  gut  bacteria,  displaying
relative  abundances  of  more  than  20%  reads  in  84.5%  of  the  samples
analyzed.  In  contrast,  Verrucomicrobia  and  Proteobacteria  showed  a
much  lower  prevalence  at  this  relative  abundance  threshold  of  20%
reads  (approximately  10%  of  samples).  The  prevalence  of  Actinobac-
teria,  Deferribacteres,  and  Tenericutes  was  <1%.  The  approach  used
in  the  present  large-scale  analysis  may   be  followed  up  in  future
studies  and  lead  to  a  more  precise  deﬁnition  of  a  prototypic  mouse
microbiota.

With  respect  to  comparative  analysis,  there  is  still  little  knowl-
edge  on  speciﬁc  traits  that  distinguish  the  human  from  the  mouse
gut  microbiota.  Recently,  Nguyen  et  al.  (2015)  compared  exist-
ing  shotgun  metagenomic  datasets  (four  from  human  subjects
and  ﬁve  from  mouse  feces)  and  reported  that  lactobacilli  and
Turicibacter  spp.  (family  Erysipelotrichaceae  within  Firmicutes)   are
characteristic  of  mice,  whereas  Prevotella,   Ruminococcus,   and  Fae-
calibacterium  spp.  showed  higher  relative  abundances  in  human
feces.  The  most  comprehensive  investigation  published  so  far  on
the  mouse  intestinal  microbiota  using  next  generation  sequencing
also  looked  at  mouse-  and  human-speciﬁc  taxa  (Xiao  et  al.,  2015).
In  this  shotgun  metagenomic  study  establishing  the  ﬁrst  microbial
gene  catalog  from  the  mouse  gut,  the  genera  Coprobacillus  (family
Erysipelotrichaceae),  Anaerotruncus 
(Ruminococcaceae),  Marvin-
bryantia  (Lachnospiraceae),  and  Pseudoﬂavonifractor  (unclassiﬁed
Clostridiales)  were  characterized  by  higher  relative  abundances
in  mice,  compared  with  higher  abundances  of  Oscillibacter
(Ruminococcaceae)  and  Klebsiella  (Enterobacteriaceae)  in  the  human
gut.

The  fact  that  a  bacterial  strain  is  better  adapted  to  a  given  host
species  may   have  various  reasons.  The  ability  of  microbes  to  opti-
mally  adapt  to  the  living  conditions  prevailing  in  the  intestinal
tract  or  parts  of  it  is  certainly  of  major  importance.  For  example,
lactobacilli  adhere  to  the  squamous  epithelium  in  the  forestom-
ach  of  mice  reaching  concentrations  of  108 cells  per  g  of  organ
content  whereas  the  concentration  of  lactobacilli  in  the  human
stomach  is  <104 cells  per  g  of  organ  content  (Tannock,  1995).  An
entire  bacterial  phylum,  the  Deferribacteres,  is  prevalent  in  the
gut  of  wild  (Linnenbrink  et  al.,  2013)  and  laboratory  mice  but  to
the  current  state  of  knowledge  absent  from  humans.  Mucispiril-
lum  schaedleri,   the  only  member  of  this  phylum  described  so  far  in
the  mouse  intestine  (Robertson  et  al.,  2005),  is  part  of  the  Altered
Schaedler  Flora  (Dewhirst  et  al.,  1999).  Segmented  ﬁlamentous
bacteria  (SFB),  which  are  conspicuous  because  they  form  long  ﬁl-
aments,  are  another  example  of  bacteria  frequently  described  in
mice,  while  they  may   exhibit  age-dependent  colonization  kinet-
ics  in  humans  (Yin  et  al.,  2013).  In  mice,  these  bacteria  are  found
in  the  terminal  ileum,  where  they  are  in  close  contact  with  the
intestinal  epithelium  (Klaasen  et  al.,  1992)  and  may   depend  on
absorptive  epithelial  cells  for  growth  and  differentiation  (Schnupf
et  al.,  2015).  SFB  colonization  induces  formation  of  IL-17-producing
T-helper  (Th17)  cells  and  thereby  modulates  the  balance  between
Th17  cells  and  Foxp3-(+)  regulatory  T-cells  (Ivanov  et  al.,  2009).
All  these  studies  provide  evidence  that  the  mouse  and  human  gut
microbiota  can  be  differentiated  by  the  presence  of  speciﬁc  bac-
terial  taxa  that  dominate  microbial  communities  as  assessed  by
sequencing.  However,  these  ﬁndings  require  additional  investiga-
tions  at  higher  taxonomic  resolution  and  also  need  to  be  conﬁrmed
using  methods  that  allow  precise  quantiﬁcation  of  target  bacterial
groups.

In  summary,  despite  the  relatively  high  number  of  existing
high-throughput  sequencing  datasets  on  the  mouse  gut  microbiota,
description  of  the  ecosystem  and  its  microbial  members  is  still
in  its  infancy.  It  will  require  concerted  actions  with  larger  sets  of
samples  collected  worldwide  combined  with  the  improvement  of
reference  databases  (via  reinforced  cultivation  efforts  and  detailed
genetic  studies)  to  make  further  progress  towards  a  representa-
tive,  speciﬁc,  and  reﬁned  picture  of  the  mouse  gut  microbiota.
Moreover,  the  host  factors  mentioned  above  and  the  impact  of
diet  discussed  below  contribute  to  substantial  variations  in  the
gut  microbiota.  This  highlights  the  need  to  work  with  minimal
communities  of  deﬁned  microorganisms  which  to  a  certain  extent
represent  complex  ecosystems  in  order  to  perform  detailed  ecolog-
ical  and  mechanistic  studies.

5.  Gnotobiotic  mouse  models  for  gut  microbiota  research

Phenotypes  may   vary  greatly  in  mouse  models  of  diseases
depending  on  the  genetic  background  of  the  mice  and  differences
in  hygiene  standard  between  animal  facilities.  The  gut  micro-
biota  is  also  a  prominent  variable  (Laukens  et  al.,  2015).  On
the  one  hand,  such  discrepancies  led  to  seminal  discoveries:  for
instance  the  importance  of  SFB  for  the  induction  of  Th-17  immune
responses  was  discovered  by  comparing  mucosal  T-cell  subsets
from  C57BL/6  mice  obtained  from  different  vendors  (Ivanov  et  al.,
2009).  On  the  other  hand,  this  condition  caused  a  high  number  of
non-reproducible  mouse  disease  phenotypes.  Pioneering  investi-
gations  in  the  1960’s  already  reported  that  various  colonies  of  mice
harboring  different  gut  bacterial  populations  displayed  different
susceptibility  to  infections  (Dubos  and  Schaedler,  1960).  Lack  of
reproducibility  remains  a  problem  that  precludes  proper  investi-
gation  of  the  molecular  mechanisms  underlying  diseases  if  body
microbiomes  are  not  the  primary  research  target.  For  example,
upon  import  into  a  new  animal  facility  via  embryo  transfer,  mice

T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327 

321

Fig.  1.  Relative  sequence  abundance  of  common  phyla  in  the  mouse  gut.  The  violin  plots  show  the  distribution  of  common  phyla  based  on  16S  rRNA  gene  studies  across
4797   mouse  gut  samples.  Data  were  calculated  on  the  basis  of  Operational  Taxonomic  Units  (ca.  250  nucleotides)  classiﬁed  by  the  Ribosomal  Database  Project  from  a  total  of
6034   mouse  gut  samples  available  in  the  Sequence  Read  Archive.  Sequences  were  processed  by  and  outputs  downloaded  from  IMNGS  (www.imngs.org).  The  term  common
phyla   refers  to  those  found  in  >10%  of  all  samples.  In  order  to  avoid  including  analysis  of  unrepresentative  samples,  those  for  which  the  sum  of  abundances  of  common  phyla
was   <80%  or  those  with  <1000  sequences  classiﬁed  as  bacteria  were  discarded,  resulting  in  4797  samples.  For  each  phylum,  the  percentage  of  samples  with  abundance  below
the   selected  thresholds  (horizontal  dashed  lines)  is  shown  along  the  violin  plots.  The  total  number  of  positive  samples  (>0.5%  relative  abundance  per  sample)  to  which  these
percentages  refer  is  shown  in  brackets  below  the  phylum  names.

are  usually  associated  with  a  different  gut  microbial  community
which  can  change  susceptibility  to  colitis  (Yang  et  al.,  2013).  For  the
same  reason,  wildtype  littermate  animals  should  be  used  as  control
groups  for  Salmonella  infection  experiments  to  test  phenotypes  of
mutant  mouse  lines  (Kaiser  et  al.,  2012).

The  observed  differences  in  hygiene  status  and  microbiota  of
laboratory  rodents  were  the  trigger  for  establishment  of  the  so
called  Schaedler  Flora  to  create  “isobiotic”  mouse  lines  and  improve
standardization  in  mouse  breeding  facilities  by  colonizing  germ-
free  mice  with  a  deﬁned  mixture  of  cultivable  bacterial  species
(see  below).  Hence,  the  rationale  for  using  minimal  microbiota
(i.e.  deﬁned  communities  of  microorganisms  to  mimic   a  complex
ecosystem)  is  not  novel,  but  recent  technical  advances  in  molecular
tools  and  cultivation  approaches  can  enhance  research  in  the  ﬁeld
(Macpherson  and  McCoy,  2015).  In  the  next  paragraphs,  we  give  a
short  overview  of  existing  minimal  microbiota  that  have  been  used
and  illustrate  urgent  needs  in  the  ﬁeld  of  gnotobiology.

5.1.  Lessons  learnt  from  studies  using  minimal  gut  microbiota

Various  bacterial  consortia  used  for  the  inoculation  of  germ-free
mice  have  been  described  in  the  literature.  The  ﬁrst  community,
termed  Schaedler  Flora,  was  developed  by  Schaedler  et  al.  (1965).
It  consisted  of  two  Lactobacillus  strains  and  one  of  each  Streptococ-
cus,  Bacteroides,  Enterococcus,  and  E.  coli  strain.  This  ﬁrst  version

was  later  modiﬁed  by  Orcutt  et  al.  (1987)  and  termed  Altered
Schaedler  Flora  (ASF).  The  ASF  encompasses  eight  different  strains,
which  were  identiﬁed  based  on  their  16S  rRNA  gene  sequences
(Dewhirst  et  al.,  1999),  and  for  which  genome  information  is  now
available  (Wannemuehler  et  al.,  2014).  Two  members  of  the  com-
munity  are  lactobacilli  (ASF  360  and  361)  and  one  strain  is  related
to  Parabacteroides  distasonis  (ASF  519).  The  forth  strain  is  M.   schaed-
leri  (ASF  457),  and  the  remaining  four  members  display  a  fusiform
shape  and  have  an  extreme  oxygen  sensitivity  in  common.  Three  of
these  are  afﬁliated  with  Clostridium  species  (ASF  356,  500,  502)  and
one  strain  was  identiﬁed  as  Eubacterium  plexicaudatum  (ASF  492)
(Dewhirst  et  al.,  1999).  Mice  colonized  with  the  ASF  display  a  certain
degree  of  “normalization”  when  compared  with  germ-free  mice
(Wymore  Brand  et  al.,  2015).  However,  it  is  unknown  whether  all
ASF  strains  are  representative  members  of  dominant  bacterial  com-
munities  in  the  mouse  intestine.  Moreover,  mice  associated  with
ASF  do  not  differ  substantially  from  germ-free  mice  with  respect
to  microbiota-associated  characteristics  such  as  the  induction  of
(cid:3)-
mucosal  immune  responses,  degradation  of  trypsin,  mucin,  and 
aspartylglycine  as  well  as  conversion  of  bilirubin  and  formation  of
short-chain  fatty  acids,  which  are  usually  re-established  in  germ-
free  mice  after  colonization  with  a  complex  microbiota  (Bouskra
et  al.,  2008;  Geuking  et  al.,  2011;  Midtvedt  et  al.,  1985).

Several  other  deﬁned  microbial  communities  have  been
described,  which  are  all  based  on  human-derived  strains  (Table  1).

322 

T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327

Faith  et  al.  employed  a  community  of  ten  sequenced  bacterial
strains  to  investigate  the  response  of  this  community  to  four  dif-
ferent  diets  (Faith  et  al.,  2011).  The  study  aimed  to  predict  the
diet-dependent  abundance  of  each  community  member  and  obtain
information  on  substrate  preferences  and  phenotypic  ﬂexibility  of
the  community  members.  The  consortium  included  B.  thetaiotaomi-
cron,  Bacteroides  ovatus  and  Bacteroides  caccae,   which  are  capable  of
degrading  complex  polysaccharides;  E.  rectale,   Marvinbryantia  for-
matexigens,  Collinsella  aerofaciens,   and  E.  coli,   which  preferentially
utilize  oligosaccharides  and  simple  sugars;  Clostridium  symbiosum
and  E.  coli,  which  convert  amino  acids;  the  sulfate  reducer  Desul-
fovibrio  piger  and  the  acetogen  Blautia  hydrogenotrophica,   both  of
which  are  capable  of  oxidizing  H2 formed  in  the  course  of  car-
bohydrate  and  amino  acid  fermentation  by  the  other  community
members.  Using  a  linear  model,  the  authors  demonstrated  that  the
variation  in  abundance  of  each  organism  could  largely  be  explained
based  on  knowing  which  organisms  were  present  and  what  the
concentrations  of  the  dietary  ingredients  were  fed  to  the  mice.

In  a  more  recent  study,  a  model  community  consisting  of  twelve
different  species  was  used  (McNulty  et  al.,  2013)  (Table  1).  Commu-
nity  members  were  selected  on  the  basis  of  several  criteria:  (1)  high
prevalence  in  the  intestinal  microbiota  of  humans;  (2)  membership
in  one  of  the  three  major  phyla  present  in  the  human  intestine;  (3)
availability  of  their  genome  sequences;  and  (4)  their  ability  to  grow
in  vitro.  Following  colonization,  one  group  of  mice  was  ﬁrst  fed  a
diet  low  in  fat  and  high  in  plant  polysaccharides  (LF/HPP)  for  two
weeks,  switched  to  a  diet  high  in  fat  and  sugar  (HF/HS)  for  two   more
weeks  and  back  to  LF/HPP  for  additional  two  weeks.  The  mice  in  the
second  group  were  also  fed  the  two  diets  but  in  reverse  order.  This  is
one  of  the  ﬁrst  examples  where  community  and  transcriptome  pro-
ﬁling  in  combination  with  high-resolution  metaproteomics  were
applied  in  parallel  to  a  deﬁned  microbiota  to  analyze  the  response
to  dietary  changes.  The  study  led  to  a  number  of  interesting  ﬁnd-
ings:  the  relative  abundance  of  some  community  members  (B.
caccae,  B.  ovatus  and  B.  cellulosilyticus)   changed  in  response  to  the
alternating  diets  whereas  that  of  other  members  such  as  B.  thetaio-
taomicron  did  not.  Moreover,  whereas  the  proportion  of  B.  caccae
increased  on  LF/HPP  and  decreased  on  HF/HS,  the  relative  abun-
dance  of  B.  ovatus  and  B.  cellulosilyticus  decreased.  Diet  was   found
to  explain  the  variance  in  bacterial  population  size.  B.  cellulosi-
lyticus  was  identiﬁed  as  the  most  versatile  carbohydrate  utilizer
within  this  community.  Transcriptome  analysis  revealed  strongly
diet-dependent  expression  patterns  and  indicated  that  this  organ-
ism  is  highly  efﬁcient  in  adapting  the  expression  of  genes/proteins
to  its  needs.  However,  this  work  also  demonstrates  that  the  sen-
sitivity  of  metatranscriptomic  and  metaproteomic  methods  may
become  limited  if  the  relative  proportion  of  a  community  member
is  low.  Hence,  such  limitations  are  not  restricted  to  complex  micro-
biomes  but  may   even  occur  when  well-deﬁned  and  less  complex
microbial  communities  are  analyzed.

For  the  establishment  of  another  model  community,  the  simpli-
ﬁed  human  intestinal  microbiota  (SIHUMI),  bacterial  strains  were
selected  based  on  their  reported  presence  in  the  human  intestine
and  their  in  vitro  fermentation  capabilities  (Becker  et  al.,  2011)
(Table  1).  Germ-free  rats  were  ﬁrst  associated  with  seven  bac-
terial  species  (Anaerostipes  caccae,   B.  thetaiotaomicron,  B.  longum,
Blautia  producta,  Clostridium  ramosum,  E.  coli  and  Lactobacillus  plan-
tarum)   and  fecal  concentrations  of  short-chain  fatty  acids  were
compared  with  those  of  germ-free  animals.  To  increase  the  fecal
butyrate  concentration,  which  was  low  with  this  original  con-
sortium,  the  community  was  complemented  with  the  butyrate
producer  Clostridium  butyricum.   The  complemented  community
(cid:3)-aspartylglycine,  and  biliru-
was  capable  of  degrading  mucins, 
bin  but  to  a  lower  extent  than  conventional  rats.  Dietary  changes
in  fermentable  ﬁber  and  fat  content  affected  the  abundance  of
community  members.  The  relative  increase  of  one  member  of  this

community,  C.  ramosum,  in  response  to  a  high-fat  diet  reﬂected
the  situation  reported  for  obese  mice  and  human  subjects.  This
model  community  was   subsequently  also  established  in  mice
where  these  results  could  be  reproduced  and  extended  (Woting
et  al.,  2014).  The  community  was  stable  over  time,  was  vertically
transmitted  to  the  offspring,  and  has  also  been  used  as  a  back-
ground  microbiota  in  gnotobiotic  mice  to  investigate  the  role  of
mucin-degrading  Akkermanisa  muciniphila  in  Salmonella  enterica
Typhimurium  infection-driven  inﬂammation  (Ganesh  et  al.,  2013).
Surprisingly,  A.  muciniphila  exacerbated  the  intestinal  inﬂamma-
tion  caused  by  Salmonella  in  this  animal  model.

In  the  context  of 

inﬂammatory  bowel  disease  (IBD),  Eun
et  al.  (2014)  associated  germ-free  wildtype  and  colitis-prone
interleukin-10-deﬁcient  (IL-10−/−)  mice  on  different  genetic  back-
ground  with  a  seven-member  community  (Table  1)  to  investigate
mouse-strain  effects  on  intestinal  inﬂammation  and  on  microbial
community  composition.  Criteria  for  strain  selection  were  reports
about  different  abundances  in  IBD  patients  and  healthy  subjects,
effects  in  experimental  colitis,  human  origin,  availability  of  genome
sequence,  and  formation  of  a  stable  community  in  mice.  This  con-
sortium  induced  colitis  in  all  IL-10−/− mice,  but  the  phenotype  was
more  aggressive  in  mice  with  the  129S6/SvEv  than  the  C57BL/6
background.  The  abundance  of  community  members  was  affected
by  host  genetic  background  and  presence  of  colonic  inﬂammation.

5.2.  The  unknown  majority  should  become  minority:  Cultivation
is  worth  the  effort!

As  outlined  in  the  previous  paragraphs,  model  microbial  consor-
tia  have  provided  valuable  insights  into  microbe–host  interactions.
However,  they  show  some  important  limitations.  The  ASF  is  the
most  established  consortium  of  bacteria  originating  from  the
mouse  intestine,  but  the  strains  are  not  publicly  available  (Wymore
Brand  et  al.,  2015).  As  discussed  above,  gnotobiotic  models  col-
onized  by  human  gut  bacteria  are  suitable  for  testing  clinical
relevance,  but  they  may   be  problematic  for  establishment  of  mouse
models  with  deﬁned  microbiota  in  terms  of  colonization  efﬁcacy
and  regulation  of  host  physiology  (Chung  et  al.,  2012;  Frese  et  al.,
2011).  Most  of  all,  one  problem  common  to  all  minimal  micro-
biomes  used  so  far  relates  to  our  very  limited  view  of  mouse  gut
bacterial  diversity  and  composition,  which  prevents  establishment
of  representative  deﬁned  communities.

In  order  to  provide  an  overview  of  the  diversity  of  common
and  dominant  bacterial  taxa  in  the  mouse  intestine  from  cur-
rently  available  datasets,  we  followed  the  same  universal  16S  rRNA
amplicon  approach  as  described  in  Fig.  1  and  generated  a  dendro-
gram  showing  bacterial  taxonomy  (down  to  the  family  level)  with
prevalence  and  abundance  information  (Fig.  2).  The  most  preva-
lent  families  were  the  Lachnospiraceae  and  Ruminococcaceae  within
the  phylum  Firmicutes,   and  the  Porphyromonadaceae  within  Bac-
teroidetes.  Of  note,  the  Ribosomal  Database  Project  (Wang  et  al.,
2007)  classiﬁes  members  of  family  S24-7,  known  to  be  dominant  in
the  mouse  intestine  but  without  cultivable  members  yet  available
(Seedorf  et  al.,  2014),  as  Porphyromonadaceae,   which  has  inﬂated
values  for  this  family  in  the  present  analysis.  Most  importantly,
these  data  based  on  4712  samples  shows  that  12  of  the  37  taxa  listed
at  the  family  level  are  still  unknown,  i.e.  either  they  do  not  have  even
a
  single  representative  strain  in  culture  or  the  taxonomic  classiﬁ-
cation  of  corresponding  cultured  bacteria  is  ambiguous.  Reaching
average  prevalence  and  relative  abundance  values  of  up  to  60%
samples  and  >9%  total  reads,  these  unknown  taxa  may   be  con-
sidered  as  the  most  wanted  bacteria  from  the  mouse  gut.  Six  of
these  taxa  were  even  unknown  at  the  class  or  order  level.  In  total,
3747  samples  (79.5%)  contained  sequences  corresponding  to  these
unknown  taxa,  with  an  average  cumulative  abundance  of  21.1%
total  reads.  This  clearly  demonstrates  that  a  substantial  part  of  the

T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327 

323

bacterial  communities  in  the  mouse  gut  remains  to  be  character-
ized.

Hence,  it  is  obvious  that  gnotobiology  research  and  the  develop-
ment  of  minimal  microbiomes  require  better  technical  foundations.
More  cultivation-based  projects  are  urgently  needed  to  isolate
novel  bacteria  from  the  mouse  gut,  as  done  for  other  ecosystems
(Bai  et  al.,  2015;  Lagier  et  al.,  2015;  Vartoukian  et  al.,  2016).  Addi-
tional  effort  is  also  required  to  bridge  the  gap  between  novel
cultivation  strategies  and  their  lack  of  use  in  the  ﬁeld  (Gich  et  al.,
2012;  Zengler  et  al.,  2002).  Future  studies  should  also  include  the
complementary  use  of  metagenomics,  single-cell  approaches,  and
cultivation  of  novel  bacteria  (Dichosa  et  al.,  2014;  Pope  et  al.,  2011).
Most  importantly,  novel  bacteria  must  be  also  thoroughly  described
taxonomically,  which  is  essential  to  improve  resolution  of  16S
rRNA  amplicon  and  metagenomic  studies.  Dominant  bacteria  in
the  gut,  including  important  families  such  as  the  Lachnospiraceae
and  Ruminococcaceae,   must  rapidly  be  re-classiﬁed  to  avoid  mis-
interpretations  of  data  (Lawson  and  Rainey,  2015).  Moreover,  all
strains  should  be  made  available  to  the  entire  scientiﬁc  community
to  avoid  losing  them  over  the  years.  Pioneering  studies  in  the  1960s
and  1970s  generated  large  numbers  of  isolates,  but  very  few  are
still  available.  A  comprehensive  collection  of  representative  murine
gut  bacteria  will  facilitate  the  design  of  future  colonization  stud-
ies  in  germ-free  mice.  These  public  collections  should  be  linked  to
well-curated  databases  of  gene  and  genome  sequences  to  eventu-
ally  help  interpretation  of  omics  datasets  (Kim  et  al.,  2012).  This
will  require  thorough  genetic  studies  for  proper  analysis  of  novel
bacterial  genomes.

6.  Challenges  pertaining  to  mouse  microbiome  research
and  the  establishment  of  model  gut  microbiota

Typical  chow  fed  to  mice  in  an  animal  laboratory  differs  con-
siderably  from  human  diets,  which  per  se  display  a  high  degree  of
variability  among  human  populations  and  individuals,  whose  pre-
ferences  are  inﬂuenced  by  availability,  culture,  tradition,  price  and
individual  taste.  However,  it  may   even  be  asked  to  which  extent
chow  diets  fed  to  laboratory  mice  really  reﬂect  the  diets  typi-
cally  consumed  by  mice  living  in  the  wild,  and  whether  they  are
really  appropriate  despite  very  broad  usage  (Clavel  et  al.,  2014).
It  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  the  diet  of  wild  mice  is  inﬂuenced
by  season  and  location  and  therefore  more  varied  (Maurice  et  al.,
2015).  Laboratory  mice  differ  from  wild  mice  not  only  in  their
diets,  environmental  conditions,  bacterial  and  parasitic  exposure
but  also  in  their  genotypes.  This  is  in  accordance  with  differences
in  intestinal  microbiota  composition  observed  between  laboratory
mice  and  wild  mice  (Wang  et  al.,  2014).  Differences  in  microbiota
composition  even  exist  between  mice  from  different  laboratories
(Campbell  et  al.,  2012),  highlighting  the  fact  that  it  is  still  difﬁcult
to  tell  which  members  of  the  microbiota  are  mouse-speciﬁc  and,  if
yes,  whether  speciﬁcity  extends  to  all  mouse  strains  or  is  restricted
to  certain  mouse  strains.  The  most  comprehensive  study  to  date
of  the  gut  microbiota  in  laboratory  mice  included  samples  from
184  animals  originating  from  six  facilities  (Xiao  et  al.,  2015).  In  the
future,  gaining  additional  knowledge  of  the  mouse  gut  microbiota
will  inevitably  be  linked  to  the  necessity  of  including  many  more
samples  than  so  far  analyzed.

The  variability  in  many  parameters  affecting  the  gut  micro-
indicates  that  no  matter  which

laboratory  animals 

in 

biota 

using  IMNGS  (www.imngs.org).  Families  belonging  to  common  phyla  (as  deﬁned  in

Fig.  1)  and  detected  (>0.5%  relative  sequence  abundance)  in  >100  samples  are  shown.

Their  prevalence  (percentage  of  positive  samples)  and  median  abundance  are  indi-

cated  with  histograms  and  pie  charts,  respectively.  Samples  where  the  cumulative

abundance  of  all  common  families  was   below  80%  total  reads  were  excluded.

Fig.  2.  Taxonomic  tree  of  common  bacterial  families  in  the  mouse  gut.  The  analysis
refers  to  4712  samples  derived  from  the  Sequence  Read  Archive  and  analyzed

324 

T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327

microorganisms  are  selected  for  creating  an  artiﬁcial  community
to  associate  germ-free  mice,  it  will  hardly  be  possible  to  develop
a
  unique  model  that  is  suitable  for  investigating  all  conceivable
questions.  This  is  ampliﬁed  by  the  fact  that  our  knowledge  of
the  mouse  gut  microbiota  is  constantly  evolving,  thereby  inﬂu-
encing  our  view  of  what  a  standard  healthy  mouse  microbiota  is.
Research  in  the  ﬁeld  will  beneﬁt  from  current  efforts  in  depict-
ing  the  mouse  gut  microbiota  in  greater  detail  and  in  describing
and  archiving  community  members.  A  high  resolution  view  of
the  mouse  gut  microbiome  combined  with  well-curated  strains
and  genomes  collections  will  offer  unprecedented  opportunities
towards  the  establishment  of  standardized  mouse  models  and
towards  the  study  of  speciﬁc  bacterial  functions  based  on  the  asso-
ciation  of  mice  colonized  by  a  model  microbiota  with  one  strain
carrying  the  given  function,  which  is  less  artiﬁcial  than  mono-
colonization  of  germ-free  mice.  In  this  respect,  the  development  of
tools  for  targeted  detection  of  each  member  of  model  communities
will  also  be  crucial.

How  should  a  deﬁned  microbial  community  in  gnotobiotic
mice  be  composed  to  serve  as  a  useful  model  for  investigat-
ing  the  principles  underlying  host–microbiota  interactions?  This
certainly  depends  on  the  question  to  be  investigated.  Before  estab-
lishing  a  gnotobiotic  mouse  model,  it  is  important  to  consider
its  purpose,  i.e.  the  underlying  research  question.  In  general,  the
model  community  should  reproduce  as  many  effects  as  possible
that  are  typical  of  conventional  mice  but  not  observed  in  germ-
free  mice.  Examples  include  normalization  of  cecum  size  and  of
other  microbiota-associated  characteristics  such  as  degradation  of
(cid:3)-aspartylglycine,  conversion  of  bilirubin  and
trypsin,  mucin,  and 
formation  of  short-chain  fatty  acids  (Midtvedt  et  al.,  1985).  These
microbiota-associated  characteristics  can  be  conferred  to  the  host
by  intestinal  bacteria  that  do  not  necessarily  have  to  be  speciﬁc
to  the  host  species  (Becker  et  al.,  2011).  Immunity-related  inter-
actions  may   likely  display  a  higher  degree  of  host  speciﬁcity  than
microbial  metabolic  activities  that  are  common  to  both  humans  and
mice.  This  leads  to  the  question  whether  only  bacterial  strains  that
have  been  isolated  from  mice  should  be  used  or  whether  strains
of  human  origin  can  also  be  used.  As  already  pointed  out,  this
will  depend  on  the  particular  research  question  and  whether  a
strain  of  human  origin  can  establish  itself  in  the  intestinal  tract
of  a  mouse.  This  decision  could  be  facilitated  by  the  establish-
ment  of  a  comprehensive  catalogue  of  genomes  from  multiple
isolates  of  the  same  bacteria  obtained  from  different  host  species.
This  catalogue  could  lead  to  the  identiﬁcation  of  species  core-  and
pan-genomes,  which  will  allow  assigning  species  into  “general-
ists”  (i.e.  same  strains  are  isolated  from  different  host  species)  and
“specialists”  (i.e.  strains  from  clusters  depending  on  host  species,
as  in  case  of  L.  reuteri).  Using  single  strains  or  mixtures  isolated
from  human  subjects  is  relevant  for  testing  clinical  relevance  and
causal  relationships,  whereas  it  seems  appropriate  to  use  mouse
strains  for  the  purpose  of  generating  isobiotic  mouse  lines  and
standardizing  models  between  different  animal  facilities.  Practi-
cal  aspects  also  have  to  be  kept  in  mind.  For  example,  it  must  be
possible  to  grow  the  selected  strains  in  the  laboratory,  genome
sequences  should  be  available  for  functional  analyses,  and  the
community  should  be  stable  over  time  and  be  transferred  to  the
offspring.

In  summary,  creating  a  deﬁned  minimal  microbiota  that  repro-
duces  all  effects  observed  in  conventional  mice  or  in  humans  will
not  be  possible,  simply  because  a  less  complex  microbiota  is  less
stable  and  because  of  the  high  inter-individual  variability  in  the
prevalence  and  abundance  of  bacterial  taxa  in  human  and  mouse
populations  (Qin  et  al.,  2010;  Xiao  et  al.,  2015).  Nevertheless,
gnotobiotic  mouse  models  are  very  useful  to  dissect  mechanisms
underlying  microbe–host  interactions,  and  technical  advances  of
the  last  decades  in  molecular  and  culture-based  characterization  of

complex  microbial  communities  open  promising  avenues  toward
future  development  of  reﬁned  minimal  microbiomes.

The  authors  acknowledge  support  through  the  priority  program

SPP-1656  of  the  German  Research  Foundation  (DFG).

Acknowledgment

References

Acinas,  S.G.,  Klepac-Ceraj,  V.,  Hunt,  D.E.,  Pharino,  C.,  Ceraj,  I.,  Distel,  D.L.,  Polz,  M.F.,
2004.  Fine-scale  phylogenetic  architecture  of  a  complex  bacterial  community.
Nature  430,  551–554.

Ahern,  P.P.,  Faith,  J.J.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2014.  Mining  the  human  gut  microbiota  for

effector  strains  that  shape  the  immune  system.  Immunity  40,  815–823.

Atarashi,  K.,  Tanoue,  T.,  Oshima,  K.,  Suda,  W.,   Nagano,  Y.,  Nishikawa,  H.,  Fukuda,  S.,

Saito,  T.,  Narushima,  S.,  Hase,  K.,  Kim,  S.,  Fritz,  J.V.,  Wilmes,  P.,  Ueha,  S.,
Matsushima,  K.,  Ohno,  H.,  Olle,  B.,  Sakaguchi,  S.,  Taniguchi,  T.,  Morita,  H.,
Hattori,  M.,   Honda,  K.,  2013.  Treg  induction  by  a  rationally  selected  mixture  of
Clostridia  strains  from  the  human  microbiota.  Nature  500,  232–236.

Atarashi,  K.,  Tanoue,  T.,  Shima,  T.,  Imaoka,  A.,  Kuwahara,  T.,  Momose,  Y.,  Cheng,  G.,
Yamasaki,  S.,  Saito,  T.,  Ohba,  Y.,  Taniguchi,  T.,  Takeda,  K.,  Hori,  S.,  Ivanov,  I.I.,
Umesaki,  Y.,  Itoh,  K.,  Honda,  K.,  2011.  Induction  of  colonic  regulatory  T  cells  by
indigenous  Clostridium  species.  Science  331,  337–341.

Bachmann,  B.,  1996.  Derivations  and  genotypes  of  some  mutant  derivatives  of

Escherichia  coli  K-12.  In:  Neidhardt,  F.C.,  Curtiss,  R.  (Eds.),  Escherichia  coli  and
Salmonella:  Cellular  and  Molecular  Biology.  ASM  Press,  Washington,  DC,   pp.
2460–2488.

Bai,  Y.,  Muller,  D.B.,  Srinivas,  G.,  Garrido-Oter,  R.,  Potthoff,  E.,  Rott,  M.,   Dombrowski,

N.,   Munch,  P.C.,  Spaepen,  S.,  Remus-Emsermann,  M.,   Huttel,  B.,  McHardy,  A.C.,
Vorholt,  J.A.,  Schulze-Lefert,  P.,  2015.  Functional  overlap  of  the  Arabidopsis  leaf
and  root  microbiota.  Nature  528,  364–369.

Balish,  E.,  Warner,  T.,  2002.  Enterococcus  faecalis  induces  inﬂammatory  bowel

disease  in  interleukin-10  knockout  mice.  Am.   J.  Pathol.  160,  2253–2257.
Becker,  N.,  Kunath,  J.,  Loh,  G.,  Blaut,  M.,   2011.  Human  intestinal  microbiota:

characterization  of  a  simpliﬁed  and  stable  gnotobiotic  rat  model.  Gut  Microbes
2,   25–33.

Benson,  A.K.,  Kelly,  S.A.,  Legge,  R.,  Ma,  F.,  Low,  S.J.,  Kim,  J.,  Zhang,  M.,   Oh,  P.L.,

Nehrenberg,  D.,  Hua,  K.,  Kachman,  S.D.,  Moriyama,  E.N.,  Walter,  J.,  Peterson,
D.A.,  Pomp,  D.,  2010.  Individuality  in  gut  microbiota  composition  is  a  complex
polygenic  trait  shaped  by  multiple  environmental  and  host  genetic  factors.
Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  107,  18933–18938.

Berg,  R.D.,  1996.  The  indigenous  gastrointestinal  microﬂora.  Trends  Microbiol.  4,

430–435.

Berry,  D.,  Reinisch,  W.,   2013.  Intestinal  microbiota:  a  source  of  novel  biomarkers  in
inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases?  Best  Pract.  Res.  Clin.  Gastroenterol.  27,  47–58.
Berry,  D.,  Stecher,  B.,  Schintlmeister,  A.,  Reichert,  J.,  Brugiroux,  S.,  Wild,  B.,  Wanek,
W.,   Richter,  A.,  Rauch,  I.,  Decker,  T.,  Loy,  A.,  Wagner,  M.,   2013.  Host-compound
foraging  by  intestinal  microbiota  revealed  by  single-cell  stable  isotope
probing.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  110,  4720–4725.

Bohn,  E.,  Bechtold,  O.,  Zahir,  N.,  Frick,  J.S.,  Reimann,  J.,  Jilge,  B.,  Autenrieth,  I.B.,

2006.  Host  gene  expression  in  the  colon  of  gnotobiotic  interleukin-2-deﬁcient
mice  colonized  with  commensal  colitogenic  or  noncolitogenic  bacterial
strains:  common  patterns  and  bacteria  strain  speciﬁc  signatures.  Inﬂamm.
Bowel  Dis.  12,  853–862.

Bouskra,  D.,  Brezillon,  C.,  Berard,  M.,   Werts,  C.,  Varona,  R.,  Boneca,  I.G.,  Eberl,  G.,
2008.  Lymphoid  tissue  genesis  induced  by  commensals  through  NOD1
regulates  intestinal  homeostasis.  Nature  456,  507–510.

Bry,  L.,  Falk,  P.G.,  Midtvedt,  T.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  1996.  A  model  of  host–microbial

interactions  in  an  open  mammalian  ecosystem.  Science  273,  1380–1383.

Bufﬁe,  C.G.,  Pamer,  E.G.,  2013.  Microbiota-mediated  colonization  resistance  against

intestinal  pathogens.  Nat.  Rev.  Immunol.  13,  790–801.

Campbell,  J.H.,  Foster,  C.M.,  Vishnivetskaya,  T.,  Campbell,  A.G.,  Yang,  Z.K.,  Wymore,
A.,   Palumbo,  A.V.,  Chesler,  E.J.,  Podar,  M.,   2012.  Host  genetic  and  environmental
effects  on  mouse  intestinal  microbiota.  ISME  J.  6,  2033–2044.

Chung,  H.,  Pamp,  S.J.,  Hill,  J.A.,  Surana,  N.K.,  Edelman,  S.M.,  Troy,  E.B.,  Reading,  N.C.,

Villablanca,  E.J.,  Wang,  S.,  Mora,  J.R.,  Umesaki,  Y.,  Mathis,  D.,  Benoist,  C.,
Relman,  D.A.,  Kasper,  D.L.,  2012.  Gut  immune  maturation  depends  on
colonization  with  a  host-speciﬁc  microbiota.  Cell  149,  1578–1593.

Clavel,  T.,  Desmarchelier,  C.,  Haller,  D.,  Gerard,  P.,  Rohn,  S.,  Lepage,  P.,  Daniel,  H.,
2014.  Intestinal  microbiota  in  metabolic  diseases:  from  bacterial  community
structure  and  functions  to  species  of  pathophysiological  relevance.  Gut
Microbes  5,  544–551.

Comstock,  L.E.,  2009.  Importance  of  glycans  to  the  host-bacteroides  mutualism  in

the  mammalian  intestine.  Cell  Host  Microbe  5,  522–526.

Conway,  T.,  Cohen,  P.S.,  2015.  Commensal  and  pathogenic  Escherichia  coli
metabolism  in  the  gut.  Microbiol.  Spectr.  3,  http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/
microbiolspec.MBP-0006-2014.

Crost,  E.H.,  Pujol,  A.,  Ladire,  M.,   Dabard,  J.,  Raibaud,  P.,  Carlier,  J.P.,  Fons,  M.,   2010.
Production  of  an  antibacterial  substance  in  the  digestive  tract  involved  in
colonization-resistance  against  Clostridium  perfringens.  Anaerobe  16,  597–603.

De  Paepe,  M.,  Gaboriau-Routhiau,  V.,  Rainteau,  D.,  Rakotobe,  S.,  Taddei,  F.,

Cerf-Bensussan,  N.,  2011.  Trade-off  between  bile  resistance  and  nutritional

T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327 

325

competence  drives  Escherichia  coli  diversiﬁcation  in  the  mouse  gut.  PLoS
Genet.  7,  e1002107.

Denou,  E.,  Rezzonico,  E.,  Panoff,  J.M.,  Arigoni,  F.,  Brussow,  H.,  2009.  A  Mesocosm  of
Lactobacillus  johnsonii,  Biﬁdobacterium  longum,  and  Escherichia  coli  in  the
mouse  gut.  DNA  Cell  Biol.  28,  413–422.

Derrien,  M.,  Van  Baarlen,  P.,  Hooiveld,  G.,  Norin,  E.,  Muller,  M.,   de  Vos,  W.M.,   2011.
Modulation  of  mucosal  immune  response,  tolerance,  and  proliferation  in  mice
colonized  by  the  mucin-degrader  Akkermansia  muciniphila.  Front.  Microbiol.  2,
166.

Devkota,  S.,  Wang,  Y.,  Musch,  M.W.,   Leone,  V.,  Fehlner-Peach,  H.,  Nadimpalli,  A.,

Antonopoulos,  D.A.,  Jabri,  B.,  Chang,  E.B.,  2012.  Dietary-fat-induced  taurocholic
acid  promotes  pathobiont  expansion  and  colitis  in  Il10−/− mice.  Nature  487,
104–108.

Devlin,  A.S.,  Fischbach,  M.A.,  2015.  A  biosynthetic  pathway  for  a  prominent  class  of

microbiota-derived  bile  acids.  Nat.  Chem.  Biol.  11,  685–690.

Dewhirst,  F.E.,  Chien,  C.C.,  Paster,  B.J.,  Ericson,  R.L.,  Orcutt,  R.P.,  Schauer,  D.B.,  Fox,

J.G.,  1999.  Phylogeny  of  the  deﬁned  murine  microbiota:  altered  Schaedler  ﬂora.
Appl.  Environ.  Microbiol.  65,  3287–3292.

Dichosa,  A.E.,  Daughton,  A.R.,  Reitenga,  K.G.,  Fitzsimons,  M.S.,  Han,  C.S.,  2014.

Capturing  and  cultivating  single  bacterial  cells  in  gel  microdroplets  to  obtain
near-complete  genomes.  Nat.  Protoc.  9,  608–621.

Dubos,  R.J.,  Schaedler,  R.W.,  1960.  The  effect  of  the  intestinal  ﬂora  on  the  growth

rate  of  mice,  and  on  their  susceptibility  to  experimental  infections.  J.  Exp.  Med.
111,  407–417.

Eppig,  J.T.,  Blake,  J.A.,  Bult,  C.J.,  Kadin,  J.A.,  Richardson,  J.E.,  Mouse  Genome

Database  Group,  2015.  The  Mouse  Genome  Database  (MGD):  facilitating
mouse  as  a  model  for  human  biology  and  disease.  Nucleic  Acids  Res.  43,
D726–D736.

Eun,  C.S.,  Mishima,  Y.,  Wohlgemuth,  S.,  Liu,  B.,  Bower,  M.,   Carroll,  I.M.,  Sartor,  R.B.,
2014.  Induction  of  bacterial  antigen-speciﬁc  colitis  by  a  simpliﬁed  human
microbiota  consortium  in  gnotobiotic  interleukin-10−/− mice.  Infect.  Immun.
82,   2239–2246.

Huang,  J.Y.,  Lee,  S.M.,  Mazmanian,  S.K.,  2011.  The  human  commensal  Bacteroides

fragilis  binds  intestinal  mucin.  Anaerobe  17,  137–141.

Hugon,  P.,  Dufour,  J.C.,  Colson,  P.,  Fournier,  P.E.,  Sallah,  K.,  Raoult,  D.,  2015.  A

comprehensive  repertoire  of  prokaryotic  species  identiﬁed  in  human  beings.
Lancet  Infect.  Dis.  15,  1211–1219.

Islam,  K.B.,  Fukiya,  S.,  Hagio,  M.,   Fujii,  N.,  Ishizuka,  S.,  Ooka,  T.,  Ogura,  Y.,  Hayashi,  T.,
Yokota,  A.,  2011.  Bile  acid  is  a  host  factor  that  regulates  the  composition  of  the
cecal  microbiota  in  rats.  Gastroenterology  141,  1773–1781.

Ivanov,  I.I.,  Atarashi,  K.,  Manel,  N.,  Brodie,  E.L.,  Shima,  T.,  Karaoz,  U.,  Wei,  D.,

Goldfarb,  K.C.,  Santee,  C.A.,  Lynch,  S.V.,  Tanoue,  T.,  Imaoka,  A.,  Itoh,  K.,  Takeda,
K.,   Umesaki,  Y.,  Honda,  K.,  Littman,  D.R.,  2009.  Induction  of  intestinal  Th17  cells
by  segmented  ﬁlamentous  bacteria.  Cell  139,  485–498.

Jakobsson,  H.E.,  Rodriguez-Pineiro,  A.M.,  Schutte,  A.,  Ermund,  A.,  Boysen,  P.,

Bemark,  M.,   Sommer,  F.,  Backhed,  F.,  Hansson,  G.C.,  Johansson,  M.E.,  2015.  The
composition  of  the  gut  microbiota  shapes  the  colon  mucus  barrier.  EMBO  Rep.
16,   164–177.

Johansson,  M.E.,  Jakobsson,  H.E.,  Holmen-Larsson,  J.,  Schutte,  A.,  Ermund,  A.,

Rodriguez-Pineiro,  A.M.,  Arike,  L.,  Wising,  C.,  Svensson,  F.,  Backhed,  F.,  Hansson,
G.C.,  2015.  Normalization  of  host  intestinal  mucus  layers  requires  long-term
microbial  colonization.  Cell  Host  Microbe  18,  582–592.

Kaiser,  P.,  Diard,  M.,   Stecher,  B.,  Hardt,  W.D.,  2012.  The  streptomycin  mouse  model
for  Salmonella  diarrhea:  functional  analysis  of  the  microbiota,  the  pathogen’s
virulence  factors,  and  the  host’s  mucosal  immune  response.  Immunol.  Rev.
245,  56–83.

Kamada,  N.,  Kim,  Y.G.,  Sham,  H.P.,  Vallance,  B.A.,  Puente,  J.L.,  Martens,  E.C.,  Nunez,
G.,   2012.  Regulated  virulence  controls  the  ability  of  a  pathogen  to  compete
with  the  gut  microbiota.  Science  336,  1325–1329.

Kashyap,  P.C.,  Marcobal,  A.,  Ursell,  L.K.,  Smits,  S.A.,  Sonnenburg,  E.D.,  Costello,  E.K.,
Higginbottom,  S.K.,  Domino,  S.E.,  Holmes,  S.P.,  Relman,  D.A.,  Knight,  R.,  Gordon,
J.I.,  Sonnenburg,  J.L.,  2013.  Genetically  dictated  change  in  host  mucus
carbohydrate  landscape  exerts  a  diet-dependent  effect  on  the  gut  microbiota.
Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  110,  17059–17064.

Faith,  J.J.,  McNulty,  N.P.,  Rey,  F.E.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2011.  Predicting  a  human  gut

Kibe,  R.,  Sakamoto,  M.,   Yokota,  H.,  Ishikawa,  H.,  Aiba,  Y.,  Koga,  Y.,  Benno,  Y.,  2005.

microbiota’s  response  to  diet  in  gnotobiotic  mice.  Science  333,  101–104.
Flint,  H.J.,  Scott,  K.P.,  Louis,  P.,  Duncan,  S.H.,  2012.  The  role  of  the  gut  microbiota  in

Movement  and  ﬁxation  of  intestinal  microbiota  after  administration  of  human
feces  to  germfree  mice.  Appl.  Environ.  Microbiol.  71,  3171–3178.

nutrition  and  health.  Nat.  Rev.  Gastroenterol.  Hepatol.  9,  577–589.

Fodor,  A.A.,  DeSantis,  T.Z.,  Wylie,  K.M.,  Badger,  J.H.,  Ye,  Y.,  Hepburn,  T.,  Hu,  P.,

Sodergren,  E.,  Liolios,  K.,  Huot-Creasy,  H.,  Birren,  B.W.,  Earl,  A.M.,  2012.  The
“most  wanted”  taxa  from  the  human  microbiome  for  whole  genome
sequencing.  PLoS  ONE  7,  e41294.

Kim,  O.S.,  Cho,  Y.J.,  Lee,  K.,  Yoon,  S.H.,  Kim,  M.,   Na,  H.,  Park,  S.C.,  Jeon,  Y.S.,  Lee,  J.H.,
Yi,  H.,  Won,  S.,  Chun,  J.,  2012.  Introducing  EzTaxon-e:  a  prokaryotic  16S  rRNA
gene  sequence  database  with  phylotypes  that  represent  uncultured  species.
Int.  J.  Syst.  Evol.  Microbiol.  62,  716–721.

Klaasen,  H.L.,  Koopman,  J.P.,  Poelma,  F.G.,  Beynen,  A.C.,  1992.  Intestinal,  segmented,

Frese,  S.A.,  Benson,  A.K.,  Tannock,  G.W.,  Loach,  D.M.,  Kim,  J.,  Zhang,  M.,  Oh,  P.L.,

ﬁlamentous  bacteria.  FEMS  Microbiol.  Rev.  8,  165–180.

Heng,  N.C.,  Patil,  P.B.,  Juge,  N.,  Mackenzie,  D.A.,  Pearson,  B.M.,  Lapidus,  A.,  Dalin,
E.,   Tice,  H.,  Goltsman,  E.,  Land,  M.,   Hauser,  L.,  Ivanova,  N.,  Kyrpides,  N.C.,
Walter,  J.,  2011.  The  evolution  of  host  specialization  in  the  vertebrate  gut
symbiont  Lactobacillus  reuteri.  PLoS  Genet.  7,  e1001314.

Fukuda,  S.,  Toh,  H.,  Hase,  K.,  Oshima,  K.,  Nakanishi,  Y.,  Yoshimura,  K.,  Tobe,  T.,

Clarke,  J.M.,  Topping,  D.L.,  Suzuki,  T.,  Taylor,  T.D.,  Itoh,  K.,  Kikuchi,  J.,  Morita,  H.,
Hattori,  M.,   Ohno,  H.,  2011.  Biﬁdobacteria  can  protect  from  enteropathogenic
infection  through  production  of  acetate.  Nature  469,  543–547.

Gaboriau-Routhiau,  V.,  Rakotobe,  S.,  Lecuyer,  E.,  Mulder,  I.,  Lan,  A.,  Bridonneau,  C.,

Rochet,  V.,  Pisi,  A.,  De  Paepe,  M.,   Brandi,  G.,  Eberl,  G.,  Snel,  J.,  Kelly,  D.,
Cerf-Bensussan,  N.,  2009.  The  key  role  of  segmented  ﬁlamentous  bacteria  in  the
coordinated  maturation  of  gut  helper  T  cell  responses.  Immunity  31,  677–689.

Kozakova,  H.,  Schwarzer,  M.,  Tuckova,  L.,  Srutkova,  D.,  Czarnowska,  E.,  Rosiak,  I.,

Hudcovic,  T.,  Schabussova,  I.,  Hermanova,  P.,  Zakostelska,  Z.,
Aleksandrzak-Piekarczyk,  T.,  Koryszewska-Baginska,  A.,  Tlaskalova-Hogenova,
H.,   Cukrowska,  B.,  2015.  Colonization  of  germ-free  mice  with  a  mixture  of
three  lactobacillus  strains  enhances  the  integrity  of  gut  mucosa  and
ameliorates  allergic  sensitization.  Cell.  Mol.  Immunol.,  http://dx.doi.org/10.
1038/cmi.2015.09.

Krumbeck,  J.A.,  Marsteller,  N.L.,  Frese,  S.A.,  Peterson,  D.A.,  Ramer-Tait,  A.E.,  Hutkins,

R.W.,  Walter,  J.,  2015.  Characterization  of  the  ecological  role  of  genes
mediating  acid  resistance  in  Lactobacillus  reuteri  during  colonization  of  the
gastrointestinal  tract.  Environ.  Microbiol.,  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1462-
2920.13108.

Ganesh,  B.P.,  Klopﬂeisch,  R.,  Loh,  G.,  Blaut,  M.,   2013.  Commensal  Akkermansia

Kubinak,  J.L.,  Petersen,  C.,  Stephens,  W.Z.,  Soto,  R.,  Bake,  E.,  O’Connell,  R.M.,  Round,

muciniphila  exacerbates  gut  inﬂammation  in  Salmonella
Typhimurium-infected  gnotobiotic  mice.  PLoS  ONE  8,  e74963.

J.L.,   2015.  MyD88  signaling  in  T  cells  directs  IgA-mediated  control  of  the
microbiota  to  promote  health.  Cell  Host  Microbe  17,  153–163.

Geuking,  M.B.,  Cahenzli,  J.,  Lawson,  M.A.,  Ng,  D.C.,  Slack,  E.,  Hapfelmeier,  S.,  McCoy,

Lagier,  J.C.,  Hugon,  P.,  Khelaiﬁa,  S.,  Fournier,  P.E.,  La  Scola,  B.,  Raoult,  D.,  2015.  The

K.D.,   Macpherson,  A.J.,  2011.  Intestinal  bacterial  colonization  induces
mutualistic  regulatory  T  cell  responses.  Immunity  34,  794–806.

rebirth  of  culture  in  microbiology  through  the  example  of  culturomics  to  study
human  gut  microbiota.  Clin.  Microbiol.  Rev.  28,  237–264.

Gich,  F.,  Janys,  M.A.,  Konig,  M.,   Overmann,  J.,  2012.  Enrichment  of  previously

Laukens,  D.,  Brinkman,  B.M.,  Raes,  J.,  De  Vos,  M.,   Vandenabeele,  P.,  2015.

uncultured  bacteria  from  natural  complex  communities  by  adhesion  to  solid
surfaces.  Environ.  Microbiol.  14,  2984–2997.

Heterogeneity  of  the  gut  microbiome  in  mice:  guidelines  for  optimizing
experimental  design.  FEMS  Microbiol.  Rev.  40,  117–132.

Goodman,  A.L.,  Kallstrom,  G.,  Faith,  J.J.,  Reyes,  A.,  Moore,  A.,  Dantas,  G.,  Gordon,  J.I.,

Lawson,  P.A.,  Rainey,  F.A.,  2015.  Proposal  to  restrict  the  genus  Clostridium

2011.  Extensive  personal  human  gut  microbiota  culture  collections
characterized  and  manipulated  in  gnotobiotic  mice.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.
108,  6252–6257.

(Prazmowski)  to  Clostridium  butyricum  and  related  species.  Int.  J.  Syst.  Evol.
Microbiol.,  http://dx.doi.org/10.1099/ijsem.0.000824.

Leinonen,  R.,  Sugawara,  H.,  Shumway,  M.,   2011.  The  sequence  read  archive.  Nucl.

Grimm,   V.,  Radulovic,  K.,  Riedel,  C.U.,  2015.  Colonization  of  C57BL/6  mice  by  a

Acids  Res.  39,  D19–D21.

potential  probiotic  Biﬁdobacterium  biﬁdum  strain  under  germ-free  and  speciﬁc
pathogen-free  conditions  and  during  experimental  colitis.  PLoS  ONE  10,
e0139935.

Gulati,  A.S.,  Shanahan,  M.T.,  Arthur,  J.C.,  Grossniklaus,  E.,  von  Furstenberg,  R.J.,

Kreuk,  L.,  Henning,  S.J.,  Jobin,  C.,  Sartor,  R.B.,  2012.  Mouse  background  strain
profoundly  inﬂuences  Paneth  cell  function  and  intestinal  microbial
composition.  PLoS  ONE  7,  e32403.

Hapfelmeier,  S.,  Lawson,  M.A.,  Slack,  E.,  Kirundi,  J.K.,  Stoel,  M.,  Heikenwalder,  M.,
Cahenzli,  J.,  Velykoredko,  Y.,  Balmer,  M.L.,  Endt,  K.,  Geuking,  M.B.,  Curtiss  3rd,
R.,   McCoy,  K.D.,  Macpherson,  A.J.,  2010.  Reversible  microbial  colonization  of
germ-free  mice  reveals  the  dynamics  of  IgA  immune  responses.  Science  328,
1705–1709.

Hooper,  L.V.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2001.  Commensal  host–bacterial  relationships  in  the  gut.

Science  292,  1115–1118.

Hooper,  L.V.,  Littman,  D.R.,  Macpherson,  A.J.,  2012.  Interactions  between  the

Ley,  R.E.,  Backhed,  F.,  Turnbaugh,  P.,  Lozupone,  C.A.,  Knight,  R.D.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2005.

Obesity  alters  gut  microbial  ecology.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  102,
11070–11075.

Ley,  R.E.,  Hamady,  M.,   Lozupone,  C.,  Turnbaugh,  P.J.,  Ramey,  R.R.,  Bircher,  J.S.,
Schlegel,  M.L.,  Tucker,  T.A.,  Schrenzel,  M.D.,  Knight,  R.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2008a.
Evolution  of  mammals  and  their  gut  microbes.  Science  320,  1647–1651.

Ley,  R.E.,  Lozupone,  C.A.,  Hamady,  M.,   Knight,  R.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2008b.  Worlds  within
worlds:  evolution  of  the  vertebrate  gut  microbiota.  Nat.  Rev.  Microbiol.  6,
776–788.

Ley,  R.E.,  Peterson,  D.A.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2006.  Ecological  and  evolutionary  forces
shaping  microbial  diversity  in  the  human  intestine.  Cell  124,  837–848.

Li,  H.,  Limenitakis,  J.P.,  Fuhrer,  T.,  Geuking,  M.B.,  Lawson,  M.A.,  Wyss,  M.,   Brugiroux,
S.,   Keller,  I.,  Macpherson,  J.A.,  Rupp,  S.,  Stolp,  B.,  Stein,  J.V.,  Stecher,  B.,  Sauer,  U.,
McCoy,  K.D.,  Macpherson,  A.J.,  2015.  The  outer  mucus  layer  hosts  a  distinct
intestinal  microbial  niche.  Nat.  Commun.  6,  8292.

microbiota  and  the  immune  system.  Science  336,  1268–1273.

Lima-Filho,  J.V.,  Vieira,  L.Q.,  Arantes,  R.M.,  Nicoli,  J.R.,  2004.  Effect  of  the

Hsiao,  A.,  Ahmed,  A.M.,  Subramanian,  S.,  Grifﬁn,  N.W.,  Drewry,  L.L.,  Petri  Jr.,  W.A.,

Haque,  R.,  Ahmed,  T.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2014.  Members  of  the  human  gut  microbiota
involved  in  recovery  from  Vibrio  cholerae  infection.  Nature  515,  423–426.

Escherichia  coli  EMO   strain  on  experimental  infection  by  Salmonella  enterica
serovar  Typhimurium  in  gnotobiotic  mice.  Braz.  J.  Med.  Biol.  Res.  37,
1005–1013.

326 

T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327

Linnenbrink,  M.,   Wang,  J.,  Hardouin,  E.A.,  Kunzel,  S.,  Metzler,  D.,  Baines,  J.F.,  2013.

The  role  of  biogeography  in  shaping  diversity  of  the  intestinal  microbiota  in
house  mice.  Mol.  Ecol.  22,  1904–1916.

Louis,  P.,  Hold,  G.L.,  Flint,  H.J.,  2014.  The  gut  microbiota,  bacterial  metabolites  and

colorectal  cancer.  Nat.  Rev.  Microbiol.  12,  661–672.

Macpherson,  A.J.,  McCoy,  K.D.,  2015.  Standardised  animal  models  of  host  microbial

mutualism.  Mucosal  Immunol.  8,  476–486.

Macpherson,  A.J.,  Uhr,  T.,  2004.  Induction  of  protective  IgA  by  intestinal  dendritic

cells  carrying  commensal  bacteria.  Science  303,  1662–1665.

Mahowald,  M.A.,  Rey,  F.E.,  Seedorf,  H.,  Turnbaugh,  P.J.,  Fulton,  R.S.,  Wollam,  A.,
Shah,  N.,  Wang,  C.,  Magrini,  V.,  Wilson,  R.K.,  Cantarel,  B.L.,  Coutinho,  P.M.,
Henrissat,  B.,  Crock,  L.W.,  Russell,  A.,  Verberkmoes,  N.C.,  Hettich,  R.L.,  Gordon,
J.I.,  2009.  Characterizing  a  model  human  gut  microbiota  composed  of  members
of   its  two  dominant  bacterial  phyla.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  106,
5859–5864.

Succinivibrionaceae  implicated  in  low  methane  emissions  from  Tammar
wallabies.  Science  333,  646–648.

Qin,  J.,  Li,  R.,  Raes,  J.,  Arumugam,  M.,   Burgdorf,  K.S.,  Manichanh,  C.,  Nielsen,  T.,  Pons,
N.,  Levenez,  F.,  Yamada,  T.,  Mende,  D.R.,  Li,  J.,  Xu,  J.,  Li,  S.,  Li,  D.,  Cao,  J.,  Wang,  B.,
Liang,  H.,  Zheng,  H.,  Xie,  Y.,  Tap,  J.,  Lepage,  P.,  Bertalan,  M.,   Batto,  J.M.,  Hansen,
T.,  Le  Paslier,  D.,  Linneberg,  A.,  Nielsen,  H.B.,  Pelletier,  E.,  Renault,  P.,
Sicheritz-Ponten,  T.,  Turner,  K.,  Zhu,  H.,  Yu,  C.,  Jian,  M.,   Zhou,  Y.,  Li,  Y.,  Zhang,  X.,
Qin,  N.,  Yang,  H.,  Wang,  J.,  Brunak,  S.,  Dore,  J.,  Guarner,  F.,  Kristiansen,  K.,
Pedersen,  O.,  Parkhill,  J.,  Weissenbach,  J.,  Bork,  P.,  Ehrlich,  S.D.,  2010.  A  human
gut   microbial  gene  catalogue  established  by  metagenomic  sequencing.  Nature
464,  59–65.

Rausch,  P.,  Rehman,  A.,  Kunzel,  S.,  Hasler,  R.,  Ott,  S.J.,  Schreiber,  S.,  Rosenstiel,  P.,

Franke,  A.,  Baines,  J.F.,  2011.  Colonic  mucosa-associated  microbiota  is
inﬂuenced  by  an  interaction  of  Crohn  disease  and  FUT2  (Secretor)  genotype.
Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  108,  19030–19035.

Marcobal,  A.,  Kashyap,  P.C.,  Nelson,  T.A.,  Aronov,  P.A.,  Donia,  M.S.,  Spormann,  A.,

Rawls,  J.F.,  Mahowald,  M.A.,  Ley,  R.E.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2006.  Reciprocal  gut  microbiota

Fischbach,  M.A.,  Sonnenburg,  J.L.,  2013.  A  metabolomic  view  of  how  the  human
gut  microbiota  impacts  the  host  metabolome  using  humanized  and
gnotobiotic  mice.  ISME  J.  7,  1933–1943.

Marcobal,  A.,  Yusufaly,  T.,  Higginbottom,  S.,  Snyder,  M.,  Sonnenburg,  J.L.,  Mias,  G.I.,
2015.  Metabolome  progression  during  early  gut  microbial  colonization  of
gnotobiotic  mice.  Sci.  Rep.  5,  11589.

Martz,  S.L.,  McDonald,  J.A.,  Sun,  J.,  Zhang,  Y.G.,  Gloor,  G.B.,  Noordhof,  C.,  He,  S.M.,

Gerbaba,  T.K.,  Blennerhassett,  M.,   Hurlbut,  D.J.,  Allen-Vercoe,  E.,  Claud,  E.C.,
Petrof,  E.O.,  2015.  Administration  of  deﬁned  microbiota  is  protective  in  a
murine  Salmonella  infection  model.  Sci.  Rep.  5,  16094.

Maurice,  C.F.,  Knowles,  S.C.,  Ladau,  J.,  Pollard,  K.S.,  Fenton,  A.,  Pedersen,  A.B.,
Turnbaugh,  P.J.,  2015.  Marked  seasonal  variation  in  the  wild  mouse  gut
microbiota.  ISME  J.  9,  2423–2434.

Mazmanian,  S.K.,  2008.  Capsular  polysaccharides  of  symbiotic  bacteria  modulate

immune  responses  during  experimental  colitis.  J.  Pediatr.  Gastroenterol.  Nutr.
46   (Suppl.  1),  E11–E12.

Mazmanian,  S.K.,  Liu,  C.H.,  Tzianabos,  A.O.,  Kasper,  D.L.,  2005.  An

transplants  from  zebraﬁsh  and  mice  to  germ-free  recipients  reveal  host  habitat
selection.  Cell  127,  423–433.

Rettedal,  E.A.,  Gumpert,  H.,  Sommer,  M.O.,  2014.  Cultivation-based  multiplex

phenotyping  of  human  gut  microbiota  allows  targeted  recovery  of  previously
uncultured  bacteria.  Nat.  Commun.  5,  4714.

Rey,  F.E.,  Faith,  J.J.,  Bain,  J.,  Muehlbauer,  M.J.,  Stevens,  R.D.,  Newgard,  C.B.,  Gordon,

J.I.,  2010.  Dissecting  the  in  vivo  metabolic  potential  of  two   human  gut
acetogens.  J.  Biol.  Chem.  285,  22082–22090.

Rey,  F.E.,  Gonzalez,  M.D.,  Cheng,  J.,  Wu,   M.,   Ahern,  P.P.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2013.  Metabolic

niche  of  a  prominent  sulfate-reducing  human  gut  bacterium.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.
Sci.  U.S.A.  110,  13582–13587.

Ridaura,  V.K.,  Faith,  J.J.,  Rey,  F.E.,  Cheng,  J.,  Duncan,  A.E.,  Kau,  A.L.,  Grifﬁn,  N.W.,

Lombard,  V.,  Henrissat,  B.,  Bain,  J.R.,  Muehlbauer,  M.J.,  Ilkayeva,  O.,
Semenkovich,  C.F.,  Funai,  K.,  Hayashi,  D.K.,  Lyle,  B.J.,  Martini,  M.C.,  Ursell,  L.K.,
Clemente,  J.C.,  Van  Treuren,  W.,   Walters,  W.A.,  Knight,  R.,  Newgard,  C.B.,  Heath,
A.C.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2013.  Gut  microbiota  from  twins  discordant  for  obesity
modulate  metabolism  in  mice.  Science  341,  1241214.

immunomodulatory  molecule  of  symbiotic  bacteria  directs  maturation  of  the
host  immune  system.  Cell  122,  107–118.

Ridlon,  J.M.,  Bajaj,  J.S.,  2015.  The  human  gut  sterolbiome:  bile  acid-microbiome

endocrine  aspects  and  therapeutics.  Acta  Pharm.  Sin.,  B  5,  99–105.

Mazmanian,  S.K.,  Round,  J.L.,  Kasper,  D.L.,  2008.  A  microbial  symbiosis  factor

prevents  intestinal  inﬂammatory  disease.  Nature  453,  620–625.

McNulty,  N.P.,  Wu,   M.,   Erickson,  A.R.,  Pan,  C.,  Erickson,  B.K.,  Martens,  E.C.,  Pudlo,

N.A.,  Muegge,  B.D.,  Henrissat,  B.,  Hettich,  R.L.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2013.  Effects  of  diet
on   resource  utilization  by  a  model  human  gut  microbiota  containing
Bacteroides  cellulosilyticus  WH2,  a  symbiont  with  an  extensive  glycobiome.
PLoS  Biol.  11,  e1001637.

McNulty,  N.P.,  Yatsunenko,  T.,  Hsiao,  A.,  Faith,  J.J.,  Muegge,  B.D.,  Goodman,  A.L.,

Henrissat,  B.,  Oozeer,  R.,  Cools-Portier,  S.,  Gobert,  G.,  Chervaux,  C.,  Knights,  D.,
Lozupone,  C.A.,  Knight,  R.,  Duncan,  A.E.,  Bain,  J.R.,  Muehlbauer,  M.J.,  Newgard,
C.B.,  Heath,  A.C.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2011.  The  impact  of  a  consortium  of  fermented
milk  strains  on  the  gut  microbiome  of  gnotobiotic  mice  and  monozygotic
twins.  Sci.  Transl.  Med.  3  (106),  ra106.

Robertson,  B.R.,  O’Rourke,  J.L.,  Neilan,  B.A.,  Vandamme,  P.,  On,  S.L.,  Fox,  J.G.,  Lee,  A.,
2005.  Mucispirillum  schaedleri  gen.  nov.,  sp.  nov.,  a  spiral-shaped  bacterium
colonizing  the  mucus  layer  of  the  gastrointestinal  tract  of  laboratory  rodents.
Int.  J.  Syst.  Evol.  Microbiol.  55,  1199–1204.

Round,  J.L.,  Lee,  S.M.,  Li,  J.,  Tran,  G.,  Jabri,  B.,  Chatila,  T.A.,  Mazmanian,  S.K.,  2011.

The  Toll-like  receptor  2  pathway  establishes  colonization  by  a  commensal  of
the   human  microbiota.  Science  332,  974–977.

Salzman,  N.H.,  Hung,  K.,  Haribhai,  D.,  Chu,  H.,  Karlsson-Sjoberg,  J.,  Amir,  E.,  Teggatz,
P.,  Barman,  M.,   Hayward,  M.,   Eastwood,  D.,  Stoel,  M.,   Zhou,  Y.,  Sodergren,  E.,
Weinstock,  G.M.,  Bevins,  C.L.,  Williams,  C.B.,  Bos,  N.A.,  2010.  Enteric  defensins
are  essential  regulators  of  intestinal  microbial  ecology.  Nat.  Immunol.  11,
76–83.

Sampson,  T.R.,  Mazmanian,  S.K.,  2015.  Control  of  brain  development,  function,  and

Mestas,  J.,  Hughes,  C.C.,  2004.  Of  mice  and  not  men:  differences  between  mouse

behavior  by  the  microbiome.  Cell  Host  Microbe  17,  565–576.

and  human  immunology.  J.  Immunol.  172,  2731–2738.

Samuel,  B.S.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2006.  A  humanized  gnotobiotic  mouse  model  of

Midtvedt,  T.,  Bjorneklett,  A.,  Carlstedt-Duke,  B.,  Gustafsson,  B.E.,  Hoverstad,  T.,
Lingaas,  E.,  Norin,  K.E.,  Saxerholt,  H.,  Steinbakk,  M.,   1985.  The  inﬂuence  of
antibiotics  upon  microﬂora-associated  characteristics  in  man  and  mammals.
Prog.  Clin.  Biol.  Res.  181,  241–244.

Miquel,  S.,  Leclerc,  M.,   Martin,  R.,  Chain,  F.,  Lenoir,  M.,   Raguideau,  S.,  Hudault,  S.,

Bridonneau,  C.,  Northen,  T.,  Bowen,  B.,  Bermudez-Humaran,  L.G.,  Sokol,  H.,
Thomas,  M.,   Langella,  P.,  2015.  Identiﬁcation  of  metabolic  signatures  linked  to
anti-inﬂammatory  effects  of  Faecalibacterium  prausnitzii.  MBio  6,
e00300–e00315.

Moore,  W.E.,  Holdeman,  L.V.,  1974.  Human  fecal  ﬂora:  the  normal  ﬂora  of  20

Japanese-Hawaiians.  Appl.  Microbiol.  27,  961–979.

Naik,  S.,  Bouladoux,  N.,  Linehan,  J.L.,  Han,  S.J.,  Harrison,  O.J.,  Wilhelm,  C.,  Conlan,  S.,
Himmelfarb,  S.,  Byrd,  A.L.,  Deming,  C.,  Quinones,  M.,   Brenchley,  J.M.,  Kong,  H.H.,
Tussiwand,  R.,  Murphy,  K.M.,  Merad,  M.,   Segre,  J.A.,  Belkaid,  Y.,  2015.
Commensal-dendritic-cell  interaction  speciﬁes  a  unique  protective  skin
immune  signature.  Nature  520,  104–108.

Ng,  K.M.,  Ferreyra,  J.A.,  Higginbottom,  S.K.,  Lynch,  J.B.,  Kashyap,  P.C.,  Gopinath,  S.,
Naidu,  N.,  Choudhury,  B.,  Weimer,  B.C.,  Monack,  D.M.,  Sonnenburg,  J.L.,  2013.
Microbiota-liberated  host  sugars  facilitate  post-antibiotic  expansion  of  enteric
pathogens.  Nature  502,  96–99.

host–archaeal–bacterial  mutualism.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  103,
10011–10016.

Sayin,  S.I.,  Wahlstrom,  A.,  Felin,  J.,  Jantti,  S.,  Marschall,  H.U.,  Bamberg,  K.,  Angelin,
B.,  Hyotylainen,  T.,  Oresic,  M.,   Backhed,  F.,  2013.  Gut  microbiota  regulates  bile
acid  metabolism  by  reducing  the  levels  of  tauro-beta-muricholic  acid,  a
naturally  occurring  FXR  antagonist.  Cell  Metab.  17,  225–235.

Schaedler,  R.W.,  Dubs,  R.,  Costello,  R.,  1965.  Association  of  germfree  mice  with

bacteria  isolated  from  normal  mice.  J.  Exp.  Med.  122,  77–82.

Schnupf,  P.,  Gaboriau-Routhiau,  V.,  Gros,  M.,   Friedman,  R.,  Moya-Nilges,  M.,   Nigro,
G.,  Cerf-Bensussan,  N.,  Sansonetti,  P.J.,  2015.  Growth  and  host  interaction  of
mouse  segmented  ﬁlamentous  bacteria  in  vitro.  Nature  520,  99–103.
Schumann,  S.,  Alpert,  C.,  Engst,  W.,   Loh,  G.,  Blaut,  M.,   2012.  Dextran  sodium

sulfate-induced  inﬂammation  alters  the  expression  of  proteins  by  intestinal
Escherichia  coli  strains  in  a  gnotobiotic  mouse  model.  Appl.  Environ.  Microbiol.
78,  1513–1522.

Seedorf,  H.,  Grifﬁn,  N.W.,  Ridaura,  V.K.,  Reyes,  A.,  Cheng,  J.,  Rey,  F.E.,  Smith,  M.I.,

Simon,  G.M.,  Scheffrahn,  R.H.,  Woebken,  D.,  Spormann,  A.M.,  Van  Treuren,  W.,
Ursell,  L.K.,  Pirrung,  M.,   Robbins-Pianka,  A.,  Cantarel,  B.L.,  Lombard,  V.,
Henrissat,  B.,  Knight,  R.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2014.  Bacteria  from  diverse  habitats
colonize  and  compete  in  the  mouse  gut.  Cell  159,  253–266.

Nguyen,  T.L.,  Vieira-Silva,  S.,  Liston,  A.,  Raes,  J.,  2015.  How  informative  is  the  mouse

Seﬁk,  E.,  Geva-Zatorsky,  N.,  Oh,  S.,  Konnikova,  L.,  Zemmour,  D.,  McGuire,  A.M.,

for   human  gut  microbiota  research?  Dis.  Model  Mech.  8,  1–16.

Nuttal,  G.H.F.,  Thierfelder,  H.,  1895.  Thieresches  Leben  ohne  Bakterien  im

Verdauungskanal.  Z.  Physiol.  Chem.  21,  109–121.

Ochman,  H.,  Worobey,  M.,   Kuo,  C.H.,  Ndjango,  J.B.,  Peeters,  M.,  Hahn,  B.H.,
Hugenholtz,  P.,  2010.  Evolutionary  relationships  of  wild  hominids
recapitulated  by  gut  microbial  communities.  PLoS  Biol.  8,  e1000546.

Ocvirk,  S.,  Sava,  I.G.,  Lengfelder,  I.,  Lagkouvardos,  I.,  Steck,  N.,  Roh,  J.H.,  Tchaptchet,
S.,   Bao,  Y.,  Hansen,  J.J.,  Huebner,  J.,  Carroll,  I.M.,  Murray,  B.E.,  Sartor,  R.B.,  Haller,
D.,  2015.  Surface-associated  lipoproteins  link  Enterococcus  faecalis  virulence  to
colitogenic  activity  in  IL-10-deﬁcient  mice  independent  of  their  expression
levels.  PLoS  Pathog.  11,  e1004911.

Orcutt,  R.P.,  Gianni,  F.J.,  Judge,  R.J.,  1987.  Development  of  an  “Altered  Schaedler
Flora”  for  the  generation  of  NCI  gnotobiotic  rodents.  Microecol.  Ther.  17,  59.

Pope,  P.B.,  Smith,  W.,   Denman,  S.E.,  Tringe,  S.G.,  Barry,  K.,  Hugenholtz,  P.,
McSweeney,  C.S.,  McHardy,  A.C.,  Morrison,  M.,   2011.  Isolation  of

Burzyn,  D.,  Ortiz-Lopez,  A.,  Lobera,  M.,   Yang,  J.,  Ghosh,  S.,  Earl,  A.,  Snapper,  S.B.,
Jupp,  R.,  Kasper,  D.,  Mathis,  D.,  Benoist,  C.,  2015.  MUCOSAL  IMMUNOLOGY.
Individual  intestinal  symbionts  induce  a  distinct  population  of  RORgamma(+)
regulatory  T  cells.  Science  349,  993–997.

Sonnenburg,  J.L.,  Chen,  C.T.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2006.  Genomic  and  metabolic  studies  of

the   impact  of  probiotics  on  a  model  gut  symbiont  and  host.  PLoS  Biol.  4,  e413.

Sonnenburg,  J.L.,  Xu,  J.,  Leip,  D.D.,  Chen,  C.H.,  Westover,  B.P.,  Weatherford,  J.,

Buhler,  J.D.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2005.  Glycan  foraging  in  vivo  by  an  intestine-adapted
bacterial  symbiont.  Science  307,  1955–1959.

Staubach,  F.,  Kunzel,  S.,  Baines,  A.C.,  Yee,  A.,  McGee,  B.M.,  Backhed,  F.,  Baines,  J.F.,

Johnsen,  J.M.,  2012.  Expression  of  the  blood-group-related  glycosyltransferase
B4galnt2  inﬂuences  the  intestinal  microbiota  in  mice.  ISME  J.  6,
1345–1355.

Stecher,  B.,  Maier,  L.,  Hardt,  W.D.,  2013.  ’Blooming’  in  the  gut:  how  dysbiosis  might

contribute  to  pathogen  evolution.  Nat.  Rev.  Microbiol.  11,  277–284.

T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327 

327

Steck,  N.,  Hoffmann,  M.,  Sava,  I.G.,  Kim,  S.C.,  Hahne,  H.,  Tonkonogy,  S.L.,  Mair,  K.,

Krueger,  D.,  Pruteanu,  M.,   Shanahan,  F.,  Vogelmann,  R.,  Schemann,  M.,   Kuster,
B.,   Sartor,  R.B.,  Haller,  D.,  2011.  Enterococcus  faecalis  metalloprotease
compromises  epithelial  barrier  and  contributes  to  intestinal  inﬂammation.
Gastroenterology  141,  959–971.

Subramanian,  S.,  Huq,  S.,  Yatsunenko,  T.,  Haque,  R.,  Mahfuz,  M.,  Alam,  M.A.,

Benezra,  A.,  DeStefano,  J.,  Meier,  M.F.,  Muegge,  B.D.,  Barratt,  M.J.,  VanArendonk,
L.G.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Province,  M.A.,  Petri  Jr.,  W.A.,  Ahmed,  T.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2014.
Persistent  gut  microbiota  immaturity  in  malnourished  Bangladeshi  children.
Nature  510,  417–421.

Suhr,  M.J.,  Hallen-Adams,  H.E.,  2015.  The  human  gut  mycobiome:  pitfalls  and

Wang,  Q.,  Garrity,  G.M.,  Tiedje,  J.M.,  Cole,  J.R.,  2007.  Naive  Bayesian  classiﬁer  for
rapid  assignment  of  rRNA  sequences  into  the  new  bacterial  taxonomy.  Appl.
Environ.  Microbiol.  73,  5261–5267.

Wannemuehler,  M.J.,  Overstreet,  A.M.,  Ward,  D.V.,  Phillips,  G.J.,  2014.  Draft  genome
sequences  of  the  altered  schaedler  ﬂora,  a  deﬁned  bacterial  community  from
gnotobiotic  mice.  Genome  Announc.  2,  e00214–e00287.

Weinstock,  G.M.,  2012.  Genomic  approaches  to  studying  the  human  microbiota.

Nature  489,  250–256.

Wittmann,  A.,  Autenrieth,  I.B.,  Frick,  J.S.,  2013.  Plasmacytoid  dendritic  cells  are
crucial  in  Biﬁdobacterium  adolescentis-mediated  inhibition  of  Yersinia
enterocolitica  infection.  PLoS  ONE  8,  e71338.

potentials-a  mycologist’s  perspective.  Mycologia  107,  1057–1073.

Wlodarska,  M.,   Kostic,  A.D.,  Xavier,  R.J.,  2015.  An  integrative  view  of

Takahashi,  M.,   Taguchi,  H.,  Yamaguchi,  H.,  Osaki,  T.,  Komatsu,  A.,  Kamiya,  S.,  2004.

The  effect  of  probiotic  treatment  with  Clostridium  butyricum  on
enterohemorrhagic  Escherichia  coli  O157:H7  infection  in  mice.  FEMS  Immunol.
Med.  Microbiol.  41,  219–226.

Tannock,  G.W.,  1995.  Normal  Microﬂora.  Chapman  &  Hall,  London.
Trexler,  P.C.,  Reynolds,  L.I.,  1957.  Flexible  ﬁlm  apparatus  for  the  rearing  and  use  of

germfree  animals.  Appl.  Microbiol.  5,  406–412.

Turnbaugh,  P.J.,  Ridaura,  V.K.,  Faith,  J.J.,  Rey,  F.E.,  Knight,  R.,  Gordon,  J.I.,  2009.  The
effect  of  diet  on  the  human  gut  microbiome:  a  metagenomic  analysis  in
humanized  gnotobiotic  mice.  Sci.  Transl.  Med.  1,  6ra14.

Vartoukian,  S.R.,  Adamowska,  A.,  Lawlor,  M.,   Moazzez,  R.,  Dewhirst,  F.E.,  Wade,
W.G.,  2016.  In  vitro  cultivation  of  ‘unculturable’  oral  bacteria,  facilitated  by
community  culture  and  media  supplementation  with  siderophores.  PLoS  ONE
11,   e0146926.

Vetizou,  M.,   Pitt,  J.M.,  Daillere,  R.,  Lepage,  P.,  Waldschmitt,  N.,  Flament,  C.,

Rusakiewicz,  S.,  Routy,  B.,  Roberti,  M.P.,  Duong,  C.P.,  Poirier-Colame,  V.,  Roux,
A.,  Becharef,  S.,  Formenti,  S.,  Golden,  E.,  Cording,  S.,  Eberl,  G.,  Schlitzer,  A.,
Ginhoux,  F.,  Mani,  S.,  Yamazaki,  T.,  Jacquelot,  N.,  Enot,  D.P.,  Berard,  M.,   Nigou,  J.,
Opolon,  P.,  Eggermont,  A.,  Woerther,  P.L.,  Chachaty,  E.,  Chaput,  N.,  Robert,  C.,
Mateus,  C.,  Kroemer,  G.,  Raoult,  D.,  Boneca,  I.G.,  Carbonnel,  F.,  Chamaillard,  M.,
Zitvogel,  L.,  2015.  Anticancer  immunotherapy  by  CTLA-4  blockade  relies  on  the
gut   microbiota.  Science  350,  1079–1084.

Virgin,  H.W.,  2014.  The  virome  in  mammalian  physiology  and  disease.  Cell  157,

142–150.

Waidmann,  M.,   Bechtold,  O.,  Frick,  J.S.,  Lehr,  H.A.,  Schubert,  S.,  Dobrindt,  U.,

Loefﬂer,  J.,  Bohn,  E.,  Autenrieth,  I.B.,  2003.  Bacteroides  vulgatus  protects  against
Escherichia  coli-induced  colitis  in  gnotobiotic  interleukin-2-deﬁcient  mice.
Gastroenterology  125,  162–177.

Wang,  J.,  Kalyan,  S.,  Steck,  N.,  Turner,  L.M.,  Harr,  B.,  Kunzel,  S.,  Vallier,  M.,   Hasler,  R.,
Franke,  A.,  Oberg,  H.H.,  Ibrahim,  S.M.,  Grassl,  G.A.,  Kabelitz,  D.,  Baines,  J.F.,  2015.
Analysis  of  intestinal  microbiota  in  hybrid  house  mice  reveals  evolutionary
divergence  in  a  vertebrate  hologenome.  Nat.  Commun.  6,
6440.

microbiome-host  interactions  in  inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases.  Cell  Host
Microbe  17,  577–591.

Wos-Oxley,  M.,   Bleich,  A.,  Oxley,  A.P.,  Kahl,  S.,  Janus,  L.,  Smoczek,  A.,  Nahrstedt,  H.,
Pils,   M.,   Taudien,  S.,  Platzer,  M.,   Hedrich,  H.J.,  Medina,  E.,  Pieper,  D.,  2012.
Comparative  evaluation  of  establishing  a  human  gut  microbial  community
within  rodent  models.  Gut  Microbes  3,  234–249.

Woting,  A.,  Pfeiffer,  N.,  Loh,  G.,  Klaus,  S.,  Blaut,  M.,   2014.  Clostridium  ramosum

promotes  high-fat  diet-induced  obesity  in  gnotobiotic  mouse  models.  MBio  5,
e01514–e01530.

Wu,   M.,   McNulty,  N.P.,  Rodionov,  D.A.,  Khoroshkin,  M.S.,  Grifﬁn,  N.W.,  Cheng,  J.,

Latreille,  P.,  Kerstetter,  R.A.,  Terrapon,  N.,  Henrissat,  B.,  Osterman,  A.L.,  Gordon,
J.I.,   2015.  Genetic  determinants  of  in  vivo  ﬁtness  and  diet  responsiveness  in
multiple  human  gut  Bacteroides.  Science  350,  aac5992.

Wymore  Brand,  M.,   Wannemuehler,  M.J.,  Phillips,  G.J.,  Proctor,  A.,  Overstreet,  A.M.,
Jergens,  A.E.,  Orcutt,  R.P.,  Fox,  J.G.,  2015.  The  altered  schaedler  ﬂora:  continued
applications  of  a  deﬁned  murine  microbial  community.  ILAR  J.  56,  169–178.

Xiao,  L.,  Feng,  Q.,  Liang,  S.,  Sonne,  S.B.,  Xia,  Z.,  Qiu,  X.,  Li,  X.,  Long,  H.,  Zhang,  J.,

Zhang,  D.,  Liu,  C.,  Fang,  Z.,  Chou,  J.,  Glanville,  J.,  Hao,  Q.,  Kotowska,  D.,  Colding,
C.,  Licht,  T.R.,  Wu,   D.,  Yu,  J.,  Sung,  J.J.,  Liang,  Q.,  Li,  J.,  Jia,  H.,  Lan,  Z.,  Tremaroli,  V.,
Dworzynski,  P.,  Nielsen,  H.B.,  Backhed,  F.,  Dore,  J.,  Le  Chatelier,  E.,  Ehrlich,  S.D.,
Lin,  J.C.,  Arumugam,  M.,   Wang,  J.,  Madsen,  L.,  Kristiansen,  K.,  2015.  A  catalog  of
the   mouse  gut  metagenome.  Nat.  Biotechnol.  33,  1103–1108.

Xu,  J.,  Bjursell,  M.K.,  Himrod,  J.,  Deng,  S.,  Carmichael,  L.K.,  Chiang,  H.C.,  Hooper,  L.V.,
Gordon,  J.I.,  2003.  A  genomic  view  of  the  human-Bacteroides  thetaiotaomicron
symbiosis.  Science  299,  2074–2076.

Yang,  I.,  Eibach,  D.,  Kops,  F.,  Brenneke,  B.,  Woltemate,  S.,  Schulze,  J.,  Bleich,  A.,
Gruber,  A.D.,  Muthupalani,  S.,  Fox,  J.G.,  Josenhans,  C.,  Suerbaum,  S.,  2013.
Intestinal  microbiota  composition  of  interleukin-10  deﬁcient  C57BL/6J  mice
and  susceptibility  to  Helicobacter  hepaticus-induced  colitis.  PLoS  ONE   8,
e70783.

Yin,  Y.,  Wang,  Y.,  Zhu,  L.,  Liu,  W.,   Liao,  N.,  Jiang,  M.,   Zhu,  B.,  Yu,  H.D.,  Xiang,  C.,
Wang,  X.,  2013.  Comparative  analysis  of  the  distribution  of  segmented
ﬁlamentous  bacteria  in  humans,  mice  and  chickens.  ISME  J.  7,  615–621.

Wang,  J.,  Linnenbrink,  M.,   Kunzel,  S.,  Fernandes,  R.,  Nadeau,  M.J.,  Rosenstiel,  P.,

Zengler,  K.,  Toledo,  G.,  Rappe,  M.,  Elkins,  J.,  Mathur,  E.J.,  Short,  J.M.,  Keller,  M.,  2002.

Baines,  J.F.,  2014.  Dietary  history  contributes  to  enterotype-like  clustering  and
functional  metagenomic  content  in  the  intestinal  microbiome  of  wild  mice.
Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  111,  E2703–E2710.

Cultivating  the  uncultured.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  99,  15681–15686.
Zoetendal,  E.G.,  Vaughan,  E.E.,  de  Vos,  W.M.,   2006.  A  microbial  world  within  us.

Mol.  Microbiol.  59,  1639–1650.

