fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 2

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

INTRODUCTION

The human microbiome comprises of collective genomes of
microbiota inhabiting us, namely protozoa, archaea, eukaryotes,
viruses and predominantly bacteria that live symbiotically on and
within various sites of the human body. Examples of occupied
habitats include our oral cavity, genital organs, respiratory tract,
skin and gastrointestinal system (Lloyd-Price et al., 2016). The
human microbiota is estimated to be ∼1013–1014 microbial
cells, with around 1:1 microbial cells to human cells ratio
(Sender et al., 2016). These numbers are derived from the
total bacterial cells in colon (3.8 × 1013 bacteria), the organ
that harbors the densest number of microbes (Sender et al.,
2016). The diverse gastrointestinal microbiota is predominantly
composed of bacteria from three major phyla, namely Firmicutes,
Bacteroidetes, and Actinobacteria (Tap et al., 2009). This diverse
and complex microbiome serves as a functional expansion of
host genomes, and is estimated to harbor 50- to 100-fold
more genes, compared to the host. These extra genes have
added various types of enzymatic proteins which were non-
encoded by the host, and play a critical role in facilitating
host metabolism, thus contributing to the regulation of host
physiology (Hooper and Gordon, 2001). Until recent decades, the
properties of the human microbiome and the host–microbiota
interactions have been largely unknown due to technology
limitations especially in examining non-cultivable microbes
of interest, and lack of population-scale data depicting the
microbiota compositions and functions. However, advances in
sequencing technologies and subsequent large-scale sequence-
based microbiome projects such as the Human Microbiome

forkhead box P3; FXR,

Abbreviations: ACC-1, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; APC, adenomatous polyposis
coli; Arg1, arginase 1; ASD, autism spectrum disorder; ASF, altered Schaedler ﬂora;
ATP, adenosine triphosphate; BFT, Bacteroides fragilis enterotoxin; BMI, body
mass index; c-AMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CD, Crohn’s disease; CD14,
cluster of diﬀerentiation 14; CDI, Clostridium diﬃcile infection; chAT, choline
acetyltransferase; CLA, conjugated linoleic acid; CNS, central nervous system;
CoA, coenzyme A; CRC, colorectal cancer; CTLA-4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte
protein 4; DCA, deoxycholic acid; DNL, de novo lipogenesis; EGC, enteric glial
cell; ENS, enteric nervous system; ETBF, enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis; FAS,
fatty acid synthase; Fiaf, fasting-induced adipose factor; FMT, fecal microbiota
transplant; FOXP3,
farnesoid X receptor; GABA,
γ-aminobutyric acid; GF, germ free; GIT, gastrointestinal tract; GLP, glucagon-
like peptide; GPCR, G protein-coupled receptor; GST, glutathione S-transferase;
HDAC, histone deacetylase; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IBD, inﬂammatory
bowel disease; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; IFN-γ, interferon gamma; IgA,
immunoglobulin A; IL, interleukin; IPA, indole-3-propionic acid; LCA, lithocholic
acid; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; MET, mesenchymal epithelial transition; MHC,
major histocompatibility complex; MS, maternal separation; mTg, microbial
transglutaminase; NF-κB, nuclear factor-kappa B; NKG2D, natural-killer group 2,
member D; NLR, nod-like receptor; NO, nitric oxide; NOS, nitric oxide synthase;
OF-IN, oligofructose-enriched inulin; OmpC, Escherichia coli outer membrane
protein; PD, Parkinson’s disease; PD-L1, programmed cell death protein 1 ligand 1;
PPA, propionic acid; PRR, pattern recognition receptor; PTMP, post-translational
modiﬁcation of proteins; PXR, pregnane X receptor; RA, rheumatoid arthritis;
RNA, ribonucleic acid; RNS, reactive nitrogen species; ROS, reactive oxygen
species; SCFA, short-chain fatty acid; SFB, segmented ﬁlamentous bacteria; SLE,
systemic lupus erythematosus; SOCS3, suppressor of cytokine signaling 3; sp,
species; SPF, speciﬁc-pathogen free; TcdA, Clostridium diﬃcile toxin A; TcdB,
Clostridium diﬃcile toxin B; Tg, transglutaminase; TH, helper T-cell; TLR, toll-
like receptor; TMAO, trimethylamine N-oxide; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; Treg,
regulatory T cell; tTg, tissue transglutaminase; UC, ulcerative colitis; WGS, whole
genome sequencing; WHO, World Health Organization; Wnt, Wingless Int; ZO-1,
zonula occludens-1.

(HMP) consortium funded by The United States
Project
National Institutes of Health (NIH), as well as the MetaHIT
(Metagenomics of the Human Intestinal Tract) consortium
funded by the European Commission, have served as catalysts
in nourishing research on the human microbiome. These large-
scale endeavors both share similar missions in characterizing
the human microbiome and their roles in health and disease
states, with MetaHIT solely focusing on gut microbiome.
Several analyses have been incorporated in these meta-omics
projects including 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing to
taxonomically characterize the microbiota communities; Whole
Genome Shotgun (WGS) metagenomic sequencing of body-site
speciﬁc whole community DNA, followed by reference genome
mapping, metagenomic assembly, gene cataloging and metabolic
reconstruction, to facilitate maximal capture of organismal and
functional data of human microbiota (The Human Microbiome
Project Consortium, 2012).

Due to the inherent complexity and heterogeneity of the
human microbiome, experiments are required to counteract the
limitation of empirical methods in examining the causation or
correlation links between microbiota disequilibrium (dysbiosis)
and human diseases. Robust experimental modeling enables
systematic manipulation of variables to investigate hypotheses
deduced from “omics” studies. For this, the application of
‘humanized’ gnotobiotic animal model that harbors deﬁned
collection of sequenced microbial communities, has gained
momentum in recent years in microbiome research (Faith
et al., 2010). This allows proof-of-mechanism study to examine
the potential
(Turnbaugh et al., 2009b),
antibiotic, environmental toxicants (Stedtfeld et al., 2017) and
host genotypic variation (Ley et al., 2005) on the microbiota and
disease manifestation, due to changes in microbiota composition,
transcriptomes, proteomes or metabolomes post-induced
variations can be extracted and characterized to understand the
operation of the microbiota. Besides, ‘humanized’ gnotobiotic
mice can be used in preliminary testing of the therapeutic
eﬃcacy in treating dysbiosis-associated diseases, as they allow
monitoring of the pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic changes
in microbial communities,
thus facilitating optimization of
treatment and dosage regime (Mahe et al., 1987; Silva et al.,
1999).

impacts of diet

these eﬀorts

Undoubtedly,

shed light on the clinical
signiﬁcance of the human microbiome which is pretty much a
‘black box.’ Although the human microbiome research is still
at its preliminary stage, the ﬁndings are deemed intriguing yet
promising in terms of ﬁlling the knowledge gap in microbiome-
host relationships, and their role in disease pathogenesis, as well
as therapeutic value, which requires more in-depth investigations
to uncover this exciting yet mysterious ﬁeld of research. Below,
we review recent investigations speciﬁcally related to the bacterial
microbiome in the GIT – the largest microbial reservoir of
the human body. Gut microbiota and the microbial-synthesized
metabolites are discussed along with their roles in human
wellness and normal functioning. Further, we review several
studies related to the gut microbiome dysbiosis and its association
with speciﬁc human diseases. We introduce novel microbiome-
based therapy employed in speciﬁc disease conditions to ‘restore’

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

2

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 3

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

wellness and ameliorating dysbiosis-associated diseases. Finally,
we discuss future directions and research areas that require
further elucidation in order to better understand the human
microbiome and its relationship with the host.

THE GUT MICROBIOME AND ITS
MULTIFARIOUS FUNCTIONS

interactions

The symbiotic relationship between the gut microbiota and
the host is regulated and stabilized by a complex network
of
immune, and
that encompass metabolic,
neuroendocrine crosstalk between them. This crosstalk is
potentially mediated by microbial-synthesized metabolites
which exhibit pleiotropic eﬀects, including acting as signaling
molecules in regulating host neuro-immune-inﬂammatory axes
that could physiologically link gut with other organ systems.
The predominant functions of gut microbiota and the associated
key metabolites in governing host wellness are depicted in the
following subsections, with some other microbial metabolites
being described in Table 1.

Metabolism
Human fecal
sample analysis using 16S ribosomal RNA
and metagenomic sequencing techniques reveal signiﬁcant
enrichment in metabolism of polysaccharides, amino acids,
xenobiotics and micronutrients conferred by gut microbiota,
suggest that these indigenous microbes facilitate host energy
harvesting and metabolic eﬃciency (Gill et al., 2006). These
ﬁndings were further validated by germ-free (GF) mice
experiments where it was found that germ-free mice had
40% lower epididymal
fat and an additional 10–30% food
consumption was needed to maintain the same body mass as mice
with normal microbiota (Backhed et al., 2004). Gut microbiota is
important in fermenting unabsorbed starch and soluble dietary
ﬁber. The fermented end products exist in the form of a SCFAs.
SCFA (such as butyrate, propionate, acetate and pentanoate) act
as one of the energy substrates for the host (Salminen et al.,
1998) thereby contributing an extra 10% daily dietary energy
for utilization by the host for other metabolic processes (Payne
et al., 2012). Microbial-synthesized SCFAs contribute 70% of
ATP production in colon, with butyrate as the preferred fuel
for colonocytes (Firmansyah et al., 1989; Donohoe et al., 2011).
Butyrate-producing microbes rescued the deﬁcit mitochondrial
respiration, ATP synthesis and autophagy in colonocytes of germ-
free mice (Donohoe et al., 2011), proving the importance of
butyrate in colonic cellular respiration and energy production.
Furthermore, SCFAs which are the ligands for G protein-coupled
receptor 41 (GPR41) expressed by a subset of the gut epithelial
enteroendocrine cells, had been shown to regulate energy
homeostasis by stimulating GPR41-mediated leptin production
in mouse adipocytes, in which this multifunctional circulating
hormone, leptin exhibits pleiotropic eﬀects on a vast range of
host physiological functions such as energy metabolism, appetite,
as well as sympathetic nerve activity and immune response,
potentially giving rise to interactive host-microbe signaling and

gut-brain axis immune-inﬂammatory crosstalk (Xiong et al.,
2004; Samuel et al., 2008).

Besides SCFA, gut microbiota-synthesized micronutrients
such as vitamins exhibit beneﬁcial value for both microbial
and host metabolisms. Vitamin-K-producing gut bacteria
namely Bacteroides fragilis, Eubacterium lentum, Enterobacter
agglomerans, Serratia marcescens, and Enterococcus faecium
(Fernandez and Collins, 1987; Cooke et al., 2006) anaerobically
synthesize vitamin K2 (menaquinone) which is essential
in
decreasing vascular calciﬁcation, elevating HDL and lowering
cholesterol levels, contributing to lower risk of cardiovascular
disorders such as atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease
(Kawashima et al., 1997; Geleijnse et al., 2004). Gut microbiota
also serves as an important source of vitamins B for the host
(Salminen et al., 1998; Degnan et al., 2014). Among them,
vitamins B5 and B12, which are exclusively synthesized by
intestinal microbiota, act as coenzyme for extensive range of host
biochemical processes including production of acetylcholine and
cortisol which are required for normal functioning of the nervous
system. Deﬁciency of vitamins B5 and B12 have been linked to
several disorders such as gastrointestinal discomfort, insomnia,
neuropsychological and hematological disorders (Andres et al.,
2004; Gominak, 2016). However, the possible link between loss of
vitamin-producing gut microbiota and disease onset has not yet
been elucidated.

such as Clostridium perfringens

Gut microbiota also plays an important role in the co-
metabolism of bile acids with the host. These cholesterol
derivatives are synthesized in the liver, followed by conjugation
with taurine or glycine prior to storage in the gall bladder
and subsequent secretion into duodenum to aid digestion,
cholesterol and lipid metabolisms. In humans, 95% of bile
acids are reabsorbed at distal ileum (Staels and Fonseca, 2009).
The 5% unabsorbed primary bile acids are then bioconverted
or deconjugated to secondary bile acids
(predominantly
DCA and LCA) by bile salt hydrolases secreted by several
and
colonic microbiota
Clostridium scindens, followed by partly colonic reabsorption
and transportation back to liver for conjugation (Gopal-
Srivastava and Hylemon, 1988; Ajouz et al., 2014) and the
unabsorbed secondary bile acids are excreted by the host (Sorg
and Sonenshein, 2008). Both primary and secondary bile acids
are able to activate host nuclear FXR signaling, which in turn
regulates the bile acids production, glucose metabolism, and
potentially hepatic autophagy (Lee et al., 2014; Nie et al., 2015).
Secondary bile acids serve as a potent activator of TGR5 (a
member of the Rhodopsin-like subfamily of GPCRs) which is
widely expressed on diﬀerent tissues including in gall bladder,
liver, spleen,
intestine, and the immune cells. Such GPCR
activation will stimulate second messenger c-AMP production,
and the subsequent c-AMP-dependent downstream signaling,
inducing expressions of a multitude of genes, whereby its
physiological importance remains to be fully elucidated, pointing
toward impacts of secondary bile acid-TCR5 axis (Hylemon
et al., 2009). Secondary bile acids also possess antimicrobial
eﬀects which alter microbial cell membrane integrity, causing
spillage of intracellular contents, thus inhibiting growth of bile
acid-intolerant microbes (Nie et al., 2015). Such antimicrobial

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

3

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 4

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

properties may contribute in shaping the composition of the gut
microbiota and protecting the host from an array of infectious
pathogens.

Immunity and the Nervous System
Gut barrier which is composed of mucus layer and epithelial
junctional protein structures that
layer (containing several

TABLE 1 | Metabolites contributed by gut microbiota and their respective functions.

Metabolites

Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs):

E.g., Acetate, butyrate, propionate,
hexanoate, valerate

References

Blottière et al., 2003; Backhed et al.,
2004; Xiong et al., 2004; Samuel et al.,
2008; Tolhurst et al., 2012; De Vadder
et al., 2014

Functions
(cid:114)

Regulate host metabolic pathways via
G-protein-coupled receptor GPR41 or
GPR43 -mediated signaling:

(cid:114)

energy homeostasis; synthesis of
glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1);
increase leptin production.
(cid:114)

Improve glucose tolerance and insulin
sensitivity.
(cid:114)

Potent histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor - regulation of intestinal cell
proliferation.
(cid:114)

Intestinal gluconeogenesis, lipogenesis,
suppression of fasting-induced adipose
factor Fiaf (lipoprotein lipase inhibitor) in
intestinal epithelium.
(cid:114)

Immunomodulatory effect, activate
dendritic cells, gut immunity.
(cid:114)

IPA as powerful antioxidant, inhibitor of
amyloid-beta ﬁbril formation, and
exhibits neuroprotective and
cytoprotective effects against a variety
of oxidotoxins.
(cid:114)

IPA regulates intestinal barrier function
via the xenobiotic sensor, pregnane X
receptor (PXR), in which it reduces
intestinal inﬂammation (downregulates
enterocyte pro-inﬂammatory cytokines
TNF-α), and regulate intestinal
permeability and mucosal integrity
(upregulates junctional protein-coding
mRNAs).
(cid:114)

Indoxyl sulfate as uremic toxin that
accumulates in the blood of patients
with impaired excretion system.
(cid:114)

Activate host nuclear receptors and cell
signaling pathways: regulation of bile
acid, cholesterol, glucose, lipid, and
energy metabolism.
(cid:114)
(cid:114)

Exhibit antimicrobial effects.

Modulate lipid metabolism and glucose
homeostasis.
(cid:114)

Contribute to non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease and cardiovascular disease.
(cid:114)

Antimicrobial effects: repress
pathogenic microbes, inﬂuence gut
microbiota composition, maintenance
of intestinal health.
(cid:114)
Protective effect against oxidative
stress.
(cid:114)
(cid:114)
(cid:114)

Platelet aggregation inhibition effect.

Estrogen-modulating effect.

Urolithin exhibits anti-inﬂammatory and
cancer chemopreventive effects.

Indole derivatives:

E.g., Indole, indoxyl sulfate,
indole-3-propionic acid (IPA)

Bile acid metabolites: E.g., Deoxycholic
acid (DCA), lithocholic acid (LCA)

Choline metabolites:

E.g., Choline, trimethylamine N-oxide
(TMAO) and betaine

Phenolic derivatives:

E.g., 4-OH phenylacetic acid, equol,
urolithins, enterolactone, enterodiol,
8-prenylnaringenin,
2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)acetic acid,
3-(4-hydroxyphenyl)propionic acid,
5-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)valeric acid

Bendheim et al., 2002; Deguchi et al.,
2002; Wikoff et al., 2009; Venkatesh
et al., 2014

Inagaki et al., 2006; Hylemon et al.,
2009

Dumas et al., 2006; Wang Z. et al.,
2011

Larrosa et al., 2006, 2010; Lee H.C.
et al., 2006; Selma et al., 2009

(Continued)

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

4

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 5

Kho and Lal

TABLE 1 | Continued

Metabolites

Vitamins:

E.g., Thiamine (B1),
riboﬂavin (B2),
niacin (B3), pyridoxine (B6), pantothenic
acid (B5), biotin (B7), folate (B11–B9),
cobalamin (B12), and menaquinone (K2)

Polyamines:

putrescine,

spermidine,

and

E.g.,
spermine

Functions
(cid:114)

Energy production,
formation, as enzymatic cofactor
diverse biochemical reactions.
(cid:114)

red blood cell
for

DNA replication, repair and methylation,
regulating cell proliferation.

(cid:114)

(cid:114)

Production of nucleotides, vitamins and
amino acids.
(cid:114)
(cid:114)

Enhance immune functioning.

Sustain
high
Intestinal epithelial cells.

proliferation

rate

of

Dysregulated polyamine metabolism
possibly
cancer
enhances
development.
(cid:114)

Enhance intestinal barrier integrity and
function via stimulating synthesis of
intercellular junction proteins
(cid:114)

[occludin, zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1),
E-cadherin].
(cid:114)

Enhance maturation of
systemic adaptive immune system.
(cid:114)

intestinal and

Spermine inhibits pro-inﬂammatory M1
macrophage activation.

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

References

LeBlanc et al., 2011; Nicholson et al.,
2012; Forster et al., 2017; Lerner et al.,
2017b

Guo et al., 2003, 2005; Perez-Cano
et al., 2010; Johnson et al., 2015;
Rooks and Garrett, 2016

regulate barrier integrity and paracellular permeability), serves
as the interface between the outside world and host internal
environment. Disrupted gut barrier function will increase gut
permeability to commensal microbes, microbial derived products
(such as metabolites, virulence factors) as well as other luminal
components, contributing to aberrant immune-inﬂammatory
response such as
inﬂammation, allergy, and autoimmune
disorder mediated by molecular mimicry and dysregulated T-cell
response (Barnaba and Sinigaglia, 1997). Such physical and
immunological barrier’s function is cross-regulated by host-
gut microbiota interactions. The regulation of gastrointestinal
T-lymphocytes balance [regulatory T cell/T helper type 17
(Treg/TH17) ratio], which is crucial in maintaining intestinal
homeostasis, discriminating between pathogens and commensal
microbes via organizing “immune tolerance-productive immune
response” status,
is found to be involving the role of gut
microbiota. Several commensal microbes such as Bacteroides
fragilis, Biﬁdobacterium infantis, and Firmicutes are capable in
inducing expansion of Treg cells such as FOXP3 expressing
Treg and anti-inﬂammatory IL-10-producing Treg lymphocytes,
which are crucial
inﬂammation
induced by aberrant eﬀector T cells, hence fortifying gut barrier
function (Paust et al., 2004; El Aidy et al., 2012; Lawley and
Walker, 2013). Suppression of inﬂammatory response by Treg
cells also play a critical role in inducing host tolerance in
non-host cells, possibly enabling gut microbiota to construct
their niches in host without being attacked by host immunity
under normal circumstances. Furthermore, several microbiota-
derived metabolites such as SCFAs had been shown to confer
protection to the gastrointestinal barrier integrity against the

in suppressing pathological

disruptive eﬀects of proinﬂammatory cytokines resulted by
aberrant immune-inﬂammatory axis (Peng et al., 2007; Chen
et al., 2017), whereby the mechanism remains unclear. On the
other hand, commensal SFB was shown to induce intestinal
TH17 cells and production of pro-inﬂammatory IL-17 and IL-
22, enhancing antimicrobial defense and mucosal
immunity
in against of
intestinal pathogen Citrobacter rodentium in
gnotobiotic mice model (Ivanov et al., 2009). Besides, according
to Atarashi et al. (2008), ATP which can be contributed
by gut microbiota,
is capable to activate diﬀerentiation of
lamina propria cells (CD70 and CD11c) into TH17. In short,
tight regulation of Treg/TH17 balance by healthy host-gut
microbiota interactions are critical to prevent aberrant immune-
inﬂammatory response.

Participation of gut microbiota in host immunity development
and immune response regulation at both local and systemic levels
had been demonstrated, whereby reversal of the diﬀerentiation-
suppressed states of myeloid and lymphoid progenitor cells
in GF mice was observed after colonization with normal
microbiota,
indicating gut microbiota facilitates maturation
of haematopoiesis (innate immunity) and lymphocytopoiesis
(adaptive immunity) (Khosravi et al., 2014). Intriguingly, a recent
study by Erny et al. (2015) had revealed a novel function
of host microbiota and their SCFAs in regulating maturation
and functionality of microglia, the tissue macrophage of CNS.
Colonization of GF mice with complex gut microbiota had shown
partial reversal in the initial immature microglia phenotype in
GF mice. Moreover, mice model with normal microbiota but
deﬁcit SCFAs receptor had mimicked the defective feature of
microglia observed in GF mice, thus, indicating an important role

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

5

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 6

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

of microbial-synthesized SCFAs in microglia homeostasis which
is crucial in CNS health maintenance (Nishioku et al., 2010).

hence indicating potential regulatory eﬀect of butyrate in ENS
and gut motility.

On the other hand, the emerging modulatory role of gut
microbiota in the ENS had been documented in various studies.
The ENS is crucial for life and is capable in autonomously
the GIT, and
regulating the physiology and function of
bidirectionally communicate with the CNS via vagal pathways,
forming the “gut-brain axis.” The major component of ENS
is the EGC which resembles astrocyte in the CNS. EGCs
form the enteric glial network that critically regulates a variety
of GI functions including exocrine/endocrine secretions, gut
motility, blood ﬂow, and immune-inﬂammatory reactions, via
a complex repertoire of calcium-dependent signaling (Ochoa-
Cortes et al., 2015). Dysfunctions in ENS and EGC have
been implicated in various gastrointestinal disorders (such
as IBD, IBS, postoperative ileus), motility disorder (such as
constipation), neurodegenerative disorder (such as PD) and
infection-induced gut inﬂammation. Given the close proximity
of gut microbiota and the ENS that located throughout the
GIT,
it is not surprised that gut microbiota can aﬀect and
modulate the development and function of ENS. In a study
by Collins et al. (2014), region-speciﬁc signiﬁcant reduction
of myenteric nerve ﬁber density was observed in jejunum
and ileum, but not duodenum of early postnatal GF mice
compared to the SPF mice and ASF colonized mice. In addition,
notably decrease in gut motility of GF mice compared with
SPF and ASF counterparts was observed as well, reﬂecting the
importance of gut microbiota in postnatal development of ENS
in mid-to-distal small intestine, however, the reason underlies
the region-speciﬁc myenteric ganglia reduction remains unclear.
Another study by Kabouridis et al. (2015) had demonstrated
marked reduction in mean number and density of mucosal
EGCs in 8-week old GF mice compared to the conventionally-
raised (CONV-R) counterparts, indicating the requirement of
gut microbiota in normal development of mucosal enteric glial
network. The same study also showed that gut microbiota-
dependent EGC normal development does not restricted to
critical early postnatal period as conventionalization of 4-
week old GF mice demonstrated restoration of enteric glial
network.

Toll like receptors (TLRs) from the microorganism-sensing
PRR family serve a critical role in maintaining gut microbiota-
host symbiotic relationship and intestinal homeostasis (Rakoﬀ-
Nahoum et al., 2004). Expression of TLR4 that recognizes the LPS
of Gram-negative microbes, can be found on intestinal neurons
and glial cells, possibly conferring ENS the ability to react straight
to the stimulus derived from gut microbiota. The observation of
decreased gut motility and lesser nNOS (neuronal NO synthase)
neurons had been demonstrated in GF and antibiotic-treated
mice, whereby such deﬁcits are reproduced in TLR4-knockout
mice as well as TLR signal transducer MyD88-knockout mice
(Anitha et al., 2012), suggesting TLRs signaling might be the
mediator between intestinal microbiota and ENS development.
Furthermore, Soret et al. (2010) had reported a noteworthy
elevation in ChAT but not nNOS-immunoreactive neuron, as
well as increased cholinergic-mediated colonic circular muscle
contractile reaction, induced by intracecal perfusion of butyrate,

Colonization Resistance
Another important role of human microbiota is colonization
resistance where indigenous microbiota confers protection
to host against colonization of pathogenic invader and
prevention against overgrowth of pathogenic microbiota
members
(pathobionts). Although the molecular basis of
colonization resistance remains to be elucidated, the postulated
mechanisms of actions can be classiﬁed into (1) direct interaction
between human microbiota and pathogens in competing for
shared niches and nutrients, and (2) exploitation or enhancement
of host defense machinery by human microbiota to suppress
pathogen (refer to Table 2).

Dominant non-pathogenic gut microbiota members play a
central role in occupying the niche and suppressing the growth
and colonization of pathogens. However, during gut microbiome
perturbation, decrease in dominant microbiota members reduces
the colonization resistance capacity, allowing opportunistic
pathogenic strains to invade or colonize the empty niches, leading
to occurrence of infection. C. diﬃcile is a classic example of
pathobiont which we have discussed below.

GUT MICROBIOME AND DISEASES

factors

External
(such as antibiotic consumption, dietary
component, psychological and physical stress) and host factors
can induce dysbiosis in gut microbiome. Dysbiosis is likely to
impair the normal functioning of gut microbiota in maintaining
host wellness, and potentially induce selective-enumeration
of certain microbiota member including pathobionts, leading
to dysregulated production of microbial-derived products or
metabolites which might be harmful to the host, causing diverse
range of diseases on local, systemic or remote organ (refer to
Table 3), with some of the notable diseases, along with their
respective microbiome-based therapy being discussed as below.

Clostridium difﬁcile Infection (CDI)
Clostridium diﬃcile is a Gram-positive toxin- and spore-
producing anaerobe. It is also one of the Firmicutes members
in normal gut microbiota. Catalytic activity of C. diﬃcile
toxins A (TcdA) and B (TcdB) damages cytoskeleton and
colonic epithelial barrier integrity, thereby inducing aberrant
inﬂammatory response and cell death (Genth et al., 2006; Pruitt
et al., 2012). C. diﬃcile infection (CDI)-associated symptoms
include diarrhea, pseudo-membranous colitis, sepsis and death
in severe cases (Bartlett, 1982). In America, around 453,000
incidences of CDI with 453,000 mortality cases were observed
in 2011 alone (Lessa et al., 2015). Intriguingly, antibiotic
administration was found to be the major risk factor for CDI
(Pear et al., 1994). Around 5–35% antibiotic-treated individuals
developed diarrhea as a common side eﬀect. Association of
C. diﬃcile with antibiotic-associated diarrhea is the most
frequent, which accounts for 10–20% of
incidences,
compared to other pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus

total

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

6

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 7

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

and Salmonella species (Song et al., 2008). It was observed
that greater incidence of diarrhea was correlated with uptake
of antibiotics with broad-spectrum antibacterial eﬀect (Bartlett,
2002). Also, C. diﬃcile acquisition of resistant genes toward broad
spectrum clindamycin, erythromycin, chloramphenicol, and
linezolid mediated by multiple horizontal gene transfer modes
(potentially via mobilizable transposon, phage transduction,
conjugative plasmids) within C. diﬃcile strains and possibly
among commensal microbes had been reported (Johanesen et al.,
2015). A cohort study by Pépin et al. (2005) discovered that
broad-spectrum ﬂuoroquinolone appeared to be the most potent
risk contributor to C. diﬃcile-associated diarrhea compared to
other antibiotics. Precise mechanism of this antibiotic-associated
diarrhea remains unknown, however, its noteworthy correlation
with CDI inspires research on the relationship between gut

microbiome and its pathogenic member – C. diﬃcile in healthy
non-disease state.

Currently it is postulated that dominant gut microbiota
species confer protection to the host by employing colonization
resistance mechanisms against overgrowth of C. diﬃcile in
normal microbiome. One of the proposed mechanisms is via
the bio-conversion of primary bile acid to secondary bile acids.
Primary bile acids (cholate derivatives) serves as germinant for
C. diﬃcile spores, whereas secondary bile acids (deoxycholate)
inhibits vegetative growth of C. diﬃcile (Sorg and Sonenshein,
2008). Antibiotic administration perturbs the gut microbial
communities and reduces their diversity, especially secondary
bile acids-synthesizing dominant microbes such as C. scindens
(Antonopoulos et al., 2009). As a result, there is a signiﬁcant
reduction in microbial bioconversion of primary bile acids into

TABLE 2 | Colonization resistance mechanisms employed by gut microbiota.

Colonization resistance categories

Reference

Direct interaction of gut microbiota with
pathogenic invader or pathobiont

Cherrington et al., 1991; Britton and
Young, 2012; Kamada et al., 2013;
McNally and Brown, 2015

pathogens

Potential mechanisms involved in
resisting colonization of pathogens
(cid:114)

Niche exclusion: consumption on same
limited resources to eventually out-
compete and starve the competing
pathogen.
(cid:114)

Alter ambient oxygen tension: suppress
certain microbial virulence and survival
(cid:114)

Fermentation products (e.g., SCFAs):
downregulate
virulence
factor; modulating intestinal pH to
selectively inhibit microbial growth and
promote growth of other microbes.
(cid:114)

co-metabolite

(e.g.,
Microbiota-host
secondary bile acids): antimicrobial
property
(cid:114)

Antibiotic production: selective killing
of microbes, modify microbiota
composition
(cid:114)

Antibiotic detoxiﬁcation (e.g., Beta-
lactamase, efﬂux pump): microbial self-
defense mechanism, removal of toxic
molecules.
(cid:114)

Antimicrobial or toxin production (e.g.,
Bacteriocin):
induce speciﬁc growth
inhibition on members of the same or
similar species.
(cid:114)

Gut microbiota interacts with local
pattern recognition receptors (PRRs)
such as toll-like receptors (TLRs) and
signaling
nod-like receptors
(NLRs)
to facilitate maintenance of
intestinal
immunity homeostasis.
(cid:114)

host
production
Stimulate
antimicrobial peptides (e.g., Defensins).
(cid:114)

Induce secretion of
immunoglobulin
A (IgA), pro-inﬂammatory cytokines:
recruitment of immune cells to eradicate
pathogens.
(cid:114)

Induce activation of T helper type 17
(TH17) cells without intestinal pathology,
enhancing resistance toward intestinal
pathogen.

of

Gut microbiota-mediated stimulation
enhancement of host defense
or
mechanisms

Ivanov et al., 2009; Lawley and Walker,
2013; Yiu et al., 2017

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

7

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 8

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

antimicrobial secondary bile acids, leading to reduced inhibition
of C. diﬃcile vegetative growth, allowing C diﬃcile outgrowth and
colonization of the empty niches, leading to higher susceptibility
of the host toward CDI (Samuel et al., 1973; Theriot et al.,
2014), as illustrated in Figure 1. The increased toxin secretion
by greater amount of vegetative C. diﬃcile exerts greater damage
on intestinal barrier, stimulating severe inﬂammatory response
and causing impairment in intestinal ion absorption that leads to
diarrhea.

Improved understanding on antibiotic-induced microbiome
dysbiosis in pathogenesis of CDI and its recurrence has given
rise to development of new promising therapeutic approach
that
involves restoration of gut microbiota, such as FMT.
This therapy has successfully restored gut homeostasis via
re-introduction of gut microbiota from healthy donor feces.
Patients received FMT showed long-lasting elevation of fecal
microbial diversity and a high recovery rate (90%) compared
to vancomycin (narrow-spectrum antibiotic) therapy (recovery
rate = 60%) (van Nood et al., 2013). Besides, elevation in gut
Bacteroidetes and Clostridium cluster IV and XIVa (Firmicutes),
and reduction in Proteobacteria were observed post-FMT (van
Nood et al., 2013),
indicating the importance of dominant
microbes such as Bacteroidetes and non-pathogenic Clostridia
member in suppressing C. diﬃcile outgrowth. Similar study by
Konturek et al. (2016) also had demonstrated a high healing
rate (94%) of CDI post FMT treatment, with no recurrent
CDI observed across 16 months follow-up. Besides, marked
reduction of proinﬂammatory cytokines (such as TNF-α, IL-
1β, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-12), signiﬁcant elevation in plasma level
of human antimicrobial peptide LL-37, along with increase in
beneﬁcial bacteria (such as Lactobacillaceae, Ruminococcaceae,
Desulfovibrionaceae, Sutterellaceae, and Porphyromonadaceae)
were observed in successfully treated patients post FMT.
Although the exact beneﬁcial
strains and the underlying
mechanisms of FMT in conferring high cure rate of CDI have not
yet been clariﬁed, these studies undoubtedly demonstrate a strong
association between gut microbiome and development of CDI,
and shed a light on the potential widespread use of microbiota
displacement therapy in targeting CDI.

IBD are CD and UC (Lennard-Jones, 1989).

Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease (IBD)
Another example of gut microbiome-associated disease is IBD.
IBD is a group of multifactorial,
idiopathic, persistent and
recurring gastrointestinal inﬂammations. Two common forms
In CD,
of
inﬂammation can occur anywhere along the whole GIT, whereas
UC is only restricted to the large intestine. Both forms are
associated with relapsing diarrhea, fever and abdominal pain.
The occurrence of IBD is rising at alarming rate worldwide,
estimating 1.4 million and 2.2 million individuals in America
and Europe, respectively (Loftus, 2004). IBD generally involves
host factors combined with environmental factors (Franceschi
et al., 1987; Gent et al., 1994; Hugot et al., 2001). Although
our understanding on the mechanism of pathogenesis for this
disease is still lacking, crosstalk between gut microbiota and
host factors show great potential in contributing to the disease
development, as demonstrated in Figure 2. The inappropriate

host immune response against gastrointestinal microbiota in
genetically predisposed individual is speculated to be the main
culprit in causing severe inﬂammation.

One of

the possible etiologies for IBD is due to the
hyper-responsiveness of T-lymphocyte toward non-pathogenic
antigens presented on gut microbiota. Several studies have
observed the developments of antibodies against commensal
microbial antigens and autoantigens such as anti-Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, anti-OmpC, perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic
antibody and anti-Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens-associated sequence
12 (Duchmann et al., 1999; Landers et al., 2002). Also, it has
been reported that each of these antibodies response patterns
highly correlates with distinctive clinical characteristics, disease
onset and severity, suggesting loss of diﬀerent microbiota species
that would aﬀect the gut barrier function and gut immunity,
results in diﬀerent degree of gut inﬂammation (Vasiliauskas
et al., 2000). In short, selective loss of tolerance toward gut
microbiota in IBD patient with aberrant immune response leads
to dysbiosis and loss of microbiota that might be responsible in
maintaining the gut mucus barrier integrity. Impaired barrier
function subsequently increases the exposure between gut
microbiota and epithelial cells, causing further stimulation of
local immunity, contributing to severe gut inﬂammation. All
the studies mentioned above clearly suggest that dysbiosis in
gastrointestinal microbiome might be a secondary consequence
of gastrointestinal inﬂammation.

Conversely, Nagao-Kitamoto et al. (2016) suggested that
gut dysbiosis potentially contributes to IBD pathogenesis. In
this study, elevated pro-inﬂammatory gene expression was
observed in GF mice colonized by gut microbiota isolated
from IBD patients. Colitis-prone genetically predisposed GF
mice colonized by IBD-associated-microbiota developed severe
colitis compared to those that were colonized by healthy
human microbiota. Together these ﬁndings strongly indicate
bidirectional relationship between such disease and gut dysbiosis,
in which dysbiosis potentially contributes to the onset of
IBD and also serves as a secondary consequence of gut
inﬂammation. Example of
the dysbiotic features that are
commonly observed in IBD patients is the reduction in gut
Firmicutes such as Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and Roseburia
sp. (Sokol et al., 2008; Willing et al., 2010; Machiels et al.,
2014). These bacteria play an important anti-inﬂammatory role
in reducing pro-inﬂammatory cytokines (IL-12, IFN-γ) and
increasing anti-inﬂammatory IL-10 (Sokol et al., 2008). Besides,
Firmicutes is important producer of butyrate, the primary energy
substrates for colonocytes. Therefore, reduction in Firmicutes
could elicit or heighten local inﬂammation by decreasing anti-
inﬂammatory cytokine, an important regulator of mucosal
immunity, and/or by SCFA-deﬁciency-induced impairment in
colonic barrier function (Peng et al., 2007; Machiels et al.,
2014). As such, it may be interesting to explore the therapeutic
use of probiotic F. prausnitzii
in managing IBD. Another
dysbiotic feature observed in IBD patients is the elevation of
virulent gut microbes such as Enterobacteriaceae species and
Bacteroides fragilis with both having high endotoxic LPS in their
outer membranes (Ruseler-van Embden and Both-Patoir, 1983;
Darfeuille-Michaud et al., 1998). High endotoxic LPS expressed

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

8

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 9

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

FIGURE 1 | Secondary bile acids synthesized by members of gut microbiota (such as C. scindens) inhibit outgrowth of C. difﬁcile, whilst broad spectrum
antibiotic-induced dysbiosis favors C. difﬁcile growth.

FIGURE 2 | Proposed complex interactive relationships among gut microbiome, host factors and environmental factors in IBD pathogenesis.

by microbiota has shown to induce gut inﬂammation and colitis
development in mice, possibly via suppression of regulatory
T-lymphocyte and/or activation of eﬀector helper-T (TH-1/TH-
17) through host TLR4 signaling pathway (Gronbach et al., 2014).
Inversely, colonization of GF mice with low endotoxic microbiota
prevented experimentally induced colitis (Gronbach et al., 2014),
indicating that an increase in gut microbes with high endotoxic

LPS and decrease in microbes with low endotoxic LPS in gut
microbiome may lead to pathogenesis of IBD.

Another

suggestion regarding the IBD-gut microbiome
link is the initial impairment in gut mucus barrier function
(either due to dysbiosis or other factors), resulting in elevation
of mucus-eating (mucolytic) gut microbial species, which in
turn aggravates the barrier function and stimulates severe

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

9

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 10

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

layer and
inﬂammatory response. Gastrointestinal mucus
antimicrobial peptides (such as human defensins) secreted
from epithelium work together as a barrier in preventing direct
contact of luminal gut microbiota with gastrointestinal epithelial
cells and inhibit aberrant inﬂammation (Johansson et al., 2008;
Salzman et al., 2010). Colon biopsy samples of patients with
UC showed reduced mucus layer, defective epithelium and
deep microbe- and leukocyte-inﬁltration in colon mucosa
(Swidsinski et al., 2007). Moreover, reduction in antimicrobial
peptides such as Paneth cells alpha-defensins in patients
with ileal CD was reported (Wehkamp et al., 2005). These
ﬁndings propose that the impaired host antimicrobial defense
in mucus barrier reduces the initial suppression of certain
commensal microbiota such as mucolytic bacteria. This is further
supported by Png et al. (2010) where they observed a signiﬁcant
elevation of mucolytic Ruminococcus sp. in gut microbiome
of IBDs patients. Decrease in microbial growth inhibition by
human defensins could enable outgrowth of mucolytic species,
resulting in increased mucolytic species that feast on the mucus
leading to deeper penetration of the inner mucosa
glycans,
layer and microbial
inﬂammation
inﬁltration, consequently,
ensues.

such as antibodies

Since IBD involves heightened host inﬂammatory response,
current therapeutic approaches generally target the aberrant
intestinal mucosa.
pro-inﬂammatory immune response at
Anti-inﬂammation therapies
targeting
proinﬂammatory cytokines (anti-TNF-alpha, anti-IL12, anti-
IL23) and employing α4β7-integrin antagonist
to inhibit
traﬃcking of T-lymphocytes to gut tissue (Feagan et al., 2013;
Christensen et al., 2015). However, IBD tends to recur in
long-term, and chronic treatment with immuno-suppressive
agents will develop neurotoxic side eﬀects (Hyde et al., 1998;
Croft et al., 2013). Therefore, development of a safer and more
eﬀective novel treatment is in great need. Given the association of
IBD patients with decreased anti-inﬂammatory cytokines IL-10,
administration of genetically modiﬁed probiotic (beneﬁcial
microorganism) such as Lactococcus lactis to express IL-10 had
demonstrated a signiﬁcant remission of disease activity in CD
patients during trial (Braat et al., 2006). In this study, 80% CD
patients demonstrated clinical improvements, with 50% showing
complete remission, and no severe side eﬀect was observed, thus,
indicating a promising and safer maintenance treatment strategy
for chronic intestinal disease, as compared to sole administration
of inﬂammatory cytokines. However, 40% patients developed
CD relapse upon discontinuation of such therapy, indicating
the need of long-term prescription of this medication, which in
turn will impact its economic viability. Besides, administration
of prebiotics (fermentable polysaccharides) to stimulate growth
and metabolic activity of beneﬁcial protective gut microbes
such as butyrate-synthesizing bacteria might be an attractive
concept to treat gastrointestinal inﬂammation in IBD (Joossens
et al., 2012; De Preter et al., 2013). Positive outcome had been
reported in a randomized controlled trial by De Preter et al.
(2013), whereby around 40–50% of CD patients with mild to
moderately active disease achieved remission post treatment
with prebiotic OF-IN. OF-IN intake induced a signiﬁcant
reduction in mucolytic Ruminococcus gnavus and a marked

elevation of beneﬁcial Biﬁdobacterium longum, which the latter
was strongly correlated with the clinical improvement in CD
disease activity (Joossens et al., 2012). This may due to the
anti-oxidant and anti-inﬂammatory eﬀects of B.
longum in
neutralizing reactive oxygen/nitrogen species (ROS and RNS) at
site of inﬂammation, reducing gastrointestinal discomfort and
tissue injury. Despite these exciting novel approaches in treating
or managing IBD, the elusive etiology of IBD in each patient
renders individual-speciﬁc variation in therapeutic response,
posing a great challenge in designing a curative treatment that is
eﬀective to all.

Celiac Disease
Furthermore, evidence has pointed to dysbiosis as the possible
risk factor of autoimmune disorders, such as celiac disease.
Other examples of gut microbiome-associated autoimmune
disorders such as Type 1 diabetes, SLE and RA are depicted
in Table 3. Celiac disease is a multifactorial chronic immune-
mediated disorder in small intestine characterized by permanent
intolerance to dietary gluten (such as gliadin peptides) and
prolamines in genetically predisposed individuals expressing
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DQ2 and/or HLA-DQ8 (Sanz
the most
et al., 2011). Celiac disease serves as one of
prevalent lifelong disease in Europe, aﬀecting 1% of the general
population of all ages (Mustalahti et al., 2010), contributing
to absolute mortality rate of 10.4 per 1000 person-years in
celiac disease (Ludvigsson et al., 2009). In celiac patients,
gluten triggers the activation of adaptive immune response
in mucosa,
inducing TH1 and TH17 mediated production
of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines [for example IL-21, interferon
(IFN)-gamma, TNF-alpha]; as well as innate immune response
through stimulation of IL-15 synthesis, consequently leading
to NKG2D-mediated enterocyte killing (Stepniak and Koning,
2006). Gliadin-mediated zonulin (a type of
junction
protein) signaling activation also had been reported, whereby
it causes cytoskeleton rearrangement, reduced occludin – ZO-
1 protein–protein interaction and increased gut permeability,
allowing traﬃcking of luminal antigens to the submucosa (Drago
et al., 2006). The etiology of celiac disease remains to be fully
elucidated, with several factors including genetic predisposition,
immunological factors (mucosal IgA), and environmental factors
including gluten consumption, breast-feeding duration as well
as gut infections (for example rotavirus infection), have been
postulated to serve a concerted eﬀort
in contributing the
(Akobeng et al.,
risk and timing of celiac disease onset
2006; Mulder and Mulder-Bos, 2006; Stene et al., 2006).
These factors also play a critical role in shaping and altering
gut microbiota composition, therefore potentially modulating
gut microbiota roles in gut barrier function and immunity
development.

tight

Gut dysbiosis has been largely reported in celiac disease
patients,
in which the active phase of celiac disease is
characterized by a remarkable decrease in Gram-positive
bacteria, whereby this bacterial population is partly restored
in patients that receive gluten-free diet, suggesting the initial
reduction of the recovered species might be the secondary
consequences of the disease. Besides, inconsistent observation

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

10

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 11

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

TABLE 3 | Gut microbiome-associated human diseases and their respective dysbiotic features.

Disease categories

Speciﬁc diseases

Reference

Immune-mediated/autoimmune
diseases

inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD)

Sokol et al., 2008; Png et al., 2010;
Willing et al., 2010; Machiels et al., 2014

Associated dysbiotic features
(cid:114)

virulent gut microbes
species,
and mucolytic

fragilis)

in

Increase
(Enterobacteriaceae
Bacteroides
Ruminococcus sp.
(cid:114)

in

Decrease
butyrate-producing
Firmicutes (such as Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii, Roseburia hominis)
(cid:114)
(cid:114)

Increase in Escherichia coli

Decrease in Clostridium leptum group of
bacteria and Biﬁdobacterium.
(cid:114)
(cid:114)

Decrease in bile acid biotransformation

in

Bacteroides–Prevotella

Increase
group
(cid:114)
(cid:114)

Decrease in Biﬁdobacterium

Varying observation (decrease or no
change)
in Clostridium histolyticum,
C. lituseburense, and Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii
(cid:114)

Alteration in SCFAs composition, but
overall increase in total SCFA
(cid:114)

Blautia
bacteria

sp.
such

and
as

Increase
in
Gram-negative
Proteobacteria.
(cid:114)

Decrease in gut microbiota diversity,
Odoribacter sp., Alistipes sp.
(cid:114)
(cid:114)
Increase in Bacteroidetes
(cid:114)

Increase in serum endotoxin

Decrease in Actinobacteria, Firmicutes,
and Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio
(cid:114)

in Prevotella
in Bacteroides

copri

sp.

and
In

Increase
decrease
new-onset RA
(cid:114)

Increase in microbiota diversity of
Lactobacillus genus in early RA
(cid:114)

Increase in fecal burden of Clostridium
difﬁcile, and C. difﬁcile/Biﬁdobacteria
ratio
(cid:114)

Increase in Firmicutes, Actinobacter

(cid:114)

no

observation

Varying
(decrease,
change, increase) in Bacteroidetes
(cid:114)

Increase in glycoside hydrolase and
SCFAs (butyrate and acetate)
(cid:114)
(cid:114)

Increase in Lactobacillus

Decrease in Clostridium coccoides,
Atopobium cluster, and Prevotella
(cid:114)
(cid:114)

Decrease in butyrate biosynthesis

Increase in the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes
ratio, lactate-producer
(cid:114)

in microbiota

Decrease
acetate- and butyrate-producers
(cid:114)

diversity,

Increase
endotoxin level
atherosclerosis)
(cid:114)

Increase in enterotoxigenic Bacteroides
fragilis, and pathobionts Fusobacterium
and Campylobacter sp.
(cid:114)

Decrease
in
(Faecalibacterium and Roseburia)

butyrate-producer

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)

Duboc et al., 2012

Celiac disease

Tjellström et al., 2005; Nadal et al.,
2007; De Palma et al., 2010

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)

Shi et al., 2014; Luo et al., 2018

Type-1 diabetes

Murri et al., 2013

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)

Liu et al., 2013; Scher et al., 2013

Atopic disease (E.g., childhood allergic
asthma)

Kalliomäki et al., 2001

Metabolic
disorders/cardiovascular
disorders

Obesity

Turnbaugh et al., 2006, 2009a; Koliada
et al., 2017

Type-2 diabetes

Qin et al., 2012; Sato et al., 2014

Hypertension

Atherosclerosis

Yang et al., 2015

in metabolites
(risk factor

TMAO,
for early

Wiedermann et al., 1999; Koeth et al.,
2013

Cancer

Colorectal cancer (CRC)

Wang et al., 2012; Wu et al., 2013

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

11

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

(Continued)

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 12

Kho and Lal

TABLE 3 | Continued

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

Disease categories

Speciﬁc diseases

Reference

Neurop sy chi atri c

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)

Song et al., 2004; Adams et al., 2011

Alzheimer’s disease

Pistollato et al., 2016

Depression

Kelly et al., 2016

Parkinson’s Disease

Keshavarzian et al., 2015

Associated dysbiotic features
(cid:114)

Clostridium

sp.,
Lactobacillus,

Increase
in
Bacteroidetes,
Desulfovibrio
(cid:114)
(cid:114)

Decrease in Biﬁdobacteria

between

connection

Possible
gut
microbiota-synthesized amyloids, LPS,
γ-aminobutyric acid (GAB A – major
inhibitory neurotransmitter), and the
increased permeability of gut barrier
and blood brain barrier with age
(cid:114)

in

Increase
Holdemania,
Paraprevotella, Anaeroﬁlum
(cid:114)

genus
Gelria,

Eggerthella,
Turicibacter,

Roseburia

Decrease in gut microbiota diversity,
Prevotella and Dialister
(cid:114)

from genus

Increase in anti-inﬂammatory butyrate-
Blautia,
producers
in
and
Coprococcus,
patient fecal sample, pro-inﬂammatory
Proteobacteria in patient mucosa
(cid:114)

Increased gene expression in LPS
biosynthesis and microbial
type III
secretion system
(cid:114)
(cid:114)

Increase in Clostridium difﬁcile;

Decrease in gut microbiota diversity
and secondary bile acids-producing
Clostridium scindens
(cid:114)

Increase in Firmicutes, Proteobacteria,
and Actinobacteria
(cid:114)

Decrease in Lactobacilli

Infectious disease

Clostridium difﬁcile infection (CDI)

Theriot et al., 2014

Uremic disease

Chronic kidney disease

Vaziri et al., 2013

in

Staphylococcus

encompasses of increase, decrease and indiﬀerent abundance
changes
in commensal Atopobium, Eubacterium rectale–
Clostridium coccoides, Clostridium histolyticum, Clostridium
lituseburense, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Escherichia coli,
celiac
and
Lactobacillus-Enterococcus,
patients across diﬀerent
studies had been demonstrated
(Nadal et al., 2007; De Palma et al., 2010; Marasco et al., 2016),
suspecting existence of confounding factors (such as disease
severity, disease duration, diets, age and sex-related factors
of the experiment subject, and the experimental settings and
sample types) which remain elusive. Despite that, a signiﬁcant
decrease in total Gram-positive to Gram-negative bacteria
ratio was observed in all phases of celiac disease patients as
compared to that of healthy controls, with marked reduction
in “health-promoting” Biﬁdobacteria, and elevation in virulent
Gram-negative Bacteroides–Prevotella groups being universally
observed in multiple studies, reﬂecting possible pivotal role
of Biﬁdobacteria and Bacteroides–prevotella in celiac disease
(Nadal et al., 2007; De Palma et al., 2010; Marasco et al., 2016).
Together, it is suggested that dysbiosis potentially plays both
secondary and primary roles in celiac disease pathogenesis.
Although such dysbiotic feature and its mechanistic link with
celiac disease manifestation remain elusive, it is suspected that
overgrowth of
these pro-inﬂammatory endotoxin-secreting
Gram-negative pathobionts may contribute to the gluten
intolerance as well as the onset and/or progression of celiac

such as

disease, through the enhancement of the pro-inﬂammatory
responses
increased IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha
production, which will impair gut barrier integrity and normal
functioning. The resulting increased gut permeability could
favor the inﬁltration of more luminal antigens (gluten and
microbial products) to the submucosa, leading to ampliﬁcation
or perpetuation of inﬂammatory reactions. Intriguingly, despite
the notable elevation in Bacteroides–Prevotella proportions,
mucosal ﬁrst line of defense mediated by secretory IgA was
shown to be weaker in celiac disease patients, in which the
IgA-coated Bacteroides–Prevotella was signiﬁcantly lower than
that of healthy control (De Palma et al., 2010). This ﬁnding
postulates the possible defect
in mucosal barrier of celiac
disease patient which fails to stabilize gut microbiota, and loses
its protective eﬀect against invasion of noxious antigens and
pathogens.

Another possible role of gut microbiota in contributing to
celiac disease is their capability in synthesizing mTgs, which
are the homologs of human-synthesized tissue transglutaminases
(tTgs). The mTg gene, which is potentially associated with
microbial survivability,
is encoded in the genome of many
commensal bacteria, with vast majority belongs to Firmicutes
phylum. Transglutaminase, which is also the autoantigen in celiac
disease, is a protein cross-linker in which it transamidates or
deamidates gliadin peptides to form stable neo-compounds in
a process called PTMP (Lerner et al., 2017a). The Tg-linked

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

12

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 13

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

proteins are found to be autoimmunogenic in celiac disease
patients, whereby induction of anti-tTG autoantibodies serves
as a remarkable serological marker of celiac disease. Similar
observation toward its microbial counterpart also had been
documented,
in which speciﬁc anti-mTg and mTg-gliadin
neo complex antibodies were found in the serum of celiac
disease patients but absent in healthy controls (Lerner and
Matthias, 2015). Furthermore, mTgs which are extensively
used as industrial
food additives is capable in enhancing
leakage of the epithelial tight junction, which is the major
component of gut epithelial barrier in regulating the equilibrium
between immune tolerance and immune response to non-
self antigens. Tight
junction dysfunction and “leaky gut”
are commonly observed in autoimmune diseases including
celiac disease, as the resulting increased gut permeability
promotes entry of luminal immunogenic antigens, eliciting both
local and systemic immune reactions, and the pathological
autoimmune signaling cascade (Lerner and Matthias, 2015).
speculate the endogenous mTgs
Together,
synthesized by dysbiotic gut microbiota (especially dysregulation
in Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio) potentially abrogate the tight
junction barrier integrity and drive autoimmunity through
the intestinal luminal PTMP, in which the additional dietary
source of mTgs may potentiate or exacerbate such deleterious
eﬀects.

these ﬁndings

Besides the aforementioned mTgs-mediated PTMP of dietary
gluten by Firmicutes, PTMP-catalyzing ability had been reported
in other commensal microbes,
including those potentially
virulent strains associated in the dysbiotic feature of celiac
disease. Bacteroides fragilis of Bacteroidetes phylum was found
to encode protein-modiﬁer ubiquitin,
suggesting potential
aberrant ubiquitin especially in a dysbiotic conﬁguration (such
as over-representation of Bacteroides in celiac disease) might
cross-react and interfere human ubiquitin activity, and its
downstream signaling, as well as induce inappropriate activation
of host immune (Patrick et al., 2011). Gram-negative bacteria,
especially those pathogenic strains exhibit secretion systems to
synthesize eﬀector proteins with several enzymatic properties to
manipulate host cellular signaling, for example via modiﬁcation
of host phosphoproteome to facilitate microbial survival and
niche establishment in host (Grishin et al., 2015). Linking
the dysbiotic features, microbial-mediated PTMP activities
with the aberrant
immune-inﬂammatory response in celiac
disease, it is hypothesized that dysbiosis-mediated dysregulated
PTMP activities causing both functional and conformational
transformations of dietary and host proteins, generating novel
aberrant epitopes which are potentially immunogenic and
capable to interfere critical host cellular signaling, hence,
triggering manifestation of autoimmune disease such as celiac
disease (Lerner et al., 2016).

Alteration in SCFAs compositions and the SCFA total
abundance in celiac children were also been documented by
Tjellström et al. (2005). Signiﬁcant increase in acetic, i-butyrate,
i-valeric acid and the total SCFAs level were observed in
celiac disease patients compared to that of healthy controls.
Intriguingly, no signiﬁcant diﬀerence of SCFAs composition and
the total SCFAs was observed in the untreated celiac patient

and gluten-free diet treated celiac patient, indicating the altered
gut microbiota, particularly those SCFA-producing commensal
microbes that responsible for such SCFAs composition proﬁles
in celiac patients, might be long established in the genetic
predisposed host before the onset of the disease, rather than
a mere secondary consequence of celiac disease that can
be corrected by eliminating gluten the “trigger” of celiac
disease symptoms. However, the unknown bacterial origin in
contributing such SCFA patterns in celiac patient renders a
missing link between SCFA and the aforementioned key dysbiotic
microbial communities.

Gluten-free diet has been largely employed to ameliorate
the deleterious disease symptoms in celiac patient. However,
gluten-free diet exhibits therapeutic limitation which it allows
only a partial recovery of gut microbiota in celiac disease
patients, both microbiologically (for example reduction in
certain potentially pathogenic strains, incomplete restoration
of beneﬁcial Biﬁdobacteria) and metabolically (for example
indiﬀerent SCFA pattern in treated and non-treated patient),
possibly due to the genetic factor of the patient, or the selective-
enumeration of gut microbiota mediated by the absence of
dietary gluten, which the underlying reason remains unclear.
Strict adherence to total gluten-free diet appears challenging
to the patient as well due to the vast application of gluten in
processed food, hence alternative measures using microbiome-
based therapy such as probiotic might be a promising option
to manage celiac disease. Several in vivo, animal studies as
well as human studies had demonstrated various beneﬁcial
eﬀects of probiotics Biﬁdobacterium and Lactobacillus strains
in ameliorating epithelial-gliadin induced deleterious eﬀects.
For example, Biﬁdobacterium lactis exerts inhibitory eﬀect on
the increased gut permeability induced by gliadin, and it
protects the healthy curvy appearance of epithelial tight junctions
from the unfavorable gliadin-induced “straightening” eﬀect on
tight junction in human colon Caco-2 cells (Lindfors et al.,
2008). B. longum was shown to be capable in enhancing anti-
inﬂammatory response by stimulating markedly high Treg cell
mediated production of IL-10, suppressing pro-inﬂammatory
TH1 cytokine IFN-gamma induced by fecal microbiota of celiac
patient in a cell culture-based study (Medina et al., 2008).
longum and Lactobacillus casei also have been reported
B.
to exert protective eﬀect on animal model
from gliadin-
induced enteropathy, whereby B. longum can downregulate the
production of pro-inﬂammatory TNF-alpha and reduce CD4+
T-cell mediated immune reactions (Laparra et al., 2012); whilst
L. casei can induce complete recovery of gliadin-induced villus
blunting, recover the basal TNF-alpha level, rescue homeostasis
of GALT (gut-associated lymphoid tissue) (D’arienzo et al.,
2011). Administration of probiotics Biﬁdobacterium in children
with newly diagnosed celiac disease together with gluten-
free diet had signiﬁcantly reduced the potentially harmful
Bacteroides fragilis abundance, decreased peripheral CD3+ T
cells, and improved the disease symptoms (Olivares et al., 2014).
Together, despite complete disease remission is not observed
thus far, these studies demonstrate great therapeutic value of
probiotics Biﬁdobacterium and Lactobacillus in ameliorating
gliadin-induced toxic eﬀects and improving celiac disease

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

13

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 14

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

symptoms, indicating promising approaches in managing celiac
disease.

Obesity
In recent years, the newly identiﬁed factor – gut microbiome
which is
largely involved in host metabolism regulation,
has been integrated into crosstalk studies between genetic
factors, behavior and environmental
factors as a possible
contributor to obesity. Obesity is a global health hazard
aﬀecting more than 600 million people worldwide in 2014
(World Health Organization [WHO], 2016). It is associated with
elevated energy intake and decreased energy expenditure,
causing excessive fat accumulation with raised body mass index
(BMI ≥ 30kg/m2), and is linked to metabolic syndrome, posing
obese individuals to have a higher risk of developing obesity-
associated disorders (for example cardiovascular disease, type-
II diabetes, and liver abnormalities), low-grade inﬂammation,
and premature mortality (Donnelly et al., 2005; Cani et al.,
2007).

Metagenomics studies had discovered a signiﬁcant increase
in butyrate-producing Firmicutes and generally a decrease
in Bacteroidetes were observed in distal colonic microbiome
of obese patients and genetically obese mice, compared
to their normal
lean counterparts. These obesity-associated
dysbiosis features were also accompanied by elevation in
starch-degrading glycoside hydrolase and SCFAs (butyrate and
acetate), and increased energy harvest capability as evidenced
by markedly decreased fecal energy in obese mice (Ley
et al., 2006; Turnbaugh et al., 2006), speculating signiﬁcant
elevation in host metabolism-related microbial communities
would abnormally increase energy harvest, thus increasing the
risk of developing obesity. This speculation is supported by
gnotobiotic mouse model, whereby noteworthy elevations in
body fat, fasting glucose and insulin levels, and development
of insulin resistance that mimic physiological alterations in
obesity patients, have been observed in GF mice post-
colonization with a single saccharolytic gut bacterial species
(Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron) and with gut microbiota from
obese mice respectively (Backhed et al., 2004; Turnbaugh et al.,
2006). Elevations in monosaccharides delivered to liver and
liver triglycerides level due to enhanced starch metabolism
facilitated by gut microbiota indicate a strong association
between gut microbiota and host metabolism in glucose
homeostasis and lipogenesis. These ﬁndings are consistent
with previous studies where lipogenic substrates (such as
monosaccharides and SCFAs) were able to trigger the expression
of hepatic fatty acids-synthesizing enzymes like ACC-1 and
FAS, promoting hepatic DNL (Higuchi et al., 2008). The
subsequent storing of triacyl glycerides in adipocytes also has
been shown to be possibly mediated by gut microbiota via
suppressing of
lipoprotein lipase-inhibitors (Backhed et al.,
2004; Solinas et al., 2006). Together, this data suggests that
over-representation of saccharolytic gut microbiota facilitates
augmentation in food digestion, leading to higher energy harvest
and increased fat deposition,
thus contributing to obesity
development.

(metabolic

Similarly, plasma LPS

the association between metabolic

Moreover, several studies suggest that increase in endotoxic
LPS of Gram-negative gut bacteria contributes to obesity-
associated metabolic syndrome. For instance, it was reported
that elevated LPS led to obesity-associated insulin resistance
and low-grade inﬂammation as demonstrated by Cani et al.
endotoxemia)
(2007).
showed a marked increase in high-fat-fed mice, along with
reduction of Biﬁdobacteria, a potential down-regulator of
intestinal endotoxin (Griﬃths et al., 2004). In investigation
endotoxemia with
of
obesity-associated metabolic
continuous-LPS-
infused mice were shown to develop fasting glycaemia,
increased hepatic
insulinemia, hepatic
to high-fat-fed mice
and whole-body fat gains,
In addition, absence of
phenotypes
LPS-receptor
regardless of
resisted these adverse features
LPS-infusion or high-fat diet treatments as shown in CD14
(LPS-receptor) knockout mice, indicating that the LPS/CD14
system mediates insulin insensitivity, thus inducing the onset
of obesity and obesity-related metabolic disorders (Cani et al.,
2007).

(Cani et al., 2007).

insulin resistance,

disorders,

similar

Since obesity-related metabolic disorder has been associated
with gut microbiota dysbiosis, selective modulation of microbial
composition via dietary intervention such as administration
of prebiotics or probiotics might be a promising therapeutic
approach. Administration of bacterial-synthesized CLA or
CLA-producing bacteria such as Lactobacillus rhamnosus has
shown a signiﬁcant decrease in plasma cholesterol,
triacyl
glycerides and white adipose tissue in animal models (Koba
et al., 2002; Lee H.Y. et al., 2006). Prebiotics
such as
inulin-type fructans that selectively nourish Roseburia and
Clostridium cluster XIVa, and arabinoxylan that increases the
abundance of Biﬁdobacterium, Roseburia, and Bacteroides, have
demonstrated anti-adipogenic eﬀect in high-fat-induced obese
mice (Dewulf et al., 2011; Neyrinck et al., 2011). These
ﬁndings demonstrate promising application of prebiotics and
probiotics in obesity management, however, more supportive
data from human models and clinical trials are required to
justify these treatment strategies and their respective success
rates.

Colorectal Cancer (CRC)
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the fourth leading cause of cancer-
related mortality worldwide (Arnold et al., 2017). Similar to
other cancer forms, CRC is a multifaceted diseases associated
with genetic and environmental factors. Recent ﬁndings have
suggested that gut microbiota plays a role in the intersection
of these factors, probably through shaping a tumor-promoting
environment. Colorectal carcinogenesis of the gut has been
demonstrated by Li et al. (2012) using mouse model of APC-
related CRC. In this study, GF mice displayed a signiﬁcantly lower
colonic tumor incidence and reduced tumor load as compared
to that of conventionally raised mice, which the latter also
exhibited other distinctive phenotypes of CRC such as rectal
bleeding and anemia with a massive inﬁltration of inﬂammatory
cells arising from a dysfunctional intestinal epithelial barrier
at older ages, thereby suggesting gut microbiome and host

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

14

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 15

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

(such as age and genetic predisposition) exert a
factor
concerted eﬀort in contributing to CRC growth and progression.
Conversely, tumor outgrowth into gut lumen would damage
the intestinal barrier, resulting in increased inﬁltration of
gut microbiota and potentially harmful
luminal substrates
into deeper tissue, leading to further stimulation of immune-
inﬂammatory response and myeloid cell recruitment, which
could in turn perturb the gut microbiome (Li et al., 2012).
Together, gut microbiome and CRC display a bidirectional self-
feeding relationship.

information,

16S rRNA sequencing study of fecal microbiota of CRC
patients has revealed a signiﬁcant enrichment of Bacteroides
fragilis (Wang et al., 2012; Wu et al., 2013). Despite the low
detection limit of some metagenomics studies in providing
strain-level
it is suspected that possible bloom
of enterotoxigenic strains of B. fragilis (ETBF) contributes to
CRC through enhanced production of oncogenic B.
fragilis
enterotoxin (BFT). This speculation is consistent with the
ﬁndings of Ulger Toprak et al. (2006) in which the bft
gene expression was signiﬁcantly higher in CRC patients than
healthy controls. Wu et al. (2009) had demonstrated that
colonization of tumor-prone mice with ETBF strains can trigger
TH17-dependent colon tumorigenesis, possibly facilitated by its
major virulence factor – BFT. BFT is cytopathic to intestinal
epithelial cells and can cause colitis and colonic tumor, owing
to its capability of catalyzing proteolytic degradation of tight-
junction proteins ZO-1 and E-cadherin, leading to disruption
of intestinal paracellular barriers (Moncrief et al., 1998; Wu
et al., 1998). Moreover, BFT-mediated loss of membrane-
associated E-cadherin could in turn activate T-cell
factor–
dependent Wnt (Wingless-Int)/β-catenin nuclear signaling in
intestinal epithelial cells, stimulating oncogene c-Myc expression
that results in persistent cellular proliferation (Wu et al.,
2003). Furthermore, combined action of BFT and IL-17 on
colonic epithelial cell can induce myeloid diﬀerentiation into
pro-tumoral monocytic-myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MO-
MDSCs),
leading to selective upregulation of Arg1 and NO
synthase 2 (Nos2) thereby stimulating NO synthesis that could
promote vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-mediated
tumor angiogenesis (Cianchi et al., 2003), and suppression of
anti-tumor immunity (e.g., inhibit CD8+ T-cell proliferation)
(Orberg et al., 2017).

On the other hand, non-colitogenic Fusobacterium nucleatum
which is markedly enriched in CRC patients,
is capable in
inducing intestinal tumorigenesis in murine models, suggesting
overrepresentation of the gut microbiota may be the driver
for CRC that is non-associated with colitis or IBD (Castellarin
et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2012; Wu et al., 2013). Although
remain to be
the causality and underlying mechanisms
elucidated,
it has been demonstrated that FadA adhesin of
F. nucleatum could promote bacterial attachment and invasion
into E-cadherin expressing CRC cells, subsequently activating
β-catenin-regulated transcriptions, as shown by upregulation of
lymphoid enhancer factor/T cell factor, host NF-κB, oncogene
c-Myc and cyclin D1, consequently promoting CRC cell
proliferation and inﬂammation (Rubinstein et al., 2013).
Besides, F. nucleatum outer membrane protein, Fap2 also has

been shown to mediate speciﬁc Fusobacterial attachment to
Gal-GalNAc overexpressed in CRC, facilitating F. nucleatum
invasion and colonization of CRC cells (Abed et al., 2016). In
addition,
involvement of TLR4/phosphorylated-p21-activated
kinase 1/phosphorylated-β-catenin S675 cascade was found
to be employed by invasive F. nucleatum as well (Wu et al.,
2018). Brieﬂy, both oncogenic ETBF and F. nucleatum along
with their respective unique molecular signatures serve as
potential biomarkers in identifying the risk of developing ETBF-
and F. nucleatum-related CRC, and predicting malignancy
progression. Antibiotics speciﬁcally targeting these pathobionts
as well as
inhibitors
the application of pharmacological
for pathogenic signaling pathways may be a promising
approach to be ventured in. Further longitudinal studies
are therefore recommended to assess the feasibility of such
applications.

Microbial metabolites such as butyrate have been reported
to inhibit proliferation and survival of tumor cells as evidenced
by butyrate-induced upregulation of pro-apoptotic Bax, Fas,
cell cycle checkpoint regulator p21 and p27, downregulation
of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, cyclin D1, and possible
inhibition of LPS-induced activation of pro-inﬂammatory and
pro-tumorigenic NF-κB signaling, via intracellular action of
butyrate as HDAC inhibitor that could epigenetically regulate
gene expression, and/or its extracellular action as a ligand
that targets G-protein coupled receptor GPR109A-expressing
cancer cell (Hassig et al., 1997; Thangaraju et al., 2009; Wei
et al., 2016). Butyrate also exhibits chemoprotective eﬀects in
which colonocytes pre-treated with butyrate demonstrate higher
resistance against hydrogen peroxide-induced oxidative stress
and DNA damage, possibly via butyrate-mediated enhanced
expression of GST M2 in colonocytes, which is a detoxifying
isoenzyme speciﬁc for substrates that arise from oxidative stress,
thereby reducing the impact of certain genotoxic CRC risk
factors (Abrahamse et al., 1999; Ebert et al., 2003). Together
with the observation of signiﬁcantly reduced butyrate-producers
Faecalibacterium and Roseburia in gut microbiota of CRC
patients (Wang et al., 2012; Wu et al., 2013), it is speculated
that
reduction in colonic butyrate could
partly impair the anticancer immunosurveillance and potentiate
tumorigenesis. Hence, the concept of increasing colonic butyrate
either by supplementation of butyrogenic dietary fermentable
carbohydrates (high ﬁber diet) or butyrate-producing probiotics
exhibits great intervention potential on the prevention and
therapy of CRC, whereby further studies are required to evaluate
the therapeutic success rate, as well as to determine the
eﬀective concentration of butyrate in vivo, required to attain
desirable clinical beneﬁt. In a study by Femia et al. (2002),
anti-tumorigenic activity of prebiotic OF-IN on azoxymethane-
induced colon cancer rat model was demonstrated, as evidenced
by signiﬁcant reduction of tumor loads (adenoma and cancer)
compared to control rat. However, serum metabolome such
as butyrate level and the gut microbiota compositional change
post-prebiotic treatment were not determined in this study.
This makes it diﬃcult
to decipher which key microbiota
and microbial products actually confer such anti-tumorigenic
eﬀect.

the subsequent

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

15

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 16

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

Accumulating data has also demonstrated protective eﬀect of
probiotics using lactic acid-producing bacteria (Lactobacillus and
Biﬁdobacterium) against experimentally induced colon cancer,
as shown by reduced tumor incidence and tumor loads. The
underlying mechanisms are suggested to involve direct anti-
proliferative eﬀect on tumor cells, prevention of carcinogen-
induced DNA damage, partly via inhibition of carcinogen
and mutagen formation, reduction of pro-carcinogenic enzyme
(ornithine decarboxylase) activity, and elevation of detoxifying
enzyme activity, as well as enhancement of anti-tumor immunity
as evidenced by increased natural killer cells, MHC class II
antigen presenting cells, and CD4–CD8+ T cells post-probiotic
treatment (Goldin et al., 1996; Pool-Zobel et al., 1996; Singh
et al., 1997; Wollowski et al., 1999; Lee et al., 2004). Moreover,
the gut microbiome is pivotal in inﬂuencing therapeutic eﬃcacy
of anti-cancer immunotherapy employing immune-checkpoint
inhibitors. The anti-tumor eﬀect of antibodies targeting CTLA-4,
a major negative regulator of T-cell activation, is compromised
in both GF mice and broad-spectrum antibiotics-treated mice,
conﬁrmed in both melanoma and colon cancer models, along
with the observations of signiﬁcantly reduced CD4+ T-cell and
tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes. Such defects can be overcome
by the administration of non-enterotoxin-producing strains of
B. fragilis, immunization with immunostimulatory B. fragilis
polysaccharide, or by adoptive transfer of B. fragilis-speciﬁc
in which the mechanisms underlie the restoration
T-cells,
therapeutic response to CTLA-4 blockade is suggested
of
to be via induction of
the IL-12-dependent TH1 immune
response in tumor-draining lymph nodes, and stimulation of
intratumoral dendritic cells (DCs) maturation (Vétizou et al.,
2015). Similarly, Sivan et al. (2015) reported that Biﬁdobacterium
could facilitate PD-L1 blockade eﬃcacy via augmenting DCs
function, enhancing CD8+ T-cell priming and accumulation at
the tumor microenvironment level. The concept of combination
treatment that encompasses anticancer immunotherapy and
commensal microbes holds great promise for future CRC
treatment.

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)
In recent years, increasing number of studies have explored a
possible link between the gut microbiome and brain- or neuro-
developmental disorders, such as ASD, with symptoms like
mood disorder (depression), neurodegenerative Alzheimer’s and
PDs (Table 3). ASD is a multifarious group of neurobiological
disorders aﬀecting 1 in 68, 8-year-old children in America
(Christensen et al., 2016) and 1 in 160 children globally (World
Health Organization [WHO], 2017). It
is characterized by
social and communication deﬁcits, and repetitive, stereotyped
behaviors (Constantino et al., 2000; Kim and Lord, 2012).
Despite the poorly understood causative factor of ASD, several
studies had observed a signiﬁcant association between ASD,
gastrointestinal dysfunction and dysbiosis in gut microbiota.
Comorbidity analysis of ASD patients revealed high occurrence
symptoms, with the severity positively
of gastrointestinal
associated with that of ASD (Wang L.W. et al., 2011). This co-
occurrence is speculated to be implicated by impaired tyrosine
kinase MET signaling which is important in brain development,

gastrointestinal health and immune response regulation (Ieraci
et al., 2002; Okunishi et al., 2005). This hypothesis is supported
by the observation of impaired MET-signaling in ASD patients
especially those that comorbid with familial gastrointestinal
disorder (Campbell et al., 2009; Jackson et al., 2009). Also,
clinical data has shown that physical health problems like
chronic abdominal pain caused by gastrointestinal disorders
aggravate self-injury and tantrum in ASD patients (Carr and
Owen-Deschryver, 2007), thereby suggesting that treating the
gastrointestinal dysfunction will possibly alleviate such ASD-
associated symptoms.

suggests

During the investigation of microbiota composition in
ASD patients, dysbiotic features such as increased Clostridium
sp., Bacteroidetes, Lactobacillus, Desulfovibrio, and reduced
Biﬁdobacteria were reported (Song et al., 2004; Adams et al.,
2011), suggesting a possible link between dysbiosis and ASD.
In a study by Shultz et al. (2015), mice treated with PPA
via intra-cerebroventricular injection had shown to develop
brain abnormalities and ASD-like symptoms. PPA is a type of
SCFA, synthesized by enteric bacteria include the aforementioned
Clostridium, Bacteroidetes, and Desulfovibrio species, but PPA
level usually exist at low levels in normal healthy individuals.
that possible bloom in PPA-producing gut
This
microbes leads to elevated neurotoxic PPA concentration in
blood, contributing to neuropsychiatric disorders. However, to
date, dysbiosis-associated elevation in microbial-synthesized PPA
in plasma of ASD patients has not been reported. Future
studies in examining plasma PPA level in ASD patients are
required. Surprisingly,
targeting gut microbiome
has demonstrated beneﬁcial eﬀects in alleviating ASD-like
symptoms in murine model. Desbonnet et al. (2010) reported
that probiotic Biﬁdobacterium infantis improved the behavioral
abnormalities and stress-associated gastrointestinal dysfunction
which were initially induced in mice suﬀering MS. Reduction in
Biﬁdobacterium is commonly observed in ASD patients, positive
outcome post-probiotic treatment indicates a potential protective
role of Biﬁdobacterium in neuro-immune aspects, suggesting
probiotic B.
infantis as a potential ASD therapy. Despite
the unclear underlying mechanisms, antioxidant properties of
Biﬁdobacterium are suggested to have a neutralizing neurotoxic
eﬀect, induced by excess NO in ASD (Yui et al., 2016). Further
studies that mimic the human physiological environment are very
much required to assess the therapeutic success and underlying
mechanism of probiotic B. infantis in managing ASD.

treatment

PERSPECTIVES AND FUTURE
DIRECTION

Emerging research on human microbiome and its role in
human wellness and disease are currently making it to the
limelight, by virtue of which, researchers of diverse clinical
specialty areas are attempting to ﬁt this potential “missing
piece of puzzle” into existing disease models, particularly those
with unknown etiology. Tremendous data has demonstrated
strong association of the gut microbiome with host metabolism,
immune and neuroendocrine homeostasis, and the possible

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

16

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 17

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

dysregulation or alteration of gut microbiome. Perturbation of
such delicate equilibrium will
in turn contribute to disease
manifestation. However, the causal or correlation link remains
debatable due to lack of direct evidence and mechanistic
details. Our understanding on gut microbiome is still at a
very preliminary stage, whereby there are several limitations
and research gaps that are worth further exploration to better
justify the link. For instance, large-scale longitudinal studies
that account for subject-speciﬁc variations in characterizing the
human microbiome are strongly required. On the other hand,
another important component of human microbiome – the
human virome that is dominated by bacteriophage (viruses that
infect bacteria), is relatively less established compared to that
of commensal bacteriome research. Only recently the presence
of bacteriophage (or phage) in the human microbiome has
been highlighted. Their potential role in modulating immune
homeostasis has been suggested via (1) indirect mechanisms
such as through regulating bacterial microbiome composition
(phage-mediated lytic killing of host bacteria) and function
(phage-mediated introduction of novel
functional genes to
lysogenic host such as production of endotoxin and antibiotic
resistance), and (2) direct interference with human immune-
inﬂammatory responses such as downregulation of the pro-
inﬂammatory NF-κB pathway,
inhibition of excessive ROS
synthesis,
induction of anti-inﬂammatory IL-10 production,
and T4 phage adhesin gp12 - mediated counteraction to
LPS-induced inﬂammation, as evidenced by downregulation
inﬂammation markers IL-1α and IL-6, and diminished
of
leukocyte inﬁltration (Górski et al., 2016; Miernikiewicz et al.,
2016). In addition, simultaneous increase in pro-inﬂammatory
markers such as IL-1β, IL-1α, along with upregulation in anti-
inﬂammatory IL-1 receptor antagonist and SOCS3 have been
observed in P. aeruginosa and S. aureus phages treated cells,
and the authors postulate that at
least some phages have
evolved anti-inﬂammatory properties to aid their survival and
propagation, while retaining some pro-inﬂammatory properties
(Van Belleghem et al., 2017). On the contrary to the largely
reported anti-inﬂammatory properties of phage, signiﬁcantly
increased abundance of bacteriophages and changes in phage
communities composition in CD patients compared to healthy
controls have indicated a possible contributory role of phage
in aberrant immune response (Lepage et al., 2008; Wagner
et al., 2013). Undeniably, integrating human virome studies
into the existing human bacterial microbiome will provide
a bigger and clearer picture on how such transkingdom
interactions could impact human health, thus, facilitating disease
etiology studies. However, overcoming the obstacles such as
limitations in virome sequencing techniques, uninformative
database for characterization of novel viral genomes and the
diﬃculties in identifying origin of virus from patient sample
followed by deciphering the underlying mechanisms are urgently
required.

Another noteworthy aspect is that the observed association
of human microbiome with the host in healthy and disease
states in fact reﬂects a far more complicated interactive
relationship, rather than a mere unidirectional “cause and
eﬀect.” Hence, experimental design should be revised and

tailored accordingly to comprehensively investigate at which
point of the disease (for example: disease onset, early disease
stage, disease progression, active or latent disease) does the
human microbiota play a role in, as this will reveal either
the primary role, secondary role, or both roles undertaken
by human microbiota in disease manifestation. Besides,
varying observations such as dysbiotic features in speciﬁc
diseases, and host response toward introduced stimuli across
published literatures on this topic, suspecting the existence of
confounding factors, for example, subject-speciﬁc diﬀerences
or distinctive experimental designs across studies becomes
important. Subject-speciﬁc factors such as genetic, age, gender,
lifestyle, diet,
infection, disease and postnatal exposure to
maternal and environmental microﬂora serve a crucial role
in shaping the unique composition of human microbiota in
each individual. Also the commensal microbial composition
will in turn aﬀect the development, maturation and normal
functioning of the host factors (such as the neuro-immune
network development and maturation), will contribute toward
issues on varying disease
Interconnection
of these factors make it much more challenging to design
constructive and conclusive experiments to test the role of
the microbiome in targeted disease and establishing the true
human microbiome-host relationship in multifactorial disease
conditions. Whilst for the experimental design, diﬀerences across
studies, standardization of research protocols are required to
enable eﬀective comparison of ﬁndings across studies, reduce
data variance and biases, and producing sound and robust
ﬁndings for better explanation of human microbiome-disease
relationships.

susceptibility.

A better understanding of human microbiome and how
the commensal microbes interact with the host is undeniably
useful to delineate the etiology and pathophysiological aspects
of several human diseases, as well as developing a more
eﬀective therapeutic option to counteract
the limitation of
currently existing treatments. Application of FMT, probiotic
and prebiotics derived from advances in gut microbiome
studies to ‘rectify’ or ‘restore’ the altered gut microbiota in
the dysbiosis-associated disease state back to the ‘healthy’
equilibrium, holds great promise as the alternative therapeutic
option in several symptomatic disease management. However,
the beneﬁcial therapeutic eﬀect of microbiome-based therapy
is largely dependent on the role of dysbiosis in contributing
to the nature of the disease. Accurate identiﬁcation of key
microbiota members, intricate selection of microbial strains used
in probiotics, or types of prebiotics administered to selectively
enumerate the desirable commensal, have deﬁnitely added
extra challenges to the extensive application of microbiome-
based therapy to future clinical practices. In addition, majority
of
it
does not warrant permanent safety. Several potential risks
include possible transfer of antibiotic resistance gene or
virulent genes among microbes. Although severe systemic side
eﬀects post-microbiome therapy are not observed to date,
minor gastrointestinal discomforts such as abdominal pain,
vomiting, nausea are commonly reported. This subsequently
leads to withdrawal or non-compliance by patients during

the probiotics are generally regarded as

safe but

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

17

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 18

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

improvement on treatment regime,
ﬁeld trials. Therefore,
route of administration, and eﬀective communication with the
patients are strongly encouraged. In short, Human Microbiome
ﬁeld of research is still relatively new but rapidly growing,
showing several preliminary but promising studies on the
modulatory role of human microbiome in human wellness
and disease. Future applications of microbiome-based disease
diagnosis, prognosis monitoring, prophylaxis and treatments
which exhibit great potential
in revolutionizing the current
measures in disease management and treatment, are deﬁnitely
worth anticipating.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

ZK conducted the
search and compiled the
information. SL contributed academic assistance and edited the
manuscript.

literature

FUNDING

This publication was supported by funding from the Tropical
Medicine and Biology Platform.

REFERENCES

Abed, J., Emgård, J. E., Zamir, G., Faroja, M., Almogy, G., Grenov, A., et al.
(2016). Fap2 mediates Fusobacterium nucleatum colorectal adenocarcinoma
enrichment by binding to tumor-expressed Gal-GalNAc. Cell Host Microbe 20,
215–225. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2016.07.006

Abrahamse, S. L., Pool-Zobel, B. L., and Rechkemmer, G. (1999). Potential of short
chain fatty acids to modulate the induction of DNA damage and changes in
the intracellular calcium concentration by oxidative stress in isolated rat distal
colon cells. Carcinogenesis 20, 629–634. doi: 10.1093/carcin/20.4.629

Adams, J. B., Johansen, L. J., Powell, L. D., Quig, D., and Rubin, R. A. (2011).
Gastrointestinal ﬂora and gastrointestinal status in children with autism–
comparisons to typical children and correlation with autism severity. BMC
Gastroenterol. 11:22. doi: 10.1186/1471-230x-11-22

Braat, H., Rottiers, P., Hommes, D. W., Huyghebaert, N., Remaut, E., Remon, J. P.,
et al. (2006). A phase I trial with transgenic bacteria expressing interleukin-10
in Crohn’s disease. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 4, 754–759. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.
2006.03.028

Britton, R. A., and Young, V. B. (2012). Interaction between the intestinal
microbiota and host in Clostridium diﬃcile colonization resistance. Trends
Microbiol. 20, 313–319. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2012.04.001

Campbell, D. B., Buie, T. M., Winter, H., Bauman, M., Sutcliﬀe, J. S., Perrin, J. M.,
et al. (2009). Distinct genetic risk based on association of MET in families with
co-occurring autism and gastrointestinal conditions. Pediatrics 123, 1018–1024.
doi: 10.1542/peds.2008-0819

Cani, P. D., Amar, J., Iglesias, M. A., Poggi, M., Knauf, C., Bastelica, D., et al. (2007).
Metabolic endotoxemia initiates obesity and insulin resistance. Diabetes Metab.
Res. Rev 56, 1761–1772. doi: 10.2337/db06-1491

Ajouz, H., Mukherji, D., and Shamseddine, A. (2014). Secondary bile acids:
an underrecognized cause of colon cancer. World J. Surg. Oncol. 12:164.
doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-12-164

Carr, E. G., and Owen-Deschryver, J. S. (2007). Physical illness, pain, and problem
behavior in minimally verbal people with developmental disabilities. J. Autism.
Dev. Disord. 37, 413–424. doi: 10.1007/s10803-006-0176-0

Akobeng, A. K., Ramanan, A. V., Buchan, I., and Heller, R. F. (2006). Eﬀect of breast
feeding on risk of coeliac disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
observational studies. Arch. Dis. Child. 91, 39–43. doi: 10.1136/adc.2005.082016
Andres, E., Loukili, N. H., Noel, E., Kaltenbach, G., Abdelgheni, M. B., Perrin, A. E.,
et al. (2004). Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) deﬁciency in elderly patients. Can. Med.
Assoc. J. 171, 251–259. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.1031155

Anitha, M., Vijay-Kumar, M., Sitaraman, S. V., Gewirtz, A. T., and Srinivasan, S.
(2012). Gut microbial products regulate murine gastrointestinal motility via
Toll-like receptor 4 signaling. Gastroenterology 143, 1006–1016. doi: 10.1053/
j.gastro.2012.06.034

Antonopoulos, D. A., Huse, S. M., Morrison, H. G., Schmidt, T. M., Sogin,
M. L., and Young, V. B. (2009). Reproducible community dynamics of the
gastrointestinal microbiota following antibiotic perturbation. Infect. Immun.
77, 2367–2375. doi: 10.1128/iai.01520-08

Arnold, M., Sierra, M. S., Laversanne, M., Soerjomataram, I., Jemal, A., and Bray, F.
(2017). Global patterns and trends in colorectal cancer incidence and mortality.
Gut 66, 683–691. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-310912

Atarashi, K., Nishimura, J., Shima, T., Umesaki, Y., Yamamoto, M., Onoue, M.,
et al. (2008). ATP drives lamina propria TH17 cell diﬀerentiation. Nature 455,
808–812. doi: 10.1038/nature07240

Backhed, F., Ding, H., Wang, T., Hooper, L. V., Koh, G. Y., Nagy, A., et al. (2004).
The gut microbiota as an environmental factor that regulates fat storage. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 15718–15723. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0407076101

Barnaba, V., and Sinigaglia, F. (1997). Molecular mimicry and T cell–mediated
autoimmune disease. J. Exp. Med. 185, 1529–1532. doi: 10.1084/jem.185.9.1529
Bartlett, J. G. (1982). Antimicrobial agents implicated in Clostridium diﬃcile
toxin-associated diarrhea or colitis. Obstet. Gynecol. Surv. 37:46. doi: 10.1097/
00006254-198201000-00019

Bartlett, J. G. (2002). Clinical practice. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea. N. Engl. J.

Med. 346, 334–339. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcp011603

Bendheim, P. E., Poeggeler, B., Neria, E., Ziv, V., Pappolla, M. A., and Chain, D. G.
(2002). Development of indole-3-propionic acid (OXIGONTM) for Alzheimer’s
disease. J. Mol. Neurosci. 19, 213–217. doi: 10.1007/s12031-002-0036-0

Blottière, H. M., Buecher, B., Galmiche, J. P., and Cherbut, C. (2003). Molecular
analysis of the eﬀect of short-chain fatty acids on intestinal cell proliferation.
Proc. Nutr. Soc. 62, 101–106. doi: 10.1079/PNS2002215

Castellarin, M., Warren, R. L., Freeman, J. D., Dreolini, L., Krzywinski, M.,
Strauss, J., et al. (2012). Fusobacterium nucleatum infection is prevalent in
human colorectal carcinoma. Genome Res. 22, 299–306. doi: 10.1101/gr.126516.
111

Chen, T., Kim, C. Y., Kaur, A., Lamothe, L., Shaikh, M., Keshavarzian, A., et al.
(2017). Dietary ﬁbre-based SCFA mixtures promote both protection and repair
of intestinal epithelial barrier function in a Caco-2 cell model. Food Funct. 8,
1166–1173. doi: 10.1039/c6fo01532h

Cherrington, C. A., Hinton, M., Pearson, G. R., and Chopra, I. (1991). Short-chain
organic acids at pH 5.0 kill Escherichia coli and Salmonella spp. without causing
membrane perturbation. J. Appl. Microbiol. 70, 161–165.

Christensen, D. L., Baio, J., Braun, K. V., Bilder, D., Charles, J., Constantino, J. N.,
et al. (2016). Prevalence and characteristics of autism spectrum disorder among
children aged 8 years - autism and developmental disabilities monitoring
network, 11 sites, United States, 2012. MMWR Surveill. Summ. 65, 1–23.
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.ss6503a1

Christensen, K. R., Steenholdt, C., Buhl, S. S., Ainsworth, M. A., Thomsen, O. Ø,
and Brynskov, J. (2015). Systematic information to health-care professionals
about vaccination guidelines improves adherence in patients with inﬂammatory
bowel disease in anti-tnfα therapy. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 110, 1526–1532. doi:
10.1038/ajg.2015.162

Cianchi, F., Cortesini, C., Fantappiè, O., Messerini, L., Schiavone, N., Vannacci, A.,
et al. (2003). Inducible nitric oxide synthase expression in human colorectal
cancer: correlation with tumor angiogenesis. Am. J. Pathol. 162, 793–801.
doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63876-X

Collins, J., Borojevic, R., Verdu, E. F., Huizinga, J. D., and Ratcliﬀe, E. M. (2014).
Intestinal microbiota inﬂuence the early postnatal development of the enteric
nervous system. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 26, 98–107. doi: 10.1111/nmo.12236
Constantino, J. N., Przybeck, T., Friesen, D., and Todd, R. D. (2000). Reciprocal
social behavior in children with and without pervasive developmental disorders.
J. Dev. Behav. Pediatr. 21, 2–11. doi: 10.1097/00004703-200002000-00002

Cooke, G., Behan,

J., and Costello, M. (2006). Newly identiﬁed vitamin
K-producing bacteria isolated from the neonatal faecal ﬂora. Microb. Ecol.
Health Dis. 18, 133–138. doi: 10.3402/mehd.v18i3-4.7681

Croft, A., Walsh, A., Doecke, J., Cooley, R., Howlett, M., and Radford-Smith, G.
(2013). Outcomes of salvage therapy for steroid-refractory acute severe

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

18

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 19

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

ulcerative colitis: cyclosporine vs. Inﬂiximab. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 38,
294–302. doi: 10.1111/apt.12375

Darfeuille-Michaud, A., Neut, C., Barnich, N., Lederman, E., Martino, P. D.,
Desreumaux, P., et al. (1998). Presence of adherent Escherichia coli strains in
ileal mucosa of patients with Crohns disease. Gastroenterol. 115, 1405–1413.
doi: 10.1016/s0016-5085(98)70019-8

D’arienzo, R., Stefanile, R., Maurano, F., Mazzarella, G., Ricca, E., Troncone, R.,
et al. (2011). Immunomodulatory eﬀects of Lactobacillus casei administration
in a mouse model of gliadin-sensitive enteropathy. Scand. J. Immunol. 74,
335–341. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02582.x

De Palma, G., Nadal, I., Medina, M., Donat, E., Ribes-Koninckx, C., Calabuig, M.,
et al. (2010). Intestinal dysbiosis and reduced immunoglobulin-coated bacteria
associated with coeliac disease in children. BMC Microbiol. 10:63. doi: 10.1186/
1471-2180-10-63

De Preter, V., Joossens, M., Ballet, V., Shkedy, Z., Rutgeerts, P., Vermeire, S., et al.
(2013). Metabolic proﬁling of the impact of oligofructose-enriched inulin in
Crohn’s disease patients: a double-blinded randomized controlled trial. Clin.
Transl. Gastroenterol. 4:e30. doi: 10.1038/ctg.2012.24

De Vadder, F., Kovatcheva-Datchary, P., Goncalves, D., Vinera, J., Zitoun, C.,
Duchampt, A., et al. (2014). Microbiota-generated metabolites promote
metabolic beneﬁts via gut-brain neural circuits. Cell 156, 84–96. doi: 10.1016/
j.cell.2013.12.016

Degnan, P. H., Taga, M. E., and Goodman, A. L. (2014). Vitamin B12 as a modulator
of gut microbial ecology. Cell Metab. 20, 769–778. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2014.10.
002

Deguchi, T., Ohtsuki, S., Otagiri, M., Takanaga, H., Asaba, H., Mori, S., et al. (2002).
Major role of organic anion transporter 3 in the transport of indoxyl sulfate in
the kidney. Kidney Int. 61, 1760–1768. doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2002.00318.x
Desbonnet, L., Garrett, L., Clarke, G., Kiely, B., Cryan, J., and Dinan, T. (2010).
Eﬀects of the probiotic Biﬁdobacterium infantis in the maternal separation
model of depression. Neuroscience 170, 1179–1188. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.
2010.08.005

Dewulf, E. M., Cani, P. D., Neyrinck, A. M., Possemiers, S., Holle, A. V., Muccioli,
G. G., et al. (2011). Inulin-type fructans with prebiotic properties counteract
GPR43 overexpression and PPARγ-related adipogenesis in the white adipose
tissue of high-fat diet-fed mice. J. Nutr. Biochem. 22, 712–722. doi: 10.1016/j.
jnutbio.2010.05.009

Donnelly, K. L., Smith, C. I., Schwarzenberg, S. J., Jessurun, J., Boldt, M. D.,
and Parks, E. J. (2005). Sources of fatty acids stored in liver and secreted via
lipoproteins in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. J. Clin. Invest. 115,
1343–1351. doi: 10.1172/jci200523621

Donohoe, D. R., Garge, N., Zhang, X., Sun, W., Oconnell, T. M., Bunger, M. K.,
et al. (2011). The microbiome and butyrate regulate energy metabolism and
autophagy in the mammalian colon. Cell Metab. 13, 517–526. doi: 10.1016/j.
cmet.2011.02.018

Drago, S., El Asmar, R., Di Pierro, M., Grazia Clemente, M., Sapone, A. T. A.,
Thakar, M., et al. (2006). Gliadin, zonulin and gut permeability: eﬀects on
celiac and non-celiac intestinal mucosa and intestinal cell lines. Scand. J.
Gastroenterol. 41, 408–419. doi: 10.1080/00365520500235334

Duboc, H., Rainteau, D., Rajca, S., Humbert, L., Farabos, D., Maubert, M., etal.
(2012). Increase in fecal primary bile acids and dysbiosis in patients with
diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 24,
513–520 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2982.2012.01893.x

Duchmann, R., May, E., Heike, M., Knolle, P., Neurath, M., and zum Büschenfelde,
K. M. (1999). T cell speciﬁcity and cross reactivity towards Enterobacteria,
Bacteroides, Biﬁdobacterium, and antigens from resident intestinal ﬂora in
humans. Gut 44, 812–818. doi: 10.1136/gut.44.6.812

Dumas, M. E., Barton, R. H., Toye, A., Cloarec, O., Blancher, C., Rothwell, A.,
et al. (2006). Metabolic proﬁling reveals a contribution of gut microbiota to
fatty liver phenotype in insulin-resistant mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103,
12511–12516. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0601056103

Ebert, M. N., Klinder, A., Peters, W. H., Schäferhenrich, A., Sendt, W., Scheele, J.,
et al. (2003). Expression of glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) in human colon
cells and inducibility of GSTM2 by butyrate. Carcinogenesis 24, 1637–1644.
doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgg122

El Aidy, S., van Baarlen, P., Derrien, M., Lindenbergh-Kortleve, D. J., Hooiveld, G.,
interplay of microbiota
Levenez, F., et al. (2012). Temporal and spatial
and intestinal mucosa drive establishment of
immune homeostasis in
conventionalized mice. Mucosal Immunol. 5, 567–579. doi: 10.1038/mi.2012.32

Erny, D., de Angelis, A. L. H., Jaitin, D., Wieghofer, P., Staszewski, O., David, E.,
et al. (2015). Host microbiota constantly control maturation and function of
microglia in the CNS. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 965–977. doi: 10.1038/nn.4030

Faith, J. J., Rey, F. E., O’donnell, D., Karlsson, M., McNulty, N. P., Kallstrom, G.,
et al. (2010). Creating and characterizing communities of human gut microbes
in gnotobiotic mice. ISME J. 4, 1094–1098. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2010.110

Feagan, B. G., Rutgeerts, P., Sands, B. E., Hanauer, S., Colombel, J. F., Sandborn,
W. J., et al. (2013). Vedolizumab as induction and maintenance therapy for
ulcerative colitis. N. Engl. J. Med. 369, 699–710. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1215734
Femia, A. P., Luceri, C., Dolara, P., Giannini, A., Biggeri, A., Salvadori, M.,
et al. (2002). Antitumorigenic activity of the prebiotic inulin enriched with
oligofructose in combination with the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus and
Biﬁdobacterium lactis on azoxymethane-induced colon carcinogenesis in rats.
Carcinogenesis 23, 1953–1960. doi: 10.1093/carcin/23.11.1953

Fernandez, F., and Collins, M. D. (1987). Vitamin K composition of anaerobic
gut bacteria. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 41, 175–180. doi: 10.1016/0378-1097(87)90
233-3

Firmansyah, A., Penn, D., and Lebenthal, E.

Isolated colonocyte
metabolism of glucose, glutamine, n-butyrate, and β-hydroxybutyrate in
malnutrition. Gastroenterology 97, 622–629. doi: 10.1016/0016-5085(89)90
633-1

(1989).

Forster, V. J., McDonnell, A., Theobald, R., and McKay, J. A. (2017). Eﬀect
of methotrexate/vitamin B12 on DNA methylation as a potential factor
in leukemia treatment-related neurotoxicity. Epigenomics 9, 1205–1218.
doi: 10.2217/epi-2016-0165

Franceschi, S., Panza, E., Vecchia, C. L., Parazzini, F., Decarli, A., and Porro, G. B.
(1987). Nonspeciﬁc inﬂammatory bowel disease and smoking. Am. J. Epidemiol.
125, 445–452. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a114550

Geleijnse, J. M., Vermeer, C., Grobbee, D. E., Schurgers, L. J., Knapen, M. H., van
der Meer, I. M., et al. (2004). Dietary intake of menaquinone is associated with
a reduced risk of coronary heart disease: the rotterdam study. J. Nutr. 134,
3100–3105. doi: 10.1093/jn/134.11.3100

Gent, A., Hellier, M., Grace, R., Swarbrick, E., and Coggon, D.

(1994).
Inﬂammatory bowel disease and domestic hygiene in infancy. Lancet 343,
766–767. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(94)91841-4

Genth, H., Huelsenbeck, J., Hartmann, B., Hofmann, F., Just, I., and Gerhard, R.
(2006). Cellular stability of Rho-GTPases glucosylated by Clostridium diﬃcile
toxin B. FEBS Lett. 580, 3565–3569. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.04.100

Gill, S. R., Pop, M., Deboy, R. T., Eckburg, P. B., Turnbaugh, P. J., Samuel, B. S., et al.
(2006). Metagenomic analysis of the human distal gut microbiome. Science 312,
1355–1359. doi: 10.1126/science.1124234

Goldin, B. R., Gualtieri, L. J., and Moore, R. P. (1996). The eﬀect of Lactobacillus
GG on the initiation and promotion of DMH-induced intestinal tumors in the
rat. Nutr. Cancer 25, 197–204. doi: 10.1080/01635589609514442

Gominak, S. (2016). Vitamin D deﬁciency changes the intestinal microbiome
reducing B vitamin production in the gut. The resulting lack of pantothenic
acid adversely aﬀects the immune system, producing a “pro-inﬂammatory”
state associated with atherosclerosis and autoimmunity. Med. Hypotheses 94,
103–107. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2016.07.007

Gopal-Srivastava, R., and Hylemon, P. B. (1988). Puriﬁcation and characterization
J. Lipid Res. 29,

of bile salt hydrolase from Clostridium perfringens.
1079–1085.

Górski, A., Mie¸dzybrodzki, R., Weber-D ˛abrowska, B., Fortuna, W., Letkiewicz, S.,
Rogó˙z, P., et al. (2016). Phage therapy: combating infections with potential for
evolving from merely a treatment for complications to targeting diseases. Front.
Microbiol. 7:1515. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01515

Griﬃths, E. A., Duﬀy, L. C., Schanbacher, F. L., Qiao, H., Dryja, D., Leavens, A.,
et al. (2004). In vivo eﬀects of Biﬁdobacteria and lactoferrin on gut endotoxin
concentration and mucosal immunity in balb/c mice. Dig. Dis. Sci. 49, 579–589.
doi: 10.1023/b:ddas.0000026302.92898.ae

Grishin, A. M., Beyrakhova, K. A., and Cygler, M. (2015). Structural insight
into eﬀector proteins of Gram-negative bacterial pathogens that modulate the
phosphoproteome of their host. Protein Sci. 24, 604–620. doi: 10.1002/pro.2636
Gronbach, K., Flade, I., Holst, O., Lindner, B., Ruscheweyh, H. J., Wittmann, A.,
et al. (2014). Endotoxicity of lipopolysaccharide as a determinant of T-cell-
mediated colitis induction in mice. Gastroenterology 146, 765–775. doi: 10.1053/
j.gastro.2013.11.033

Guo, X., Rao, J. N., Liu, L., Zou, T., Keledjian, K. M., Boneva, D., et al. (2005).
Polyamines are necessary for synthesis and stability of occludin protein in

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

19

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 20

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

intestinal epithelial cells. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 288, G1159–
G1169. doi: 10.1152/ajpgi.00407.2004

Guo, X., Rao, J. N., Liu, L., Zou, T. T., Turner, D. J., Bass, B. L., et al. (2003).
Regulation of adherens junctions and epithelial paracellular permeability: a
novel function for polyamines. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 285, C1174–C1187.
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00015.2003

Hassig, C. A., Tong, J. K., and Schreiber, S. L. (1997). Fiber-derived butyrate and
the prevention of colon cancer. Chem. Biol. 4, 783–789. doi: 10.1016/S1074-
5521(97)90111-3

Higuchi, N., Kato, M., Shundo, Y., Tajiri, H., Tanaka, M., Yamashita, N., et al.
(2008). Liver X receptor in cooperation with SREBP-1c is a major lipid synthesis
regulator in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatol. Res. 38, 1122–1129. doi:
10.1111/j.1872-034x.2008.00382.x

Hooper, L. V., and Gordon, J. I. (2001). Commensal host-bacterial relationships in

the gut. Science 292, 1115–1118. doi: 10.1126/science.1058709

Hugot, J. P., Chamaillard, M., Zouali, H., Lesage, S., Cezard, J. P., Belaiche, J., et al.
(2001). Association of NOD2 leucine-rich repeat variants with susceptibility to
Crohn’s disease. Nature 411, 599–603. doi: 10.1038/35079107

Hyde, G. M., Thillainayagam, A. V., and Jewell, D. P. (1998). Intravenous
cyclosporin as rescue therapy in severe ulcerative colitis. Eur. J. Gastroenterol.
Hepatol. 10, 411–414. doi: 10.1097/00042737-199805000-00010

Hylemon, P. B., Zhou, H., Pandak, W. M., Ren, S., Gil, G., and Dent, P. (2009).
Bile acids as regulatory molecules. J. Lipid Res. 50, 1509–1520. doi: 10.1194/jlr.
R900007-JLR200

Ieraci, A., Forni, P. E., and Ponzetto, C. (2002). Viable hypomorphic signaling
mutant of the met receptor reveals a role for hepatocyte growth factor in
postnatal cerebellar development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 15200–15205.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.222362099

Inagaki, T., Moschetta, A., Lee, Y. K., Peng, L., Zhao, G., Downes, M., et al. (2006).
Regulation of antibacterial defense in the small intestine by the nuclear bile
acid receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 3920–3925. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0509592103

Ivanov, I. I., Atarashi, K., Manel, N., Brodie, E. L., Shima, T., Karaoz, U., et al.
(2009). Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented ﬁlamentous bacteria.
Cell 139, 485–498. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.09.033

Kelly, J. R., Borre, Y., O’Brien, C., Patterson, E., El Aidy, S., Deane, J., et al.
(2016). Transferring the blues: depression-associated gut microbiota induces
neurobehavioural changes in the rat. J. Psychiatr. Res. 82, 109–118. doi: 10.1016/
j.jpsychires.2016.07.019

Keshavarzian, A., Green, S. J., Engen, P. A., Voigt, R. M., Naqib, A., Forsyth, C. B.,
et al. (2015). Colonic bacterial composition in Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord.
30, 1351–1360. doi: 10.1002/mds.26307

Khosravi, A., Yáñez, A., Price, J. G., Chow, A., Merad, M., Goodridge, H. S., et al.
(2014). Gut microbiota promote hematopoiesis to control bacterial infection.
Cell Host Microbe 15, 374–381. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2014.02.006

Kim, S. H., and Lord, C. (2012). New autism diagnostic interview-revised
algorithms for toddlers and young preschoolers from 12 to 47 months of age.
J. Autism Dev. Disord. 42, 82–93. doi: 10.1007/s10803-011-1213-1

Koba, K., Akahoshi, A., Yamasaki, M., Tanaka, K., Yamada, K., Iwata, T., et al.
(2002). Dietary conjugated linolenic acid in relation to CLA diﬀerently modiﬁes
body fat mass and serum and liver lipid levels in rats. Lipids 37, 343–350.
doi: 10.1007/s11745-002-0901-7

Koeth, R. A., Wang, Z., Levison, B. S., Buﬀa, J. A., Org, E., Sheehy, B. T., et al.
(2013). Intestinal microbiota metabolism of L-carnitine, a nutrient in red meat,
promotes atherosclerosis. Nat. Med. 19, 576–585. doi: 10.1038/nm.3145

Koliada, A.,

Syzenko, G., Moseiko, V., Budovska, L., Puchkov, K.,
Perederiy, V., et al. (2017). Association between body mass index and
Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio in an adult Ukrainian population. BMC
Microbiol. 17:120. doi: 10.1186/s12866-017-1027-1

Konturek, P. C., Koziel, J., Dieterich, W., Haziri, S., Wirtz, I., Glowczyk, K., et al.
(2016). Successful therapy of Clostridium diﬃcile infection with fecal microbiota
transplantation. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 67, 859–866.

Landers, C. J., Cohavy, O., Misra, R., Yang, H., Lin, Y. C., Braun, J., et al. (2002).
Selected loss of tolerance evidenced by Crohns disease–associated immune
responses to auto- and microbial antigens. Gastroenterology 123, 689–699.
doi: 10.1053/gast.2002.35379

Laparra, J. M., Olivares, M., Gallina, O., and Sanz, Y. (2012). Biﬁdobacterium
longum CECT 7347 modulates immune responses in a gliadin-induced
enteropathy animal model. PLoS One 7:e30744. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0030744

Jackson, P. B., Boccuto, L., Skinner, C., Collins, J. S., Neri, G., Gurrieri, F., et al.
(2009). Further evidence that the rs1858830 C variant in the promoter region
of theMETgene is associated with autistic disorder. Autism Res. 2, 232–236.
doi: 10.1002/aur.87

Larrosa, M., González-Sarrías, A., García-Conesa, M. T., Tomás-Barberán, F. A.,
and Espín, J. C. (2006). Urolithins, ellagic acid-derived metabolites produced
by human colonic microﬂora, exhibit estrogenic and antiestrogenic activities.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 54, 1611–1620. doi: 10.1021/jf0527403

Johanesen, P. A., Mackin, K. E., Hutton, M. L., Awad, M. M., Larcombe, S.,
Amy, J. M., et al. (2015). Disruption of the gut microbiome: Clostridium
diﬃcile infection and the threat of antibiotic resistance. Genes 6, 1347–1360.
doi: 10.3390/genes6041347

Johansson, M. E. V., Phillipson, M., Petersson, J., Velcich, A., Holm, L., and
Hansson, G. C. (2008). The inner of the two Muc2 mucin-dependent mucus
layers in colon is devoid of bacteria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 15064–
15069. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0803124105

Johnson, C. H., Dejea, C. M., Edler, D., Hoang, L. T., Santidrian, A. F.,
Felding, B. H., et al. (2015). Metabolism links bacterial bioﬁlms and colon
carcinogenesis. Cell Metab. 21, 891–897. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2015.04.011

Joossens, M., De Preter, V., Ballet, V., Verbeke, K., Rutgeerts, P., and
Vermeire, S. (2012). Eﬀect of oligofructose-enriched inulin (OF-IN) on
bacterial composition and disease activity of patients with Crohn’s disease:
results from a double-blinded randomised controlled trial. Gut 61:958.
doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300413

Kabouridis, P. S., Lasrado, R., McCallum, S., Chng, S. H., Snippert, H. J.,
Clevers, H., et al. (2015). Microbiota controls the homeostasis of glial cells in
the gut lamina propria. Neuron 85, 289–295. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.037
Kalliomäki, M., Kirjavainen, P., Eerola, E., Kero, P., Salminen, S., and Isolauri, E.
(2001). Distinct patterns of neonatal gut microﬂora in infants in whom
atopy was and was not developing. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 107, 129–134.
doi: 10.1067/mai.2001.111237

Kamada, N., Chen, G. Y., Inohara, N., and Núñez, G. (2013). Control of
pathogens and pathobionts by the gut microbiota. Nat. Immunol. 14, 685–690.
doi: 10.1038/ni.2608

Kawashima, H., Nakajima, Y., Matubara, Y., Nakanowatari, J., Fukuta, T.,
Mizuno, S., et al.
(1997). Eﬀects of vitamin K2 (menatetrenone) on
atherosclerosis and blood coagulation in hypercholesterolemic rabbits. Jpn. J.
Pharmacol. 75, 135–143. doi: 10.1254/jjp.75.135

Larrosa, M., González-Sarrías, A., Yáñez-Gascón, M. J., Selma, M. V., Azorín-
Ortuño, M., Toti, S., et al. (2010). Anti-inﬂammatory properties of a
pomegranate extract and its metabolite urolithin-A in a colitis rat model and
the eﬀect of colon inﬂammation on phenolic metabolism. J. Nutr. Biochem. 21,
717–725. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2009.04.012

Lawley, T. D., and Walker, A. W. (2013). Intestinal colonization resistance.

Immunology 138, 1–11. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2012.03616.x

LeBlanc, J. G., Laiño, J. E., del Valle, M. J., Vannini, V., Van Sinderen, D., Taranto,
M. P., etal. (2011). B-Group vitamin production by lactic acid bacteria–current
knowledge and potential applications. J. Appl. Microbiol. 111, 1297–1309. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2672.2011.05157.x

Lee, H. C., Jenner, A. M., Low, C. S., and Lee, Y. K. (2006). Eﬀect of tea
phenolics and their aromatic fecal bacterial metabolites on intestinal
microbiota. Res. Microbiol. 157, 876–884. doi: 10.1016/j.resmic.2006.
07.004

Lee, H. Y., Park, J.-H., Seok, S.-H., Baek, M.-W., Kim, D.-J., Lee, K.-E., et al. (2006).
Human originated bacteria, Lactobacillus rhamnosus PL60, produce conjugated
linoleic acid and show anti-obesity eﬀects in diet-induced obese mice. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1761, 736–744. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2006.05.007

Lee, J. M., Wagner, M., Xiao, R., Kim, K. H., Feng, D., Lazar, M. A., et al. (2014).
Nutrient-sensing nuclear receptors coordinate autophagy. Nature 516, 112–115.
doi: 10.1038/nature13961

Lee, J. W., Kim, E. H., Yim, I. B., and Joo, H. G. (2004). Immunomodulatory and
antitumor eﬀects in vivo by the cytoplasmic fraction of Lactobacillus casei and
Biﬁdobacterium longum. J. Vet. Sci. 5, 41–48.

Lennard-Jones, J. E. (1989). Classiﬁcation of inﬂammatory bowel disease. Scand. J.

Gastroenterol. 24, 2–6. doi: 10.3109/00365528909091339

Lepage, P., Colombet, J., Marteau, P., Sime-Ngando, T., Doré, J., and Leclerc, M.
(2008). Dysbiosis in inﬂammatory bowel disease: a role for bacteriophages? Gut
57, 424–425. doi: 10.1136/gut.2007.134668

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

20

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 21

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

Lerner, A., Aminov, R., and Matthias, T. (2016). Dysbiosis may trigger autoimmune
diseases via inappropriate post-translational modiﬁcation of host proteins.
Front. Microbiol. 7:84. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00084

Lerner, A., and Matthias, T. (2015). Changes in intestinal

junction
permeability associated with industrial
food additives explain the rising
incidence of autoimmune disease. Autoimmun. Rev. 14, 479–489. doi: 10.1016/
j.autrev.2015.01.009

tight

Lerner, A., Aminov, R., and Matthias, T. (2017a). Transglutaminases in dysbiosis
as potential environmental drivers of autoimmunity. Front. Microbiol. 8:66.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00066

Lerner, A., Neidhöfer, S., and Matthias, T. (2017b). The gut microbiome feelings
of the brain: a perspective for non-microbiologists. Microorganisms 5:E66. doi:
10.3390/microorganisms5040066

Lessa, F. C., Mu, Y., Bamberg, W. M., Beldavs, Z. G., Dumyati, G. K., Dunn,
J. R., et al. (2015). Burden of Clostridium diﬃcile infection in the United States.
N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 825–834. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1408913

Ley, R. E., Bäckhed, F., Turnbaugh, P., Lozupone, C. A., Knight, R. D., and Gordon,
J. I. (2005). Obesity alters gut microbial ecology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
102, 11070–11075. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0504978102

Ley, R. E., Turnbaugh, P. J., Klein, S., and Gordon, J. I. (2006). Microbial ecology:
human gut microbes associated with obesity. Nature 444, 1022–1023. doi: 10.
1038/4441022a

Li, Y., Kundu, P., Seow, S. W., de Matos, C. T., Aronsson, L., Chin, K. C.,
et al. (2012). Gut microbiota accelerate tumor growth via c-jun and STAT3
phosphorylation in APC Min/+ mice. Carcinogenesis 33, 1231–1238. doi: 10.
1093/carcin/bgs137

Lindfors, K., Blomqvist, T., Juuti-Uusitalo, K., Stenman, S., Venäläinen, J.,
(2008). Live probiotic Biﬁdobacterium lactis bacteria
Mäki, M., et al.
inhibit
induced by wheat gliadin in epithelial cell
culture. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 152, 552–558. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2008.03
635.x

the toxic eﬀects

Liu, X., Zou, Q., Zeng, B., Fang, Y., and Wei, H. (2013). Analysis of fecal
Lactobacillus community structure in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis.
Curr. Microbiol. 67, 170–176. doi: 10.1007/s00284-013-0338-1

Lloyd-Price, J., Abu-Ali, G., and Huttenhower, C. (2016). The healthy human

microbiome. Genome Med. 8:51. doi: 10.1186/s13073-016-0307-y

Loftus, E. V. (2004). Clinical epidemiology of inﬂammatory bowel disease:
incidence, prevalence, and environmental inﬂuences. Gastroenterology 126,
1504–1517. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2004.01.063

Ludvigsson, J. F., Montgomery, S. M., Ekbom, A., Brandt, L., and Granath, F.
(2009). Small-intestinal histopathology and mortality risk in celiac disease.
JAMA 302, 1171–1178. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.1320

Luo, X. M., Edwards, M. R., Mu, Q., Yu, Y., Vieson, M. D., Reilly, C. M., et al. (2018).
Gut microbiota in human systemic lupus erythematosus and a mouse model of
lupus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 84:e2288-17. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02288-17
Machiels, K., Joossens, M., Sabino, J., De Preter, V., Arijs, I., Eeckhaut, V., et al.
(2014). A decrease of the butyrate-producing species Roseburia hominis and
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii deﬁnes dysbiosis in patients with ulcerative colitis.
Gut 63, 1275–1283. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2013-304833

Mahe, S., Corthier, G., and Dubos, F. (1987). Eﬀect of various diets on toxin
production by two strains of Clostridium diﬃcile in gnotobiotic mice. Infect.
Immun. 55, 1801–1805.

Marasco, G., Di Biase, A. R., Schiumerini, R., Eusebi, L. H., Iughetti, L., Ravaioli, F.,
et al. (2016). Gut microbiota and celiac disease. Dig. Dis. Sci. 61, 1461–1472.
doi: 10.1007/s10620-015-4020-2

McNally, L., and Brown, S. P. (2015). Building the microbiome in health and
disease: niche construction and social conﬂict in bacteria. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 370:20140298. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2014.0298

Medina, M., De Palma, G., Ribes-Koninckx, C., Calabuig, M., and Sanz, Y.
(2008). Biﬁdobacterium strains suppress in vitro the pro-inﬂammatory milieu
triggered by the large intestinal microbiota of coeliac patients. J. Inﬂamm. 5:19.
doi: 10.1186/1476-9255-5-19

Miernikiewicz, P., Kłopot, A., Soluch, R., Szkuta, P., Ke¸ska, W., Hodyra-
Stefaniak, K., et al. (2016). T4 phage tail adhesin gp12 counteracts LPS-induced
inﬂammation in vivo. Front. Microbiol. 7:1112. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01112
Moncrief, J. S., Duncan, A. J., Wright, R. L., Barroso, L. A., and Wilkins,
T. D. (1998). Molecular characterization of the fragilysin pathogenicity islet of
enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis. Infect. Immun. 66, 1735–1739.

Mulder, S. J., and Mulder-Bos, G. C. (2006). Most probable origin of coeliac
disease is low immune globulin A in the intestine caused by malfunction
of Peyer’s patches. Med. Hypotheses 66, 757–762. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2005.
09.050

Murri, M., Leiva, I., Gomez-Zumaquero, J. M., Tinahones, F. J., Cardona, F.,
Soriguer, F., et al. (2013). Gut microbiota in children with type 1 diabetes
diﬀers from that in healthy children: a case-control study. BMC Med. 11:46.
doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-11-46

Mustalahti, K., Catassi, C., Reunanen, A., Fabiani, E., Heier, M., McMillan, S., et al.
(2010). The prevalence of celiac disease in Europe: results of a centralized,
international mass screening project. Ann. Med. 42, 587–595. doi: 10.3109/
07853890.2010.505931

Nadal, I., Donant, E., Ribes-Koninckx, C., Calabuig, M., and Sanz, Y. (2007).
Imbalance in the composition of the duodenal microbiota of children with
coeliac disease. J. Med. Microbiol. 56, 1669–1674. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.47410-0
Nagao-Kitamoto, H., Shreiner, A. B., Gilliland, M. G. I. I. I., Kitamoto, S., Ishii, C.,
Hirayama, A., et al. (2016). Functional characterization of inﬂammatory bowel
disease–associated gut dysbiosis in gnotobiotic mice. Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol.
Hepatol. 2, 468–481.

Neyrinck, A. M., Possemiers, S., Druart, C., Wiele, T. V. D., Backer, F. D., Cani,
P. D., et al. (2011). Prebiotic eﬀects of wheat arabinoxylan related to the increase
in Biﬁdobacteria, Roseburia and Bacteroides/Prevotella in diet-induced obese
mice. PLoS One 6:e20944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020944

Nicholson, J. K., Holmes, E., Kinross, J., Burcelin, R., Gibson, G., Jia, W., et al.
(2012). Host-gut microbiota metabolic interactions. Science 336, 1262–1267.
doi: 10.1126/science.1223813

Nie, Y. F., Hu, J., and Yan, X.-H. (2015). Cross-talk between bile acids and intestinal
microbiota in host metabolism and health. J. Zhejiang Univ. Sci. B 16, 436–446.
doi: 10.1631/jzus.b1400327

Nishioku, T., Matsumoto, J., Dohgu, S., Sumi, N., Miyao, K., Takata, F., et al.
(2010). Tumor necrosis factor-α mediates the blood–brain barrier dysfunction
induced by activated microglia in mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells.
J. Pharmacol. Sci. 112, 251–254. doi: 10.1254/jphs.09292sc

Ochoa-Cortes, F., Turco, F., Linan-Rico, A., Soghomonyan, S., Whitaker, E.,
Wehner, S.,
in
neurogastroenterology and clinical target for inﬂammatory bowel diseases.
Inﬂamm. Bowel Dis. 22, 433–449. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000667

(2015). Enteric glial

a new frontier

cells:

al.

et

Okunishi, K., Dohi, M., Nakagome, K., Tanaka, R., Mizuno, S., Matsumoto, K.,
et al. (2005). A novel role of hepatocyte growth factor as an immune regulator
through suppressing dendritic cell function. J. Immunol. 175, 4745–4753.
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.7.4745

Olivares, M., Castillejo, G., Varea, V., and Sanz, Y. (2014). Double-blind,
randomised, placebo-controlled intervention trial to evaluate the eﬀects of
Biﬁdobacterium longum CECT 7347 in children with newly diagnosed coeliac
disease. Br. J. Nutr. 112, 30–40. doi: 10.1017/S0007114514000609

Orberg, E. T., Fan, H., Tam, A. J., Dejea, C. M., Shields, C. D., Wu, S., et al. (2017).
The myeloid immune signature of enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis-induced
murine colon tumorigenesis. Mucosal Immunol. 10, 421–433. doi: 10.1038/mi.
2016.53

Patrick, S., Jobling, K. L., O’Connor, D., Thacker, Z., Dryden, D. T., and Blakely,
G. W. (2011). A unique homologue of the eukaryotic protein-modiﬁer ubiquitin
present in the bacterium Bacteroides fragilis, a predominant resident of the
human gastrointestinal tract. Microbiology 157, 3071–3078. doi: 10.1099/mic.
0.049940-0

Paust, S., Lu, L., Mccarty, N., and Cantor, H. (2004). Engagement of B7 on eﬀector
T cells by regulatory T cells prevents autoimmune disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 101, 10398–10403. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0403342101

Payne, A. N., Chassard, C., Banz, Y., and Lacroix, C. (2012). The composition and
metabolic activity of child gut microbiota demonstrate diﬀerential adaptation
to varied nutrient loads in an in vitro model of colonic fermentation. FEMS
Microbiol. Ecol. 80, 608–623. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2012.01330.x

Pear, S. M., Williamson, T. H., Bettin, K. M., Gerding, D. N., and Galgiani, J. N.
(1994). Decrease in nosocomial Clostridium diﬃcile–associated diarrhea by
restricting clindamycin use. Ann. Intern. Med. 120, 272–277. doi: 10.7326/0003-
4819-120-4-199402150-00003

Peng, L., He, Z., Chen, W., Holzman, I. R., and Lin, J. (2007). Eﬀects of butyrate on
intestinal barrier function in a caco-2 cell monolayer model of intestinal barrier.
Pediatr. Res. 61, 37–41. doi: 10.1203/01.pdr.0000250014.92242.f3

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

21

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 22

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

Pépin, J., Saheb, N., Coulombe, M.-A., Alary, M.-E., Corriveau, M.-P., Authier, S.,
et al. (2005). Emergence of ﬂuoroquinolones as the predominant risk factor for
Clostridium diﬃcile-associated diarrhea: a cohort study during an epidemic in
Quebec. Clin. Infect. Dis. 41, 1254–1260. doi: 10.1086/496986

Shi, L., Zhang, Z., Angela, M. Y., Wang, W., Wei, Z., Akhter, E., et al. (2014). The
SLE transcriptome exhibits evidence of chronic endotoxin exposure and has
widespread dysregulation of non-coding and coding RNAs. PLoS One 9:e93846.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093846

Perez-Cano, F. J., Gonzalez-Castro, A., Castellote, C., Franch, A., and Castell, M.
(2010). Inﬂuence of breast milk polyamines on suckling rat immune system
maturation. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 34, 210–218. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2009.
10.001

Pistollato, F., Sumalla Cano, S., Elio, I., Masias Vergara, M., Giampieri, F., and
Battino, M. (2016). Role of gut microbiota and nutrients in amyloid formation
and pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. Nutr. Rev. 74, 624–634. doi: 10.1093/
nutrit/nuw023

Png, C. W., Lindén, S. K., Gilshenan, K. S., Zoetendal, E. G., Mcsweeney, C. S., Sly,
L. I., et al. (2010). Mucolytic bacteria with increased prevalence in IBD mucosa
augment in vitro utilization of mucin by other bacteria. Am. J. Gastroenterol.
105, 2420–2428. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2010.281

Pool-Zobel, B. L., Neudecker, C., Domizlaﬀ, I., Ji, S., Schillinger, U., Rumney, C.,
et al. (1996). Lactobacillus-and Biﬁdobacterium-mediated antigenotoxicity in
the colon of rats. Nutr. Cancer 26, 365–380. doi: 10.1080/0163558960951
4492

Pruitt, R. N., Chumbler, N. M., Rutherford, S. A., Farrow, M. A., Friedman, D. B.,
Spiller, B., et al. (2012). Structural determinants of Clostridium diﬃcile toxin
a glucosyltransferase activity. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 8013–8020. doi: 10.1074/jbc.
M111.298414

Qin, J., Li, Y., Cai, Z., Li, S., Zhu, J., Zhang, F., et al. (2012). A metagenome-
wide association study of gut microbiota in type 2 diabetes. Nature 490, 55–60.
doi: 10.1038/nature11450

Rakoﬀ-Nahoum, S., Paglino, J., Eslami-Varzaneh, F., Edberg, S., and Medzhitov, R.
(2004). Recognition of commensal microﬂora by toll-like receptors is required
for intestinal homeostasis. Cell 118, 229–241. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.07.002
Rooks, M. G., and Garrett, W. S. (2016). Gut microbiota, metabolites and host

immunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16, 341–352. doi: 10.1038/nri.2016.42

Rubinstein, M. R., Wang, X., Liu, W., Hao, Y., Cai, G., and Han, Y. W. (2013).
Fusobacterium nucleatum promotes colorectal carcinogenesis by modulating
E-cadherin/β-catenin signaling via its FadA adhesin. Cell Host Microbe 14,
195–206. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2013.07.012

Ruseler-van Embden, J. G. H., and Both-Patoir, H. C. (1983). Anaerobic gram-
negative faecal ﬂora in patients with Crohn’s disease and healthy subjects.
Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 49, 125–132. doi: 10.1007/BF00393670

Salminen, S., Bouley, C., Boutron, M.-C., Cummings, J. H., Franck, A., Gibson,
G. R., et al. (1998). Functional food science and gastrointestinal physiology and
function. Br. J. Nutr. 80, 147–171. doi: 10.1079/bjn19980108

Shultz, S. R., Aziz, N. A., Yang, L., Sun, M., Macfabe, D. F., and O’Brien,
T. J. (2015). Intracerebroventricular injection of propionic acid, an enteric
metabolite implicated in autism, induces social abnormalities that do not diﬀer
between seizure-prone (FAST) and seizure-resistant (SLOW) rats. Behav. Brain
Res. 278, 542–548. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.10.050

Silva, A. M., Bambirra, E. A., Oliveira, A. L., Souza, P. P., Gomes, D. A., Vieira,
E. C., et al. (1999). Protective eﬀect of biﬁdus milk on the experimental infection
with Salmonella enteritidis subsp. typhimurium in conventional and gnotobiotic
mice.
J. Appl. Microbiol. 86, 331–336. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2672.1999.00
674.x

Singh, J., Rivenson, A., Tomita, M., Shimamura, S., Ishibashi, N., and Reddy, B. S.
(1997). Biﬁdobacterium longum, a lactic acid-producing intestinal bacterium
inhibits colon cancer and modulates the intermediate biomarkers of colon
carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis 18, 833–841. doi: 10.1093/carcin/18.4.833

Sivan, A., Corrales, L., Hubert, N., Williams, J. B., Aquino-Michaels, K., Earley,
Z. M., et al. (2015). Commensal Biﬁdobacterium promotes antitumor immunity
and facilitates anti–PD-L1 eﬃcacy. Science 350, 1084–1089. doi: 10.1126/
science.aac4255

J.

Sokol, H., Pigneur, B., Watterlot, L., Lakhdari, O., Bermúdez-Humarán, L. G.,
Gratadoux,
is an anti-
J., et al. (2008). Faecalibacterium prausnitzii
inﬂammatory commensal bacterium identiﬁed by gut microbiota analysis of
Crohn disease patients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 16731–16736. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0804812105

Solinas, G., Summermatter, S., Mainieri, D., Gubler, M., Montani,

J. P.,
Seydoux, J., et al. (2006). Corticotropin-releasing hormone directly stimulates
thermogenesis in skeletal muscle possibly through substrate cycling between de
novo lipogenesis and lipid oxidation. Endocrinology 147, 31–38. doi: 10.1210/
en.2005-1033

Song, H. J., Shim, K.-N., Jung, S.-A., Choi, H. J., Lee, M. A., Ryu, K. H., et al. (2008).
Antibiotic-associated diarrhea: candidate organisms other than Clostridium
diﬃcile. Korean J. Intern. Med. 23, 9–15. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2008.23.1.9

Song, Y., Liu, C., and Finegold, S. M. (2004). Real-time PCR quantitation of
Clostridia in feces of autistic children. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70, 6459–6465.
doi: 10.1128/aem.70.11.6459-6465.2004

Soret, R., Chevalier, J., De Coppet, P., Poupeau, G., Derkinderen, P., Segain, J. P.,
et al. (2010). Short-chain fatty acids regulate the enteric neurons and control
gastrointestinal motility in rats. Gastroenterology 138, 1772–1782. doi: 10.1053/
j.gastro.2010.01.053

Salzman, N. H., Hung, K., Haribhai, D., Chu, H., Karlsson-Sjöberg, J., Amir, E.,
et al. (2010). Enteric defensins are essential regulators of intestinal microbial
ecology. Nat. Immunol. 11, 76–83. doi: 10.1038/ni.1825

Sorg, J. A., and Sonenshein, A. L. (2008). Bile salts and glycine as cogerminants for
Clostridium diﬃcile spores. J. Bacteriol. 190, 2505–2512. doi: 10.1128/jb.01765-
07

Samuel, B. S., Shaito, A., Motoike, T., Rey, F. E., Backhed, F., Manchester, J. K., et al.
(2008). Eﬀects of the gut microbiota on host adiposity are modulated by the
short-chain fatty-acid binding G protein-coupled receptor, Gpr41. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 16767–16772. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0808567105

Samuel, P., Holtzman, C. M., Meilman, E., and Sekowski, I. (1973). Eﬀect
of neomycin and other antibiotics on serum cholesterol
levels and on
7α-dehydroxylation of bile acids by the fecal bacterial ﬂora in man. Circ. Res.
33, 393–402. doi: 10.1161/01.res.33.4.393

Sanz, Y., Palma, G. D., and Laparra, M. (2011). Unraveling the ties between celiac
disease and intestinal microbiota. Int. Rev. Immunol. 30, 207–218. doi: 10.3109/
08830185.2011.599084

Staels, B., and Fonseca, V. A. (2009). Bile acids and metabolic regulation:
mechanisms and clinical responses to bile acid sequestration. Diabetes Care
32(Suppl. 2), S237–S245. doi: 10.2337/dc09-s355

Stedtfeld, R. D., Chai, B., Crawford, R. B., Stedtfeld, T. M., Williams, M. R.,
Xiangwen, S., et al. (2017). Modulatory inﬂuence of segmented ﬁlamentous
bacteria on transcriptomic response of gnotobiotic mice exposed to TCDD.
Front. Microbiol. 8:1708. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01708

Stene, L. C., Honeyman, M. C., Hoﬀenberg, E. J., Haas, J. E., Sokol, R. J.,
Emery, L., et al. (2006). Rotavirus infection frequency and risk of celiac disease
autoimmunity in early childhood: a longitudinal study. Am. J. Gastroenterol.
101, 2333–2340. doi: 10.1111/j.1572-0241.2006.00741.x

Sato, J., Kanazawa, A., Ikeda, F., Yoshihara, T., Goto, H., Abe, H., et al. (2014). Gut
dysbiosis and detection of “live gut bacteria” in blood of Japanese patients with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 37, 2343–2350. doi: 10.2337/dc13-2817

Stepniak, D., and Koning, F. (2006). Celiac disease—sandwiched between innate
and adaptive immunity. Hum. Immunol. 67, 460–468. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.
2006.03.011

Scher, J. U., Sczesnak, A., Longman, R. S., Segata, N., Ubeda, C., Bielski, C.,
et al.
intestinal Prevotella copri correlates with
enhanced susceptibility to arthritis. eLife 2:e01202. doi: 10.7554/eLife.
01202

(2013). Expansion of

Selma, M. V., Espin, J. C., and Tomas-Barberan, F. A. (2009). Interaction between
phenolics and gut microbiota: role in human health. J. Agric. Food Chem. 57,
6485–6501. doi: 10.1021/jf902107d

Sender, R., Fuchs, S., and Milo, R. (2016). Revised estimates for the number of
human and bacteria cells in the body. PLoS Biol. 14:e1002533. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pbio.1002533

Swidsinski, A., Loening-Baucke, V., Theissig, F., Engelhardt, H., Bengmark, S.,
Koch, S., et al. (2007). Comparative study of the intestinal mucus barrier in
normal and inﬂamed colon. Gut 56, 343–350. doi: 10.1136/gut.2006.098160
Tap, J., Mondot, S., Levenez, F., Pelletier, E., Caron, C., Furet, J. P., et al.
(2009). Towards the human intestinal microbiota phylogenetic core. Environ.
Microbiol. 11, 2574–2584. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2009.01982.x

Thangaraju, M., Cresci, G. A., Liu, K., Ananth, S., Gnanaprakasam, J. P., Browning,
D. D., et al. (2009). GPR109A is a G-protein–coupled receptor for the bacterial
fermentation product butyrate and functions as a tumor suppressor in colon.
Cancer Res. 69, 2826–2832. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4466

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

22

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

fmicb-09-01835

August 11, 2018

Time: 17:24

# 23

Kho and Lal

Gut Microbiome in Human Health

The Human Microbiome Project Consortium. (2012). A framework for human

microbiome research. Nature 486, 215–221. doi: 10.1038/nature11209

Theriot, C. M., Koenigsknecht, M. J., Carlson, P. E., Hatton, G. E., Nelson, A. M.,
Li, B., et al. (2014). Antibiotic-induced shifts in the mouse gut microbiome
and metabolome increase susceptibility to Clostridium diﬃcile infection. Nat.
Commun. 5:3114. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4114

Tjellström, B., Stenhammar, L., Högberg, L., Fälth-Magnusson, K., Magnusson,
K. E., Midtvedt, T., et al. (2005). Gut microﬂora associated characteristics in
children with celiac disease. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 100, 2784–2788. doi: 10.1111/
j.1572-0241.2005.00313.x

Tolhurst, G., Heﬀron, H., Lam, Y. S., Parker, H. E., Habib, A. M., Diakogiannaki, E.,
et al. (2012). Short-chain fatty acids stimulate glucagon-like peptide-1 secretion
via the G-protein–coupled receptor FFAR2. Diabetes Metab. Res. Rev. 61,
364–371. doi: 10.2337/db11-1019

Turnbaugh, P. J., Hamady, M., Yatsunenko, T., Cantarel, B. L., Duncan, A., Ley,
R. E., et al. (2009a). A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins. Nature 457,
480–484. doi: 10.1038/nature07540

Wei, W., Sun, W., Yu, S., Yang, Y., and Ai, L. (2016). Butyrate production
from high-ﬁber diet protects against lymphoma tumor. Leuk. Lymphoma 57,
2401–2408. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2016.1144879

Wiedermann, C. J., Kiechl, S., Dunzendorfer, S., Schratzberger, P., Egger, G.,
Oberhollenzer, F., et al. (1999). Association of endotoxemia with carotid
atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease: prospective results from the Bruneck
Study. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 34, 1975–1981. doi: 10.1016/S0735-1097(99)
00448-9

Wikoﬀ, W. R., Anfora, A. T., Liu, J., Schultz, P. G., Lesley, S. A., Peters, E. C.,
et al. (2009). Metabolomics analysis reveals large eﬀects of gut microﬂora on
mammalian blood metabolites. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 3698–3703.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0812874106

Willing, B. P., Dicksved,

J., Halfvarson,

J., Andersson, A. F., Lucio, M.,
Zheng, Z., et al. (2010). A pyrosequencing study in twins shows that
gastrointestinal microbial proﬁles vary with inﬂammatory bowel disease
phenotypes. Gastroenterology 139, 1844.e1–1854.e1. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.
08.049

Turnbaugh, P. J., Ridaura, V. K., Faith, J. J., Rey, F. E., Knight, R., and Gordon,
J. I. (2009b). The eﬀect of diet on the human gut microbiome: a metagenomic
analysis in humanized gnotobiotic mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 1:6ra14. doi: 10.1126/
scitranslmed.3000322

Wollowski, I., Ji, S. T., Bakalinsky, A. T., Neudecker, C., and Pool-Zobel, B. L.
(1999). Bacteria used for the production of yogurt inactivate carcinogens and
prevent DNA damage in the colon of rats. J. Nutr. 129, 77–82. doi: 10.1093/jn/
129.1.77

Turnbaugh, P. J., Ley, R. E., Mahowald, M. A., Magrini, V., Mardis, E. R., and
Gordon, J. I. (2006). An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased
capacity for energy harvest. Nature 444, 1027–1031. doi: 10.1038/nature0
5414

World Health Organization [WHO] (2016). Obesity and Overweight. Available at:
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/ [accessed 1 Jul. 2017].
World Health Organization [WHO] (2017). Autism Spectrum Disorders. Available
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/autism-spectrum-disorders/

Ulger Toprak, N., Yagci, A., Gulluoglu, B. M., Akin, M. L., Demirkalem, P.,
Celenk, T., et al. (2006). A possible role of Bacteroides fragilis enterotoxin in
the aetiology of colorectal cancer. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 12, 782–786. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-0691.2006.01494.x

Van Belleghem,

J. D., Clement, F., Merabishvili, M., Lavigne, R., and
Vaneechoutte, M. (2017). Pro-and anti-inﬂammatory responses of peripheral
blood mononuclear cells induced by Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa phages. Sci. Rep. 7:8004. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-08336-9

van Nood, E., Vrieze, A., Nieuwdorp, M., Fuentes, S., Zoetendal, E. G., De
Vos, W. M. D., et al. (2013). Duodenal infusion of donor feces for recurrent
Clostridium diﬃcile. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 407–415. doi: 10.1056/nejmoa1205037
Vasiliauskas, E. A., Kam, L. Y., Karp, L. C., Gaiennie, J., Yang, H., and Targan,
S. R. (2000). Marker antibody expression stratiﬁes Crohns disease into
immunologically homogeneous subgroups with distinct clinical characteristics.
Gut 47, 487–496. doi: 10.1136/gut.47.4.487

Vaziri, N. D., Wong, J., Pahl, M., Piceno, Y. M., Yuan, J., DeSantis, T. Z., et al.
(2013). Chronic kidney disease alters intestinal microbial ﬂora. Kidney Int. 83,
308–315. doi: 10.1038/ki.2012.345

Venkatesh, M., Mukherjee, S., Wang, H., Li, H., Sun, K., Benechet, A. P.,
et al. (2014). Symbiotic bacterial metabolites regulate gastrointestinal barrier
function via the xenobiotic sensor PXR and Toll-like receptor 4. Immunity 41,
296–310. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.06.014

Vétizou, M., Pitt, J. M., Daillère, R., Lepage, P., Waldschmitt, N., Flament, C.,
et al. (2015). Anticancer immunotherapy by CTLA-4 blockade relies on the gut
microbiota. Science 350, 1079–1084. doi: 10.1126/science.aad1329

Wagner, J., Maksimovic, J., Farries, G., Sim, W. H., Bishop, R. F., Cameron, D. J.,
et al. (2013). Bacteriophages in gut samples from pediatric Crohn’s disease
patients: metagenomic analysis using 454 pyrosequencing. Inﬂamm. Bowel Dis.
19, 1598–1608. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0b013e318292477c

Wang, L. W., Tancredi, D. J., and Thomas, D. W. (2011). The prevalence of
gastrointestinal problems in children across the United States with autism
spectrum disorders from families with multiple aﬀected members. J. Dev. Behav.
Pediatr. 32, 351–360. doi: 10.1097/dbp.0b013e31821bd06a

Wang, T., Cai, G., Qiu, Y., Fei, N., Zhang, M., Pang, X., et al. (2012). Structural
segregation of gut microbiota between colorectal cancer patients and healthy
volunteers. ISME J. 6, 320–329. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2011.109

Wang, Z., Klipfell, E., Bennett, B. J., Koeth, R., Levison, B. S., DuGar, B., et al.
(2011). Gut ﬂora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular
disease. Nature 472, 57–63. doi: 10.1038/nature09922

Wehkamp, J., Salzman, N. H., Porter, E., Nuding, S., Weichenthal, M., Petras, R. E.,
et al. (2005). Reduced paneth cell α-defensins in ileal Crohns disease. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 18129–18134. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0505256102

at:
en/ [accessed 1 Jul. 2017].

Wu, N., Yang, X., Zhang, R., Li, J., Xiao, X., Hu, Y., et al. (2013). Dysbiosis signature
of fecal microbiota in colorectal cancer patients. Microb. Ecol. 66, 462–470.
doi: 10.1007/s00248-013-0245-9

Wu, S., Lim, K. C., Huang, J., Saidi, R. F., and Sears, C. L. (1998). Bacteroides fragilis
enterotoxin cleaves the zonula adherens protein, E-cadherin. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 95, 14979–14984. doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.25.14979

Wu, S., Morin, P.

(2003). Bacteroides
fragilis enterotoxin induces c-Myc expression and cellular proliferation.
Gastroenterology 124, 392–400. doi: 10.1053/gast.2003.50047

J., Maouyo, D., and Sears, C. L.

Wu, S., Rhee, K. J., Albesiano, E., Rabizadeh, S., Wu, X., Yen, H. R., et al. (2009).
A human colonic commensal promotes colon tumorigenesis via activation of T
helper type 17 T cell responses. Nat. Med. 15, 1016–1022. doi: 10.1038/nm.2015
Wu, Y., Wu, J., Chen, T., Li, Q., Peng, W., Li, H., et al. (2018). Fusobacterium
nucleatum potentiates intestinal tumorigenesis in mice via a toll-like receptor
4/p21-activated kinase 1 cascade. Dig. Dis. Sci. 63, 1210–1218. doi: 10.1007/
s10620-018-4999-2

Xiong, Y., Miyamoto, N., Shibata, K., Valasek, M. A., Motoike, T., Kedzierski, R. M.,
et al. (2004). Short-chain fatty acids stimulate leptin production in adipocytes
through the G protein-coupled receptor GPR41. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
101, 1045–1050. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2637002100

Yang, T., Santisteban, M. M., Rodriguez, V., Li, E., Ahmari, N., Carvajal, J. M., et al.
(2015). Gut dysbiosis is linked to hypertension. Hypertension 65, 1331–1340.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.05315

Yiu, J. H., Dorweiler, B., and Woo, C. W. (2017). Interaction between gut
microbiota and toll-like receptor: from immunity to metabolism. J. Mol. Med.
95, 13–20. doi: 10.1007/s00109-016-1474-4

Yui, K., Kawasaki, Y., Yamada, H., and Ogawa, S. (2016). Oxidative stress
and nitric oxide in autism spectrum disorder and other neuropsychiatric
disorders. CNS Neurol. Disord. Drug Targets 15, 587–596. doi: 10.2174/
1871527315666160413121751

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.

Copyright © 2018 Kho and Lal. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

23

August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1835

