bioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. 

1A

1B

1D

1C

1E

2

Figure 1: Study Design and Population 
Characteristics

1A. The study cohort had 550 adult participants 
(66% female). Each study participant provided 
a stool sample, filled out questionnaires, and 
made an office visit. Then over 14 days, partici-
pants consumed pre-designed meals that were 
provided, they monitored their blood glucose 
response, and they kept a diary of their meals, 
sleep, & activity. At the end of the study, all the 
data streams were fused, pre-processed, and 
analyzed as described in this paper.

The following exclusion criteria were used: 
age<18; dietary restrictions that would prevent 
adherence to any of the study diets; antibiot-
ic use 1 month prior to or during study; skin 
disease (e.g. contact dermatitis) that precludes 
proper attachment of the CGM; pregnancy; ac-
tive neoplastic disease; active neuropsychiatric 
disorder; myocardial infarction or cerebrovas-
cular accident in the 6 months prior; pre-diag-
nosed type I or type II diabetes mellitus; HbA1c 
>= 6.5; or unwilling / incapable of following 
instructions.

1B. Age distribution with mean of 43.8 years (SD 
12.115).

1C. 28% of the study population had BMI > 25 
and 18% had BMI > 30.

1D. 4% of the study population were pre-diabet-
ic with HbA1c% > 5.7.

1E. Waist-to-hip ratio distribution with mean of 
0.901 (SD 0.076) for men and 0.832 (SD 0.071) 
for women.

150 participants, 37% were Asian, 33% were Hispanic, and 30% were 
Black  or  Other.  The  study’s  Research  Protocol  was  approved  by  an 
accredited  IRB  committee  and  all  study  participants  consented  to 
participating in the study. All study participants were at least 18 years 
old. We obtained a stool sample at participation enrollment, as well as 
a comprehensive questionnaire describing their lifestyle, preferences, 
and health history. We collected blood glucose measurements every 
15  minutes  using  a  Continuous  Glucose  Monitor  (CGM)  sensor  that 
measures glucose levels within the range of 40 to 500 mg/dL [Abbott 
2016]. 

Study Meals
As  described  in  Figure  2,  participants  were  provided  pre-designed 
breakfasts,  snacks,  and  lunches  (“provided  meals”)  over  14  days 
(“day  0”  to  “day  13”).  After  lunch,  participants  were  allowed  to  eat 
whatever they wanted (“free meals”) without further guidance on the 
composition, and day 0 consisted of only free meals. Provided meals 

accounted for 66% of all meals and free meals 34%.

Both  provided  and  free  meals  were  recorded  by  all  participants 
during  the  entire  study  period,  using  a  smartphone  app  (Bitesnap). 
We  obtained  macronutrient  and  micronutrient  information  from  the 
smartphone  app  platform  for  further  analysis.  Provided  meals  were 
pre-loaded  into  the  app.  Free  meals  were  loaded  by  users  through 
selection of custom dishes, ingredients, and quantities.

We  asked  the  participants  to  not  perform  intense  exercise  2.5 
hours before or 2.5 hours after meals, to not start probiotics or pre-
biotics, to not take vitamins or supplements during the study (with a 
specific detail to avoid interfering substances as defined in [Abbott 
2016]),  to  not  take  over-the-counter  medication,  and  to  inform  the 
study coordinator if they are prescribed antibiotics during the study.

In order to test our methodology across a range of diets and to 
support  a  range  of  participant  preferences,  we  provided  two  diet 
types – omnivore and vegetarian/gluten-free – in different phases of 
the study. We provided 104 unique pre-designed meals — 71 unique 

Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. 

pre-designed meals in the omnivore diet in two separate waves, and 
33  unique  pre-designed  meals  in  the  vegetarian/gluten-free  diet  in 
one wave. 140 participants signed up for the omnivore diet and 410 
signed up for the vegetarian/gluten-free diet.

To  distribute  macronutrients  across  all  the  meals,  we  designed 
the provided meals using a high (H) / low (L) determination of each 
of the 4 macronutrients – carbs, fiber, protein, and fat – as shown in 
Figure 2A. In this paper, we use the terms carbs and carbohydrates 
interchangeably to mean net carbohydrates, i.e. excluding fiber. High 
(H) and Low (L) were thresholded based on the proportion of each 
macronutrient and their daily recommended allowance. For example, 
day 1 breakfast was high (H), low (L), high (H), low (L), respectively, 
in  carbs,  fiber,  protein,  and  fat.    An  example  meal  plan  is  shown  in 
Figure 2B; over the 14 day period (day 0 consisted of only free meals), 
participants were provided with 39 meals, including one glucose drink. 
The  distribution  of  macronutrients  (Figure  2C)  shows  the  coverage 
of the provided meals within the space of macronutrient proportions.
Figure 2B includes 3 distinct meals that were repeated on days 1 
and 8. A total of 9 distinct meals shown in Figure 2D were repeated 
over the course of the 14 day diet schedules (omnivore and vegetar-
ian/gluten-free)  to  collect  information  regarding  intra-person  vari-
ability; each repeat meal was consumed twice by study participants. 
By design, these repeat meals were generally high in just one or two 
macronutrients. 

Figure 2E shows the data from all study sources for a single par-
ticipant over two days, fused into a single visualization. This visualiza-
tion helped the study administrators to visually inspect the data and 
ensure that data was properly captured and lined up. Based on this 
visual inspection, we observed that some of the CGMs malfunctioned 
with consistent lack of signal, or in some cases the smartphone app 
meal captured events were out of sync with the glucose curves, which 
indicated that the participant did not capture the data as instructed 
(at the point of meal consumption). In either of these cases, we dis-
carded the respective meal data.

Meal  data  was  pre-processed  as  follows.  After  discarding  meals 
that were clearly from malfunctioning CGMs or from erroneous data 
capture,  we  ended  up  with  27630  total  meals,  with  18208  provided 
meals and 9422 free meals. All provided meals were at least 2.5 hours 
apart (participants were instructed). Free meals that were within 30 
mins  were  merged,  and  those  within  90  minutes  of  each  other  dis-
carded. After all of this pre-processing, each participant provided an 
average of approximately 50 meals. 

Microbiome Features
Stool  samples  from  participants  were  processed  using  our  meta-
transcriptomic  method  [Hatch  2019]  to  yield  raw  microbiome  data 
features  including  KEGG  gene  orthologs  (or  “KOs”)  [KEGG]  and 
microbial taxonomy. Our cloud-based bioinformatic pipeline performs 
read QC/trimming, host read filtering, and taxonomic classification at 
three taxonomic ranks (strain, species and genus) through sequence 
alignment to a custom database of more than 110,000 genomes. Func-
tional assignments (KOs) are obtained through alignment to the IGC 
[Li 2014] and KEGG databases. For the samples provided by the 550 
participants in this study, 6587 unique microbial KOs were detected, a 
mean of 2941.9 per sample (s.d. 541.9); and 1047 unique species were 
detected, with a mean of 122.7 (s.d. 40.5).  

3

Collections of these raw microbiome data features were aggregat-
ed into custom microbiome scores designed to capture the collective 
functional characteristics as described in the literature. For example, 
the score microbiome balance, is an aggregate assessment of overall 
ratios of active beneficial and harmful microbes, as well as some di-
versity metrics. This score is binary with a value of “Low” or “Normal”. 
All  microbiome  scores  are  generated  by  taking  expression  data  as 
input, and applying an expert-designed scoring algorithm developed 
at Viome [Perlina et al, in prep.] to derive an overall activity level.

Metabolic  and  signaling  pathway  activities  are  scored  using  ex-
pression levels of genes encoding specific protein functions (KEGG 
mappings  are  used  primarily),  compared  with  a  reference  cohort  of 
samples supplied by Viome customers. Scores measure the quantity 
and expression levels of specific KEGG gene orthologs (KOs) selected 
due to their specific directional enzymatic roles, pathway topology, or 
significance in the functional literature. The more key genes expressed, 
and the higher their expression levels, the higher the resulting score.

RESULTS
Meal Effects
For the remainder of our analyses we look at incremental area under 
the  curve  (iAUC),  a  standard  assessment  of  PPGR  ([Cheng  2018]; 
[Wolever 1986]). We define this as the integrated area under the CGM 
curve over 120 minutes, relative to the baseline CGM measured at the 
time of the meal, i.e., the difference between the area above baseline 
and area below baseline. Note that this measurement can be negative 
due to decline in blood sugar level below the baseline over time, es-
pecially after activity, and due to noise from the measurement device. 
The actual iAUC values for all meals, the repeated meals from Figure 
2D, and the glucose drink are shown in Figure 3A. 

Figure 3B was constructed after modeling iAUC with standardized 
macronutrient values (i.e., z-scores). Linear regression of iAUC on all 
four of the standardized macronutrients was performed at each time-
point after the meal. The plot shows the learned weights for each of 
the standardized macronutrients at each of these timepoints, and this 
reveals the magnitude and time-course of the macronutrient effects. 
Meals with more carbohydrates led to increased postprandial glucose 
(PPG), peaking 45 minutes after the meal, while meals with more fiber 
led to a diminished and delayed PPG. Protein and fat suppress and 
delay the response as shown.

Figure 3C illustrates the variability in responses to a single meal, 
for all meals that were repeated within the provided diet (Figure 2D). 
Intra-person variability is the difference in a participant’s response to 
a single meal when eaten on two occasions.

Predictive Model Development and Evaluation
In this section we first present a linear multilevel mixed-effects or hier-
archical model [Gelman 2007] of PPGRs based on the data described 
above.  The  linear  model  allows  us  to  provide  a  concise  description 
of the relationships between nutrients, anthropometrics, microbiome 
activity,  and  PPGR.  Additionally,  it  allows  us  to  derive  significance 
statistics testing the hypotheses that each predictor is relevant in the 
determination of the PPGR.

Importantly,  the  inclusion  of  random  effects  captures  individual 
variation  in  PPGR  due  to  unobserved  factors  (unknown  properties 
of the individual, meal, or measurement devices) that may affect the 

Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. 

2C

2D

4

Figure 2: Study meal design 
and content

2A. Percentage of each meal cat-
egory within all 18,000+ provided 
meals. Categories were defined 
using proportions of Carbs (H/L), 
Fiber (H/L), Proteins (H/L), and Fats 
(H/L).

2B. In this omnivore diet example, 
meals are shown for several of the 
provided macronutrient groups 
(carbs - fiber - protein - fat).   Meals 
with similar composition “types” 
were distributed across the sched-
ule, and schedule days 1 and 8 were 
repeated meal days. 

2C. Macronutrient proportions of all 
71 unique pre-designed omnivore 
meals (top, blue), all 33 unique 
pre-designed vegetarian/glu-
ten-free meals (middle, blue), and all 
free meals (bottom, red). Provided 
meals account for 66% of all meals, 
and free meals 34%.

2D. Macronutrient information for 
the 9 “repeat meals” which were 
consumed twice by study partici-
pants. Actual servings were adjust-
ed based on the participant’s basal 
metabolic rate (BMR).

2E. Data collected for a single par-
ticipant over 2 days (out of 14). Each 
row is a single day. The blue curve is 
the CGM reading collected every 15 
mins. Vertical bars are meal events, 
showing carbs proportion (blue), fat 
proportion (yellow), and protein pro-
portion (pink). The user interface 
also visualizes a picture of the meal 
and the nutrient details. Grey bars 
represent light and deep sleep. The 
red histogram next to sleep bars is 
the tracked physical activity.

2A

2B

2E

Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. 

outcome. Including random effects is essential in order to derive con-
servative hypothesis tests of both the relevance and magnitude of our 
fixed  effects,  especially  in  a  repeated-measures  design  where  each 
person and each meal provide many data points. Our experimental de-
sign calls for a multilevel model because of this repetition; each PPGR 
observation is at a lower level nested within one person and within one 
meal (higher levels), in a crossed or fully factorial experimental design 
(see Figure 4A). For example, without the multilevel model we could 
not conclusively test the importance of any variable that is constant 
across all data taken from one person, such as microbiome features.

Model  development  was  performed  using  the  lme4  package  in 
R [Bates 2015]. The model was built incrementally. In the first pass, 
we  determined  appropriate  transformations  for  the  nutritional  and 
anthropometric  variables  by  visualizing  the  relationship  between 
each predictor and the iAUC. The effect of carbohydrates appeared 
to be well-described by the square root transformation, while other 
predictors were left untransformed. We then fitted a model of these 
nutritional  and  anthropometric  predictors  as  fixed  effects,  and  ran-
dom intercepts and slopes allowing the nutritional effects to vary be-
tween people and the anthropometric effects to vary between meals. 
Likelihood  ratio  tests  showed  no  evidence  for  any  random  slopes 
of anthropometrics by meal (i.e., responses to all meals are similarly 
influenced by the participant’s age, BMI, etc).

As the largest effects were associated with carbs, in the second 
pass we introduced interactions between that and all other nutrients 
as  fixed  effects,  and  with  random  slopes  by  participant.  Based  on 
visual inspection of their relationship with iAUC, we also introduced 
fixed effects of two response-level “context” measurements, minutes 
of activity during the 2 hours following the meal and minutes of sleep 
during the 3 hours before the meal. We removed effects not significant 
by likelihood ratio test at p<.05.

In the third pass, we introduced fixed effects of our microbiome 
features, a number of expert-designed scores measuring the activity 
of crucial metabolic pathways and functions (see discussion section 
below). We determined a candidate set of scores to add to the model 
by predicting participants’ average iAUC from each score using t-test 
(binary)  or  regression  (continuous).  15  scores  showed  a  significant 
association taken alone and were tested in the full model. After con-
trolling for all other predictors, 6 remained significant or marginally 
significant.

The final model fixed-effect coefficients are displayed in Figure 4B. 
Positive coefficients indicate a greater predicted glycemic response. 
All predictors were significant by likelihood-ratio test at p<.05, except 
for  glutamine  production  pathways  (p=.08)  and  the  interaction  be-
tween tyrosine metabolizers and carbs (p=.06) which are kept in this 
model as suggestive, and do not substantially affect the estimation of 
other coefficients.

Several of the significant predictors were microbiome scores. One 
of the scores, named microbiome balance, is an aggregate assessment 
of  microbiome  balance  quantifying  overall  beneficial  and  harmful 
activities (based on the literature), as well as some diversity metrics. 
This score, when “Low,” showed a negative association with glycemic 
response. Two other scores are quantified pathway activities repre-
sentative of overall activity levels of a given set of microbial pathways.
The fucose metabolism pathways activity score considers expres-
sion levels of all the genes that encode enzymes known to carry out 

5

biochemical reactions that result in processing and catabolic conver-
sions of fucose – a glycan that microbes may obtain from the host’s 
gut lining mucosal layer, or food components. This quantitative score 
showed a positive association with glycemic response.

The  indoleacetate  production  pathways  activity  score  considers 
expression levels of all the genes that encode enzymes known to carry 
out biochemical reactions that result in production of indole-acetate 
(or indole acetic acid, IAA). This binary score, when “High,” showed a 
negative association with glycemic response.

The marginally significant score of glutamine production pathways 
implies  higher  glycemic  response  when  “Low.”  The  score  is  derived 
with the same approach as the indoleacetate score, and assess the 
levels of activity of various pathway axes leading to microbial produc-
tion of glutamate (or glutamic acid).

Microbial scores for tyrosine and fructose metabolizers are based 
on functional groups of active microbes known to metabolize tyrosine 
and  fructose,  respectively.  Tyrosine  metabolizers,  when  “Low,”  are 
directly related to elevated PPGR. Fructose metabolizers, when “Low,” 
show inverse relationship to glycemic response.

Figure  4C  compares  different  approaches  to  predicting  iAUC. 
The first two plots show single predictor models (calories or carbs). 
We also present predictions from the fixed-effect part of our model 
after  zeroing  out  certain  components.  Using  all  nutrient  predictors 
achieves  a  similar  fit  to  using  the  square  root  of  carbs  alone  (both 
R=.41, not pictured). Including the microbiome features yields a small 
but significant improvement in fit (R=.42, not pictured), and adding 
the other fixed effect predictors (age, BMI, sleep, activity, microbiome) 
improves the fit further (R=.45, Fig. 4C bottom-left). Finally, the full 
model including random effects (best linear unbiased predictions) fits 
the data very well (R=.77, Fig. 4C bottom-right).

Figure 4D (left) shows the influence of age on the modelled re-
lationship  between  carbs  and  glycemic  response.  Figure  4D  (right) 
illustrates the extent of modeled individual differences in this relation-
ship, taking into account all predictors.  Two hypothetical meals A and 
B (similar to repeat meals from Figure 2D with carbs approximately 
25g and 50g respectively) are shown to illustrate that two users (blue 
and red lines) have the opposite glycemic responses (iAUC of 14 & 20 
vs iAUC of 37 & 27 respectively) due to the crossover of their iAUC 
response  lines  between  the  two  meals  —  this  effect  was  shown  in 
Figure 3D using the raw data. 

A model optimized for prediction accuracy over explanation
As described above, mixed effects linear models are valuable because 
they are easily interpreted and allow statements about the statistical 
significance of predictors. In this section we present another model for 
the same data which does not offer these benefits but achieves great-
er predictive accuracy due to its richer modeling framework. This is a 
gradient boosting machine [Chen 2016] built on the same predictors 
already discussed as well as a number of additional features. These 
encompass  the  microbiome  (activity  of  individual  organisms  and 
genes), nutrients (weight of meal; subtypes of carbs and fats; micro-
nutrients; specific compounds like caffeine and alcohol), and context 
(more detailed representations of sleep and activity). Following [Zeevi 
2015] we also add two further predictors encoding prior blood glucose 
levels: the CGM reading immediately before the meal, and the slope 
of the linear change in CGM readings over the previous 90 minutes. 

Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. 

6

3B

3D

3A

3C

3E

Figure 3: Overview of postprandial glycemic response data

3A. iAUC values (in mg / dl-h) for all meals, provided and free (red bar); the 9 repeated meals from Figure 2D, (blue bars); and the glucose drink (green bar). 
Boxplots show the interquartile range; whiskers cover the middle 95th percentile.

3B. Marginal effect of macronutrients on glucose response over time, across all meals, across all participants. Each timepoint is a linear regression of iAUC 
on all four standardized macronutrients.

3C. Inter- and intra-person variability for 9 repeated provided meals. X axis is the mean absolute difference in iAUC. Points indicate the mean absolute differ-
ence in response between two consumptions of the meal by one person (green), and mean absolute difference in response between all pairs of different 
people (blue). Bars indicate standard error. Y axis is in descending order of difference between inter-person and intra-person variability.

3D. Examples of individual variation in glycemic response. Ingestion of two of the repeated meals (blue and green lines) result in opposite blood glucose 
response in two participants (top).  Ingestion of two free meals results in opposite blood glucose response in two participants (bottom). 

3E. Relationships between anthropometric characteristics and per-participant average iAUC across all meals (provided and free).

Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. 

7

After removing predictors that are low variance, highly correlated with 
each other, or not correlated with the outcome, a total of 1446 were 
included in the model.

However,  in  our  analysis  there  is  no  significant  effect  of  HbA1c  on 
iAUC after controlling for other predictors. This may be because the 
study population was selected for HbA1c in the normal range (< 6.5).

Data from 82% of users was used to train, with the data from the 
remaining  18%  held  out  for  evaluation.  Hyperparameters  controlling 
learning rate, number of trees and tree depth were estimated using 
cross validation on the training set. 

Averaging across 5 such random train/test splits of the data, 

the model achieves R=.80 (R2=.64) on training data, and R=.64 
(R2=.40) on held-out test data. Performance on training and test 
data is shown in Figure 5.

DISCUSSION
We set out to study the variation of glycemic response based on in-
dividual differences, especially differences in gut microbiome activity 
obtained  via  the  metatranscriptomic  method  for  the  first  time.  We 
made  a  few  key  design  choices  for  the  study,  including  (a)  14  days 
of  monitoring,  (b)  multiple  diet  types  –  omnivore  and  vegetarian/
gluten-free, and (c) a large proportion (66%) of “provided” (pre-de-
signed) meals.

The  number  of  provided  meals  (104)  is  considerably  larger  in 
our study compared to previous studies (e.g. [Zeevi 2015]; [Mendes-
Soares 2019] had only 4 standardized meals). This design allowed us 
to get more precise readings of consumed meals rather than entirely 
depending on the smartphone diet tracking app. This choice also en-
sures that our data allows us to quantify individual PPGR differences 
between people in response to the same food, reducing the risk that 
observed differences reflect differences between participants’ diets. 
Secondly, as shown in Figure 2A, we wanted to design a diet plan that 
provided broad coverage of the space of macronutrient proportions 
(carbs, fiber, protein, fat) with the intention of teasing out the inde-
pendent and interacting effects of the macronutrients. And finally, we 
needed more control of meals since we also wanted to study the effect 
of  multiple  diet  types:  omnivore  and  vegetarian/gluten-free  (this  is 
ongoing work, not reported here).

It  is  evident  from  our  data  that  accounting  for  individual  differ-
ences is crucial in providing a full description of PPGRs. We designed 
9  specific  meals,  each  of  which  was  a  combination  of  food  staples 
(Figure 2D), that were consumed twice by all participants. While in-
tra-person variability for a given meal is substantial (Figure 3C, green), 
this variability is small relative to the inter-person variability for the 
same meals (blue). We can conclude that while many factors affect 
PPGRs, some of these factors are individual differences which must 
be accounted for by differences between people and their lifestyles, 
not properties of the meal alone. The two meals where intra-person 
variability  is  close  to  inter-person  variability  are  meals  that  contain 
little to no carbohydrates.

Relationships between iAUC and phenotype and food features
We see the expected relationship between age and iAUC in Figure 3E, 
first panel. The relationship between iAUC and BMI / waist-to-hip ratio 
(Figure 3E second and third panels) is the opposite of that previously 
reported  in  studies  such  as  [Zeevi  2015].  We  hypothesize  that  this 
may  reflect  the  self-reported  good  health  and  high  exercise  rate 
within this study population. We see the expected increase in average 
iAUC  with  HbA1c  in  our  study  population  (Figure  3E,  fourth  panel). 

As expected, the bulk of variation in the response is explained by 
the amount of carbs ingested, and by interactions with fat content in 
food and other factors that modulate the effect of carbs. Increased 
fiber resulted in overall lower PPGRs, and while increased fat had little 
marginal effect by itself, it interacts with carbs to suppress the effect 
of  ingested  carbs  on  the  PPGR.  The  plot  of  the  time-course  of  this 
effect in Figure 3B suggests this may happen because fat and protein 
flatten and delay the digestion of carbs, pushing some of the PPGR 
out  of  the  2  hour  window  considered  here  ([Franz  1997];  [Wakhloo 
1984]). Protein has a numerically negative effect on iAUC but is not 
significant  after  controlling  for  other  predictors,  so  was  removed 
from the final model. Older people had higher PPGRs, and also higher 
PPGRs per unit of carbs ingested (Figure 4D). Activity after meal con-
sumption as well as sleep immediately before eating both resulted in 
lower PPGR to carbs, which is consistent with literature on metabolic 
effects of circadian rhythms [Van Cauter 1997].

The fact that the PPGR is better predicted by the square root of 
carbs than untransformed carbs is reminiscent of a standard model 
of  gastric  emptying  in  which  the  volume  of  food  passing  from  the 
stomach  per  unit  of  time  is  linear  in  the  square  root  of  its  volume 
[Hopkins 1966]. 

Relationships between iAUC and microbiome features
The significant microbiome features related to prediction of postpran-
dial glycemic response were microbiome balance, fucose metabolism 
pathways,  fructose  metabolizers,  tyrosine  metabolizers  (marginal), 
indoleacetate  production  pathways,  and  glutamine  production 
pathways  (marginal).  Of  these,  fucose,  indoleacetate,  and  tyrosine 
(marginal) scores interact with carbs, indicating that the microbiome 
or  properties  correlated  with  the  microbiome  affect  the  processing 
of carbs as well as leading to an overall difference in baseline blood 
sugar.

The microbiome balance score was one of the significant features 
in  predicting  glycemic  response.    Low  microbiome  balance  scores 
usually result from either an imbalance of relative activities of ben-
eficial  vs.  harmful  microbes  or  from  lower  quantity  and  diversity  of 
microbial organisms. The relationship of suboptimal overall gut micro-
biome and higher PPGR is in line with the current literature [Karlsson 
2013; Larsen 2010; Vrieze 2012] implicating the role of gut health in 
glycemic regulation.

The fucose metabolism pathway score showed a direct relation-
ship  with  PPGR.  Fucose  is  a  sugar  molecule  that  various  microbial 
organisms  can  use  as  an  energy  source  [Chen  1987].  When  other 
carbohydrate sources are not available, gut microbiota can switch to 
using  the  fucose  that  can  be  obtained  from  the  host’s  gut  mucosal 
lining. This process is often carried out by microbes known as mucin 
degraders,  such  as  certain  species  of  genus  Ruminococcus  [Crost 
2016].  We  therefore  hypothesize  that  higher  fucose  consumption 
activity,  as  reflected  by  the  microbiome  pathway  score,  may  be  as-
sociated with microbiomes of those individuals who are either more 
likely  to  fast  or  whose  internal  ecosystem  and  overall  body  state 
resembles the conditions of fasting or calorie deprivation. This may 
explain its association with higher PPGR. More research is needed to 

Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. 

8

4A

4B

4C

Figure 4. Models for predicting PPGR

4A. Nesting of predictors in our repeated-measures crossed 
experimental design. Plates (boxes) indicate repetition: e.g., 
there is one measurement of carbs, protein, fiber, fat for each 
meal.  Arrows indicate the possibility of dependence: here, 
PPGR is estimated as a function of all other variables.

4B. Fixed effect estimates for all predictors included in the 
final model. Continuous predictors are standardized (mean 
is zero, units are standard deviations), meaning the expected 
response changes by the value of the coefficient when the 
predictor changes by one standard deviation. All microbi-
ome scores except fucose are binary scores, meaning the 
coefficient is the difference in expected response between 
the two levels of the score. Error bars show standard error of 
the estimate.

4C: Actual glycemic response (iAUC) against (a) calories, 
(b) carbs, (c) predictions from model including all fixed 
effects (standard linear regression), and (d) the fit of the full 
mixed-effects model.

4D. (left) Model predictions as a function of carbs and age, 
holding all other predictors at the baseline. (right) Model 
predictions as a function of carbs for 10 randomly sampled 
people, taking into account all person-level fixed and random 
effects and holding all other nutrient and context variables 
at the baseline. Two users are highlighted (red and blue) to 
draw attention to the flip in their predicted response to the 
two example meals A & B annotated in yellow.

4E. Actual vs predicted iAUC for a gradient boosting machine 
(GBM) model.  Performance shown is on the best test fold 
across 5 random splits, with data from 82% of the users used 
to train and 18% held out for evaluation.

4E

4D

Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. 

establish  relationships  between  microbial  metabolism  of  gut  sugars 
and the host’s tendency to show higher glucose spikes in the blood 
after meals.

The  indoleacetate  production  pathways  score  incorporates  the 
role and significance of expressed genes in the context of microbial 
indoleacetate production. The algorithm takes all the known pathway 
axes  that  ultimately  lead  to  microbial  production  of  compounds  of 
type indole acetic acids (IAAs) and scores them using gene expres-
sion as input data. In the case of indole acetate production, the result 
shows that when such pathways score “High” in activity, the glycemic 
response  to  the  given  food  is  lower.  This  is  consistent  with  known 
anti-inflammatory properties of IAA [Krishnan 2018 ; Whitfield-Cargile 
2016]. Inflammatory activities in the gut and their consequential po-
tential to cause systemic low-grade inflammation are implicated in the 
development of Type 2 Diabetes and other metabolic disorders [Gon-
zalez 2018; Tuomainen 2018]. Moreover, there are direct implications 
of IAAs in glycemic response, and some findings suggest hypoglyce-
mic action of indole-3-acetic acid in diabetes mellitus [Mirsky 1956].

Indoles  and  indoleacetate  are  beneficial  products  of  protein 
fermentation,  and  tryptophan  metabolism  pathway  products  partic-
ularly  [Russell  2013].  In  one  study,  intraperitoneal  administration  of 
indole-3-propionic  acid,  indole-3-butyric  acid,  and  indole-3-acetic 
acid were shown to be associated with hypogIycemia in normal and 
alloxandiabetic mice, while L-tryptophan and kynurenic acid had no 
effect [Silverstein 1966].

The interpretation we offer here is dependent on the individual’s 
microbiome  function.  If  a  given  person’s  microbiota  mainly  shows 
ability to convert tryptophan to beneficial indoles and indole-actetate 
molecules capable of reducing inflammation and glycemic effects of 
foods,  then  it  may  be  of  benefit  to  recommend  tryptophan  sources 
(in  the  form  of  food  or  supplement)  to  such  people.  On  the  other 
hand, if tryptophan is used by the microbiota to produce more of the 
pro-inflammatory triggers, then such action may not be suitable for 
mitigating glycemic response or inflammation in general.

Tyrosine and fructose metabolizer scores group active microbes 
by  functional  characteristics.  In  our  studies  we  have  observed  that 
active  functional  microbial  groups  reflect  the  host’s  habitual  diet. 
Hence,  “Low”  tyrosine  metabolizers  may  suggest  a  diet  that  is  low 
on protein sources of tyrosine. We also hypothesize that the inverse 
relationship between the fructose metabolizers score and PPGR may 
be due to a diet that is low in fructose, or other carbohydrates that 
serve as metabolic precursors of fructose. It is not yet clear how a diet 
that is rich in fructose or deficient in tyrosine may influence glycemic 
response, and more studies are needed.

Glutamine  production  pathways  score,  when  “Low,”  showed  a 
direct relationship with higher PPGR. Microbial glutamine production 
has not been directly linked to glycemic response in humans. Howev-
er, glutamine is considered an important nutrient for gut health and 
has been included in various supplements used by clinical healthcare 
practitioners to prevent or heal “leaky gut” [Kim 2017, Rao 2012].  More 
research is needed to understand the molecular mechanisms that may 
be  responsible  for  higher  glycemic  response  to  food  in  individuals 
with low microbial glutamine production activity in the gut.

The microbiome features revealed by our glycemic response mod-
el may influence PPGR directly or indirectly. Although it is challenging 
to  delineate  causal  mechanisms,  there  may  be  functional  patterns 

9

that connect the significant scores with gut health, intestinal barrier 
integrity,  and  inflammation.  Inflammation  and  stress  response  may 
be  implicated  in  elevation  of  blood  glucose  (either  due  to  cortisol 
pathway  or  other  mechanisms).  Knowing  which  foods  may  elicit 
higher personal PPGR can offer valuable guidance in diet selection. 
However, to intervene on the root cause of glycemic response, spe-
cific mechanisms connecting nutrients to the gut microbiome and to 
inflammatory and glycemic response need to be taken into account. 
We seek to confirm and validate these mechanisms. An understanding 
of  which  microbiome  features  are  significant  will  pave  the  path  to 
precise personalization of food and supplement recommendations.

Modeling methods and model evolution
The  multilevel  mixed  effects  model  presented  first  in  the  previous 
section was deliberately chosen to better understand the incremental 
effects  of  the  significant  features,  especially  the  functional  gut  mi-
crobiome  activity  features.  We  are  not  aware  of  any  prior  literature 
that  demonstrates  the  statistical  significance  of  the  microbiome  in 
the context of a predictive model of PPGR. Prior studies [Zeevi 2015] 
using  only  ensemble  methods  such  as  gradient  boosting  machines 
represent the state of the art in accurate prediction of PPGR (which 
we  also  show  in  Figure  4E).  These  models  suffer  from  difficulty  of 
interpretation, including determination of which features significantly 
contribute to the predicted outcome.

We are in the process of increasing the generalizability of our find-
ings by collecting further data from underrepresented subpopulations 
such as pre-diabetics, people reporting poor overall health, and older 
participants. With the goal of continuous improvement, we will rebuild 
and  revalidate  our  model  based  on  this  new  expanded  data.  The 
current paper provides a first snapshot of the collected data, and we 
will use the additional data to consolidate the current model, as well 
as potentially surface new relevant predictors.  Finally, we also plan on 
validating the model on an unseen cohort, and performing a blinded 
randomized controlled dietary intervention based on this predictive 
model to look for improvements in the glycemic response as well as 
alterations to the gut microbiota. 

Conclusions
Most significantly, this paper makes the following contributions:

•  Demonstrates for the first time that metatranscriptomic activity of 
the gut microbiome contributes to individual variation in glycemic 
response among adults.

•  Suggests new microbial features that may help uncover molecular 

mechanisms of glycemic control.

•  Demonstrates  the  statistical  significance  of  all  features  using  a 
multilevel  mixed-effects  regression  model  where  fixed  effects 
represent  measured  properties  and  random  effects  account  for 
further variation. We also present a gradient boosting machine for 
maximizing predictive accuracy.

•  Demonstrates that glycemic response is driven by the properties 
of  an  individual  in  addition  to  the  food’s  macronutrient  content, 
measured  with  104  unique  pre-designed  meals  within  omnivore 
and  vegetarian/gluten-free  diet  types  and  within  a  multi-ethnic 
population.

Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. 

Acknowledgements
We  are  grateful  to  the  Viome  study  team  –  (alphabetically)  Ashleigh  Winter,  Barry 
Zhao,  Braidon  Waggoner,  Brendan  Zapp,  Calita  Quesada,  Erica  Castillo,  Gabby 
Hands, James Horne, Kelly Nebgen, Marcela Walker, Miranda Intrator, Pete Lichtman, 
Ryan  Toma,  Sabria  Hankins,  Tristen  Hill,  and  YehShen  McShan  –  for  handling  the 
considerable  logistics  during  the  data  collection  and  annotation  phases.  We  thank 
Matteo  Rinaldi  and  Sha  Yu  Han  for  initial  data  exploration  and  analyses;  Subha 
Krishnan  for  curating  the  microbiome  pathway  literature  and  features;  and  Debra 
Heald and Samika Savanur for their clinical input.

References
[Abbott 2016] https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf15/p150021c.pdf

[Bashiardes  2016]  Bashiardes  S.,  Zilberman-Schapira  G.,  Elinav  E.  2016.  Use  of 
Metatranscriptomics  in  Microbiome  Research.  Bioinformatics  and  Biology  Insights 
10:BBI.S34610. DOI: 10.4137/BBI.S34610.

[Bates 2015] Bates, Douglas, Martin Maechler, Ben Bolker, Steven Walker, Rune Haubo 
Bojesen Christensen, Henrik Singmann, Bin Dai, Gabor Grothendieck, C+ Eigen, and L. 
Rcpp. "Package ‘lme4’." Convergence 12, no. 1 (2015).

[Bervoets 2019] Indra Bervoets, Daniel Charlier, Diversity, versatility and complexity of 
bacterial gene regulation mechanisms: opportunities and drawbacks for applications 
in  synthetic  biology,  FEMS  Microbiology  Reviews,  Feb  2019,  https://doi.org/10.1093/
femsre/fuz001

[CDC 2017] https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2017/p0718-diabetes-report.html 

[Chen  1987]  Chen,  Y.  M.,  Zhu,  Y.,  Lin,  E.  C.  “NAD-linked  aldehyde  dehydrogenase 
for aerobic utilization of L-fucose and L-rhamnose by Escherichia coli.” J Bacteriol. 
1987;169(7):3289-94

[Chen 2016] Chen, T., Guestrin, C. “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system” KDD'16, 
Proceedings  of  the  22nd  ACM  SIGKDD  International  Conference  on  Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining (2016): 785-794.

[Cheng  2018]  Cheng,  J.  T.  "Merit  of  Incremental  Area  under  the  Curve  (iAUC)  in 
Nutrition is Varied in Pharmacological Assay-A Review." Clin J Dia Care Control 1, no. 
2 (2018): 180008.

[Crost 2016] Crost EH, Tailford LE, Monestier M, Swarbreck D, Henrissat B, Crossman 
LC,  Juge  N.”  The  mucin-degradation  strategy  of  Ruminococcus  gnavus:  The 
importance of intramolecular trans-sialidases” Gut Microbes. 2016 Jul 3;7(4):302-312.

[Franz 1997] Franz, Marion J. "Protein: metabolism and effect on blood glucose levels." 
The diabetes educator 23, no. 6 (1997): 643-651.

[Gelman 2007] Gelman, Andrew, and Jennifer Hill. "Data analysis using regression and 
hierarchical/multilevel models." New York, NY: Cambridge (2007).

[Gonzalez 2018] Lopez, Laura, Karin Garrie, and Mark D. Turner. "Type 2 diabetes–An 
autoinflammatory disease driven by metabolic stress." Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 
(BBA)-Molecular Basis of Disease (2018).

[Gosalbes  2011]  Gosalbes  MJ.,  Durbán  A.,  Pignatelli  M.,  Abellan  JJ.,  Jiménez-
Hernández  N.,  Pérez-Cobas  AE.,  Latorre  A.,  Moya  A.  2011.  Metatranscriptomic 
Approach to Analyze the Functional Human Gut Microbiota. PLoS ONE 6:e17447. DOI: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0017447.

[Gutierrez 1998] Gutierrez, Mario, Mehras Akhavan, Lois Jovanovic, and Charles M. 
Peterson. Utility of a short-term 25% carbohydrate diet on improving glycemic control 
in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Journal of the American College of Nutrition 17.6 (1998): 
595-600. DOI: 10.1080/07315724.1998.10718808 

[Hatch  2019]  Andrew  Hatch,  James  Horne,  Ryan  Toma,  Brittany  L  Twibell,  Kalie  M 
Somerville,  Benjamin  Pelle,  Kinga  P  Canfield,  Guruduth  Banavar,  Ally  Perlina,  Helen 
Messier,  Niels  Klitgord,  and  Momchilo  Vuyisich.  2019.  A  robust  metatranscriptomic 
technology for population-scale studies of diet, gut microbiome, and human health. 
doi:10.31219/osf.io/8vd6x`

[He 2010] He S., Wurtzel O., Singh K., Froula JL., Yilmaz S., Tringe SG., Wang Z., Chen F., 
Lindquist EA., Sorek R., Hugenholtz P. 2010. Validation of two ribosomal RNA removal 
methods for microbial metatranscriptomics. Nature Methods 7:807–812. DOI: 10.1038/
nmeth.1507.

[Hopkins 1966] Hopkins A: The pattern of gastric emptying: a new view of old results. 
J Physiol (Lond) 182:144-149, 1966

[Jenkins  1985]  Jenkins,  David  JA,  and  Alexandra  L.  Jenkins.  "Dietary  fiber  and 
the  glycemic  response."  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Experimental  Biology  and 
Medicine 180, no. 3 (1985): 422-431. DOI: 10.3181/00379727-180-42199

[Karlsson 2013] Karlsson, F. H., Tremaroli, V., Nookaew, I., Bergström, G., Behre, C. J., 
Fagerberg,  B.,  Nielsen,  J.,  Bäckhed,  F.  “Gut  metagenome  in  European  women  with 
normal, impaired and diabetic glucose control.” Nature (2013) 498(7452):99-103.

10

Quinn RA, Sanders JG, Swafford AD, Thompson LR, Tripathi A, Xu ZZ, Zaneveld JR, 
Zhu Q, Caporaso JG, Dorrestein PC. 2018. Best practices for analysing microbiomes. 
Nature Reviews Microbiology 16:410–422. DOI: 10.1038/s41579-018-0029-9.

[Krishnan 2018] Krishnan S, Ding Y, Saedi N, Choi M, Sridharan GV, Sherr DH, Yarmush 
ML,  Alaniz  RC,  Jayaraman  A,  Lee  K.”  Derived  Tryptophan  Metabolites  Modulate 
Inflammatory  Response  in  Hepatocytes  and  Macrophages”  Cell  Rep.  2018  Apr 
24;23(4):1099-1111

[Larsen  2010]  Larsen,  N.,  Vogensen,  F.  K.,  van  den  Berg,  F.  W.,  Nielsen,  D.  S., 
Andreasen,A. S., Pedersen, B.K., Al-Soud, W. A., Sørensen, S.J., Hansen, L.H., Jakobsen, 
M.  “Gut  microbiota  in  human  adults  with  type  2  diabetes  differs  from  non-diabetic 
adults.” PLoS One. 2010;5(2):e9085

[Livesey 2008] Livesey, Geoffrey, Richard Taylor, Toine Hulshof, and John Howlett. 
"Glycemic  response  and  health—a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis:  relations 
between dietary glycemic properties and health outcomes." The American journal of 
clinical nutrition 87, no. 1 (2008): 258S-268S. DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/87.1.258S

[Li 2014] Li J, Jia H, Cai X, Zhong H, Feng Q, Sunagawa S, Arumugam M, Kultima JR, 
Prifti E, Nielsen T, Juncker AS, Manichanh C, Chen B, Zhang W, Levenez F, Wang J, 
Xu X, Xiao L, Liang S, Zhang D, Zhang Z, Chen W, Zhao H, Al-Aama JY, Edris S, Yang 
H,  Wang  J,  Hansen  T,  Nielsen  HB,  Brunak  S,  Kristiansen  K,  Guarner  F,  Pedersen  O, 
Doré J, Ehrlich SD, Bork P, Wang J. 2014. “An integrated catalog of reference genes in 
the human gut microbiome.” Nature Biotechnology 32:834–841. (2014) DOI: 10.1038/
nbt.2942.

[Ludwig  2018]  Ludwig,  David  S.,  Frank  B.  Hu,  Luc  Tappy,  and  Jennie  Brand-Miller. 
"Dietary  carbohydrates:  Role  of  quality  and  quantity  in  chronic  disease."  Bmj  361 
(2018): k2340. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.k2340 

[Mendes-Soares 2019] Mendes-Soares H, Raveh-Sadka T, Azulay S, et al. Assessment 
of a Personalized Approach to Predicting Postprandial Glycemic Responses to Food 
Among  Individuals  Without  Diabetes.  JAMA  Network  Open.  2019;2(2):e188102. 
doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2018.8102

[Mirsky 1956] Mirsky, I. Arthur, and Daniel Diengott. "Hypoglycemic action of indole-
3-acetic acid by mouth in patients with diabetes mellitus." Proceedings of the Society 
for Experimental Biology and Medicine 93, no. 1 (1956): 109-110.

[Perlina  in  prep.]  Perlina  et  al,  “Pathway  Scoring  and  Functional  Assessment  of 
Microbiome Activities Connects Gut Metatranscriptomics to Phenotype and Health 
Metrics.” - in preparation

[Rao  2012]  RadhaKrishna  Rao  and  Geetha  Samak  “Role  of  Glutamine  in  Protection 
of Intestinal Epithelial Tight Junctions” J Epithel Biol Pharmacol. 2012 Jan; 5(Suppl 
1-M7): 47–54.

[Russell 2013] Russell, Wendy R., Sylvia H. Duncan, Lorraine Scobbie, Gary Duncan, 
Louise  Cantlay,  A.  Graham  Calder,  Susan  E.  Anderson,  and  Harry  J.  Flint.  "Major 
phenylpropanoid-derived  metabolites  in  the  human  gut  can  arise  from  microbial 
fermentation of protein." Molecular nutrition & food research 57, no. 3 (2013): 523-535.

[Silverstein  1966]  Silverstein,  Murray  N.,  Khalil  G.  Wakim,  Robert  C.  Bahn,  and 
Richard H. Decker. "Role of tryptophan metabolites in hypoglycemia associated with 
neoplasia." Cancer 19, no. 1 (1966): 127-133.

[Suez  2016]  Suez  J,  Shapiro  H,  Elinav  E.  Role  of  the  microbiome  in  the  normal 
and  aberrant  glycemic  response.  Clin  Nutr  Exp.  2016;6:59-73.  doi:10.1016/j.
yclnex.2016.01.001

[Tuomainen 2018] Tuomainen M, Lindström J, Lehtonen M, Auriola S, Pihlajamäki J, 
Peltonen M, Tuomilehto J, Uusitupa M, Mello V and Hanhineva K. “ Associations of 
serum  indolepropionic  acid,  a  gut  microbiota  metabolite,  with  type  2  diabetes  and 
low-grade inflammation in high-risk individuals” Nutrition & Diabetes 35 (2018)

 [Van Cauter 1997] Van Cauter, Eve, Kenneth S. Polonsky, and André J. Scheen. "Roles 
of circadian rhythmicity and sleep in human glucose regulation." Endocrine reviews 
18, no. 5 (1997): 716-738.

[Vrieze  2012]  Vrieze,  A.,  Van  Nood,  E.,  Holleman,  F.,  Salojärvi,  J.,  Kootte,  R.  S., 
Bartelsman,  J.  F.,  Dallinga-Thie,  G.  M.  ,  Ackermans,  M.  T.,  Serlie,  M.  J.,  Oozeer,  R., 
Derrien, M., Druesne, A., Van Hylckama Vlieg, J. E., Bloks, V. W., Groen, A.K., Heilig, H. 
G., Zoetendal, E. G., Stroes, E. S., de Vos, W. M., Hoekstra, J. B., Nieuwdorp, M. “Transfer 
of intestinal microbiota from lean donors increases insulin sensitivity in individuals 
with metabolic syndrome.” Gastroenterology. 2012 Oct;143(4):913-6.e7

[Wakhloo 1984] Wakhloo, A. K., J. Beyer, C. Diederich, and G. Schulz. "Effect of dietary 
fat on blood sugar levels and insulin consumption after intake of various carbohydrate 
carriers  in  type  I  diabetics  on  the  artificial  pancreas."  Deutsche  medizinische 
Wochenschrift (1946) 109, no. 42 (1984): 1589-1594.

[Whitfield-Cargile  2016]  Whitfield-Cargile,  Canaan  M.,  Noah  D.  Cohen,  Robert  S. 
Chapkin, Brad R. Weeks, Laurie A. Davidson, Jennifer S. Goldsby, Carrie L. Hunt et 
al.  "The  microbiota-derived  metabolite  indole  decreases  mucosal  inflammation  and 
injury in a murine model of NSAID enteropathy." Gut microbes 7, no. 3 (2016): 246-261.

[KEGG]  KEGG:  Kyoto  Encyclopedia  of  Genes  and  Genomes.  http://www.kegg.jp/  or 
http://www.genome.jp/kegg/

[Wolever 1986] Wolever, T.M., and Jenkins, D.J. (1986). The use of the glycemic index 
in predicting the blood glucose response to mixed meals. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 43, 167–172.

[Kim 2017] Min-Hyun Kim and Hyeyoung Kim. “The Roles of Glutamine in the Intestine 
and Its Implication in Intestinal Diseases” Int J Mol Sci. (2017) 18(5): 1051.

[Knight  2018]  Knight  R,  Vrbanac  A,  Taylor  BC,  Aksenov  A,  Callewaert  C,  Debelius 
J, Gonzalez A, Kosciolek T, McCall L-I, McDonald D, Melnik AV, Morton JT, Navas J, 

[Zeevi  2015]  David  Zeevi,  Tal  Korem,  Niv  Zmora,  David  Israeli,  Daphna  Rothschild, 
Adina Weinberger, Orly Ben-Yacov, Dar Lador, Tali Avnit-Sagi, Maya Lotan-Pompan, 
et al. Personalized Nutrition by Prediction of Glycemic Responses. Cell. 2015 Nov 19; 
163(5): 1079–1094. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.001

Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adults