30_PARAGRAPHS

Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest Oliver et al.

The human vaginal microbiome maintains low diversity in low-pH conditions and
depends on host sugars as carbon sources, with less access to dietary and exogenous
nutrients than the gut, skin, or oral cavity. Historically, vaginal microbial communities
have been stratiﬁed based on hierarchical clustering of the taxa composition (12).
Keystone species include Lactobacillus crispatus and Lactobacillus gasseri, which have
been associated with maintenance of a simple vaginal microbiome by their production
of bacteriostatic and bactericidal compounds (e.g., lactic acid and hydrogen peroxide)
and maintenance of a low pH (14–16) numerically and functionally dominating their
respective vaginal communities. A closely related species, Lactobacillus iners, has been
associated with health-promoting beneﬁts; however,
its genome also encodes the
capacity to promote microbiome perturbation by increasing vaginal pH and producing
species-speciﬁc virulence factors (14, 17–19). Bacterial vaginosis (BV), the most common
gynecological condition in reproductive-age women (20),
is characterized by the
presence of a more diverse vaginal microbiome and associated with adverse pregnancy
outcomes, including preterm birth (21), endometritis (22, 23), and spontaneous abor-
tion (24–27). Recently, vaginal microbial transplants have been successfully imple-
mented as a treatment for intractable BV (28). Despite L. crispatus generally being
regarded as a highly beneﬁcial and dominant microbe throughout pregnancy, healthy
women from different ethnic groups have markedly different species dominating the
vaginal microbiome (15). In fact, many healthy women who lack BV symptoms have
vaginal microbiomes dominated by microbes that are associated with BV (29), suggest- July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 mbio.asm.org 2 Microbiome Composition in Healthy Pregnancy ® Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest FIG 1 Study outline. Eighteen women were sampled throughout pregnancy and their offspring were sampled at
birth and 6 and 12 months of age. Samples collected were urine, saliva, and cervical vaginal ﬂuid (CVF) from the
mothers and urine and saliva from the children. CVF was sequenced using shotgun metagenomics and amplicon
sequencing. All samples were analyzed using GC-TOF MS and lipidomics.

RESULTS Description of the cohort and data obtained from samples. Saliva, urine, and
cervical vaginal ﬂuid (CVF) were collected from 18 women at early, middle, and late
pregnancy with the gestational age range of the included women at each time point
(Fig. 1). At the time of enrollment into the cohort, the average woman’s age was
27.8 years old, and the average prepregnancy body mass index (BMI) was 24.8 kg/m2
(Table 1). The cohort was 39% white Hispanic and 61% non-Hispanic white; there were July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 mbio.asm.org 3 ® Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest Oliver et al.

Maternal ID
1018
1062
1088
1089
1103
1111
1120
1126
1137
1146
1151
1157
1180
1191
1198
1201
1202
1222 TABLE 1 Demographics of the 18 mothers who participated in the study Race and ethnicity
White Hispanic
White Hispanic
White non-Hispanic
White non-Hispanic
White non-Hispanic
White Hispanic
White non-Hispanic
White Hispanic
White Hispanic
White non-Hispanic
White non-Hispanic
White non-Hispanic
White non-Hispanic
White Hispanic
White non-Hispanic
White non-Hispanic
White Hispanic
White non-Hispanic Age (yr)
35
23
26
22
27
38
34
19
31
29
30
28
29
31
26
30
20
24 BMI (prepregnancy [kg/m2])
27.4
25.3
25.8
21.8
24.5
27.9
26.9
27.8
23.5
23.5
22.4
18.9
24.9
22.7
24.8
29.9
24.7
24.0 no signiﬁcant differences in BMI (t test; P (cid:2) 0.28) or age (t test; P (cid:2) 0.89) between ethnic
groups. Saliva and urine were collected at indicated intervals from each infant up until
1 year of age (Fig. 1). Saliva, urine, and CVF samples were subjected to metabolomics
analysis, whereas only CVF was used for sequence analysis. Sequence analysis included
amplicon-based sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene (bacteria and archaea) and ITS2
(fungi) loci and shotgun metagenomic sequencing of the entire microbial community.
Vaginal microbiota support high abundances of Lactobacillus and Biﬁdobacte-
riaceae throughout pregnancy. Sixteen individuals (42 total samples) produced suf-
ﬁcient sequence reads for taxonomic assignment using the 16S rRNA gene. Amplicon
sequencing stratiﬁed cervical samples into those where the most abundant taxon was
Lactobacillus spp. (34/42; 81%) or Gardnerella spp. (8/42; 19%) (Fig. 2A; Fig. S1A). The
bacterial taxa in samples with abundant Lactobacillus spp. were signiﬁcantly less evenly
distributed (linear mixed-effects [LME] modeling; P (cid:2) 0.001; Fig. 2C), with Gardnerella
vaginalis being the most abundant in seven of eight samples (88% relative abundance)
and a Shuttleworthia taxon being most abundant in one sample (at 23% relative
abundance). In samples where Lactobacillus spp. had the highest abundance, a single
taxon comprised 50% or more of the sequencing reads (27/34; 79%). L. iners was the
most abundant taxon detected in 14 samples from 7 subjects, with a median relative
abundance of 79%. In 12 samples from 7 subjects, a Lactobacillus taxon, putatively
identiﬁed as L. crispatus through metagenomic sequencing (Fig. S1B and C), had a
median relative abundance of 96% and persisted at a relative abundance greater than
90% in subjects 1088, 1120, and 1191. Altogether, the most abundant 3 taxa, L. iners
(operational taxonomic unit 1 [OTU_1]), L. crispatus (OTU_2), and G. vaginalis (OTU_3),
comprised 66% of the total bacterial sequencing reads.

Whole-genome shotgun sequencing produced, on average, 2.9 million paired-end
reads per sample, which decreased to an average of 220,355 paired-end reads per
sample following removal of reads that aligned to the human genome. Thirteen
individuals (35 total samples) produced sufﬁcient sequence reads for taxonomic as-
signment, which was concordant with 16S rRNA gene sequence results (Fig. S1B and C).
Most of the reads classiﬁed as L. crispatus or L. iners mapped to a single metagenomic
assembled genome, with completeness of 95.7% and 97.1% and redundancy of 0% and
1.4%, respectively.

Twelve samples from seven subjects produced ITS2 sequences (Fig. 2A); we do not
have quantitative data characterizing the abundance of bacterial or fungal biomass.
Eleven samples from six subjects contained species of Candida, classiﬁed as C. albicans
(Fig. S2A), the most abundant fungal taxon in these data. Shotgun metagenomics
conﬁrmed these results and allowed for additional identiﬁcation of reads mapping to July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 mbio.asm.org 4 Microbiome Composition in Healthy Pregnancy ® Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest FIG 2 Taxonomy and alpha diversity of vaginal microbiomes during pregnancy. (A) Relative abundance plot of operational taxonomic units, from 16S
amplicon data, grouped together by individual. Each individual is clustered into a larger category deﬁned by the dominating microbe. (B) Presence or July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 (Continued on next page) mbio.asm.org 5 Oliver et al.

® Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest FIG 3 Ordination of vaginal microbiomes during pregnancy. (A) Nonmetric multidimensional scaling (nMDS) of Bray-Curtis dissimilarity between vaginal
microbiomes (n (cid:2) 42 samples) of mothers. Color indicates the most abundant microbe within the microbial community. The most abundant microbe in the
community plays a statistically signiﬁcant role in the composition of the community (LME; R2 (cid:2) 69%; P (cid:3) 0.0001). (B) Some participants (6/16 individuals)
experienced large, signiﬁcant shifts (LME; P (cid:2) 0.0219) in their microbiomes throughout the trimesters of pregnancy.

Highly abundant bacterial taxa were signiﬁcantly associated with community
composition. A nonmetric multidimensional scaling (nMDS) plot of Bray-Curtis
dissimilarities showed that vaginal communities clustered by their most abundant
bacterium (Fig. 3A). This association between the most abundant bacterial taxa and
microbial composition of the sample was signiﬁcant and explained more than half
of the variance using permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA)
(R2 (cid:2) 56%; P (cid:2) 0.0001). To account for repeated measures from longitudinal samples
from the same individual, we also performed an LME, which required dimensional
reduction (LME; R2 (cid:2) 69%; P (cid:3) 0.0001). Communities with abundant L. crispatus were
more similar to each other, sharing more than 90% similarity,
in comparison to
communities where a different bacterial species was most abundant. While some
individuals exhibited a relatively stable microbial community over time, others (6/16)
experienced shifts in composition, resulting in a statistically signiﬁcant change in
Bray-Curtis dissimilarity on PC axis 1 between trimesters (Fig. 3B).

The ﬁve subjects with Candida detected in at least one of two longitudinally paired
samples displayed a signiﬁcant increase in intersample Bray-Curtis dissimilarity in their
bacterial proﬁles over that interval (e.g., the intervals between trimester 1 to 2, 2 to 3,
or 1 to 3), suggesting the presence of Candida may be associated with greater shifts in
bacterial composition than those who had no Candida detected (Fig. S2B).

FIG 2 Legend (Continued)
absence of fungi, at the genus level, per sample. Linear mixed-effects models (LME) were done on the alpha diversity metrics to account for repeated
measures in the data. (C) Evenness between samples dominated by Lactobacillus (n (cid:2) 34 samples) is signiﬁcantly lower than samples dominated by
Biﬁdobacteriaceae (n (cid:2) 7 samples). (D) No signiﬁcant change in the observed OTUs between the trimesters (n (cid:2) 15, 13, and 14 samples, respectively) of
pregnancy and likewise. (E and F) There was no change in evenness (E) or phylogenetic diversity (F) throughout pregnancy.

July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 mbio.asm.org 6 Microbiome Composition in Healthy Pregnancy ® Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest FIG 4 Relationship between vaginal microbes and metabolites. (A) Distance-based linear model recapitulates the relationship between the vaginal
microbiomes of these subjects (n (cid:2) 42 samples). Superimposed are vectors showing which annotated GC-TOF MS molecules are best correlated with these
microbial communities. Length and direction of vectors correspond to the strength of the association between the metabolite and the microbial communities.
Box plots show the raw abundance (n (cid:2) 45 samples) of indole-3-lactate (B) and mannitol (C).

Metabolites have strong associations with vaginal microbial community struc-
tures. Using gas chromatography-time of ﬂight mass spectrometry (GC-TOF MS), we
detected 330 metabolites from urine, saliva, and CVF with 133 identiﬁed compounds.
In the same samples, 1,946 metabolites were also detected by liquid chromatography-
quadrupole time of ﬂight tandem mass spectrometry (LC-QTOF MS/MS) (lipidomics;
Table S1), with an additional 353 identiﬁed compounds. The CVF metabolome as
assessed by both mass spectrometry methods did not signiﬁcantly differ across trimes-
ters (LME; P (cid:2) 0.6378 for GC-TOF MS; P (cid:2) 0.3942 for liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry [LC-MS/MS]). This stability was even true for the subset of individ-
uals who exhibited shifts in microbiota composition over trimesters (LME; P (cid:2) 0.6594
for GC-TOF MS; P (cid:2) 0.2482 for LC-MS/MS). CVF samples dominated by distinct bacte-
ria exhibited signiﬁcant differences in metabolic proﬁles (PERMANOVA; R2 (cid:2) 12%;
P (cid:2) 0.0195). A constrained, distance-based ordination plot recapitulated 67% of the
community variation observed in the vaginal microbiota (Fig. 4). Superimposed on the
ordination plot are GC-TOF MS predictor metabolites, calculated using the distance-
based linear models (DISTLM) program in PRIMER-e. Indole-3-lactate (ILA) accounted for
27% of the variation observed in the vaginal microbiota data and was found to be more
abundant in vaginal microbiota with abundant L. crispatus (Fig. 4B). Mannitol was also
more abundant in samples dominated by L. crispatus (Fig. 4C). In parallel, we found that
a pathway for mannitol-1-phosphate production is also more abundant in shotgun
metagenomic data sets of CVF samples dominated by L. crispatus (Fig. S3). This linear
model identiﬁed the top 10 annotated GC-TOF MS metabolites that were associated
with variation in the microbial community composition, which are shown in Fig. 4A;
these 10 metabolites together might explain almost 57% of the total variation in the
microbial community composition. A permutated random forest recapitulated what we
identifying mannitol and indole-3-lactate as two of the top
found in the DISTLM,
variables of importance, speciﬁcally for distinguishing microbiomes with high abun- July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 mbio.asm.org 7 Oliver et al.

® Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest FIG 5 Ordination of functional pathways within the vaginal microbiome. An nMDS of HUMAnN2 analysis, examining the abundance
of pathways in each microbiome (n (cid:2) 35 samples). Vaginal microbiomes have functions that are indicative of the most abundant
microbe present in the samples.

dances of L. crispatus (Fig. S4A). To explore the ability to analyze the metabolome in
high throughput, the same sample sets were analyzed using matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-MSI) (Table S1). Detected
ions by MALDI were compared to those identiﬁed by GC-MS and LC-MS, and we found
that (cid:4)55% of the metabolites identiﬁed had corresponding ions in the MALDI analysis
(Table S1).

Metagenomics and functional potential of communities. Distinct functions were
associated with each of the vaginal microbial community clusters (PERMANOVA;
R2 (cid:2) 70%; P (cid:2) 0.0001; Fig. 5). LEfSe identiﬁed several pathways that differed between
L. crispatus and G. vaginalis, in particular, an enrichment of ammonia assimilation genes
in G. vaginalis (Fig. S4B). Genes involved in mannitol metabolism were enriched in
communities where L. crispatus was highly abundant (Fig. S3C and Fig. 4B). Searching
the PATRIC database of all sequenced L. crispatus (64 genomes), L. iners (22 genomes),
and G. vaginalis (127 genomes) strains revealed annotated genes for mannitol usage
and transport for L. crispatus but not for L. iners or G. vaginalis.

Mothers and infants have signiﬁcantly different saliva and urine metabolomes.
Maternal and infant saliva and urine metabolomes were assessed with both GC-TOF MS
and LC-MS/MS (lipidomics) in order to study the relationship between maternal and
infant metabolomic compositions during early life (see Fig. 1). PERMANOVA analysis of
lipidomics data from saliva samples showed the largest difference between mothers
and offspring (PERMANOVA; R2 (cid:2) 69%; P (cid:2) 0.001; Fig. S5A). A subset of 50 lipidomics
metabolites with high mean abundance, 70% of which were unannotated, showed
distinct proﬁles between mother and offspring salivary metabolomes (Fig. S6A). Like-
wise, GC-TOF MS salivary metabolomes were also signiﬁcantly different between
mother and offspring, but far less variation was explained (PERMANOVA; R2 (cid:2) 12%;
P (cid:2) 0.0001; Fig. S5B). Some metabolites, such as lactulose, were much more abundant
in infants and largely absent in mothers (Fig. S6B). Maternal metabolomics proﬁles July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 mbio.asm.org 8 Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest Microbiome Composition in Healthy Pregnancy ® (both GC-TOF MS and LC-MS/MS lipidomics) have a strong individual signature, while
infants do not (see PERMANOVAs; Table S2). The infant metabolome for saliva and urine
had little variance attributed to which subject donated the sample, but GC-TOF MS was
able to detect a signiﬁcant change between the infant urine metabolome at birth
versus 6 and 12 months of age (PERMANOVA; R2 (cid:2) 34%; P (cid:2) 0.0007; Table S2). More-
over, from lipidomics data, the infant metabolome proﬁle seemed to converge on
mothers’ metabolomes as they aged, though more samples would be needed to
conﬁrm this ﬁnding (Fig. S5C). For both saliva and urine, GC-TOF MS- and lipidomics-
detected metabolites were more similar for mother-child pairs than for unrelated
individuals (Fig. S7). Mantel tests to determine if intersample relationships were similar
between chromatography methods (including both GC-TOF MS and lipidomics)
showed a strong correlation between saliva samples and weaker correlations between
urine and CVF (Table S3).

Our study supports the results from several other studies that have indicated that
the vaginal microbiome is stable during pregnancy (8, 31). Speciﬁcally, in a longitudinal
study that includes 90 women, most retain a microbial community with the same
dominant member (in L. crispatus communities, 75% remain stable; in communities
with high L. iners abundance, 71% remain stable; and in more diverse communities like
those sometimes associated with BV, 58% do not shift) (13). Using metagenomic
sequencing to probe microbial community variation, our ﬁndings indicate that few
bacteria, particularly Lactobacillus species, are highly abundant in the vaginal environ-
ment. Indeed, for individuals with vaginal microbiomes numerically dominated by L.
crispatus or L. iners, the vast majority of reads mapped to contigs from one strain of L.
crispatus or L. iners (Fig. S1B). Of note, the microbiome of some individuals did differ
considerably with advancing pregnancy. For instance, the vaginal microbiota of sub-
jects 1180 and 1222 had higher abundances of L. crispatus during the ﬁrst trimester, but
L. iners was more abundant in the remaining trimesters. Brooks et al. (32) demonstrated
that shifts in vaginal microbiota structures can be described probabilistically, where
shifts from L. crispatus to L. iners are the most likely to occur. This is consistent with the
observations made in two individuals from our study; however, due to the small July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 mbio.asm.org 9 Oliver et al.

® Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest FIG 6 Proposed vaginal microbial community model. Current hypothesized model of vaginal microbial community physiology, with gaps in
understanding (denoted by question marks) where future work is needed. Our study indicates that mannitol production is associated with a high
relative abundance of L. crispatus.

number of samples exhibiting this phenomenon, qualitative assessments were more
appropriate than statistical analysis. Of note, vaginal microbiota instability throughout
pregnancy was associated with the presence of Candida, a known opportunistic
pathogen of the vaginal tract. Since inclusion criteria for this study stipulated no
antibiotic treatment, it is unlikely that Candida detection was a result of antibiotic
administration. The prevalence of Candida in our cohort is more likely to be reﬂective
of the fact that pregnancy is a known risk factor for candidiasis (33) and to related
differences in the vaginal environment, including microbiological colonization. Indeed,
L. crispatus has been shown to have anti-Candida activity (34), and 90% (10/11) of
samples that were Candida positive came from individuals whose vaginal microbiota
were dominated by an organism other than L. crispatus.

A few metabolites were highly indicative of the bacterial community present in each
subject and may be useful biomarkers for the type of vaginal microbiota present. The
most indicative metabolite was indole-3-lactate (ILA), a tryptophan metabolite whose
abundance was correlated with communities having abundant L. crispatus (Fig. 4B and
Fig. S4A). One potential explanation is that L. crispatus produces ILA to competitively
exclude the growth of other species (Fig. 6). At physiologically relevant concentrations,
ILA has been shown to have antimicrobial properties against both Gram-positive and
Gram-negative organisms (35, 36). Although the production of lactic acid is generally
thought of as a strategy Lactobacillus spp. use to prevent other species from colonizing
the vagina, perhaps these organisms also use ILA in a similar or supplementary
capacity. Additionally, bacteria-derived ILA (also referred to as indole-lactic acid) has
been recently shown to directly move from maternal to infant tissue (6). It has been
suggested that indoles may play an important role as a ligand for the human aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), which have diverse functions from immune regulation to
metabolism (reviewed in reference 37). Zelante et al. further showed that some
lactobacilli produce the related tryptophan catabolite, indole-3-aldehyde (IAld), which
provides protection against candidiasis by increasing interleukin-22 (IL-22) production
via AhR receptor binding (38). The study also demonstrated that vaginal speciﬁc
bacteria, such as L. acidophilus, produce IAld in the vaginal environment, which
protected against vaginal but not intestinal candidiasis. We measured indole-3-acetate
(IAA), the direct precursor to IAld, in our study, but found no difference in its abundance
between women dominated by different species of Lactobacillus (data not shown).
Because indole-3-lactate can act as a ligand for AhR, we speculate that L. crispatus may July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 mbio.asm.org 10 Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest Microbiome Composition in Healthy Pregnancy ® regulate the IL-22-AhR response in the vagina, reducing the risk of vaginal candidiasis
in the same way IAld does, and potentially activating the AhR response in newborns to
prevent early-life candidiasis. Additionally, indole itself may play a role in structuring
community composition by selecting for organisms that have adapted to a high
abundance of this metabolite, repelling more transient microbes that have not been
exposed to higher indole concentrations previously (39).

Whole-genome shotgun metagenomics allowed us to begin to address the func-
tional capacities of these microbiomes. The largest differences between functional
capacity appeared to be between communities where L. crispatus or G. vaginalis were
the most abundant bacterial taxon. One pathway particularly enriched in Gardnerella
communities was the ammonia assimilation cycle (Fig. S4B). Studies have pointed out
Gardnerella’s preference for ammonia as a nitrogen source (40); moreover, this ability to
assimilate ammonia and produce amino acids has been implicated in mutualistic
interactions between species of Prevotella, in the context of BV (41). Together, these
BV-associated organisms contribute to genital inﬂammation, which may play a role in
the susceptibility of certain diseases, such as HIV (42).

Increased abundance of mannitol when L. crispatus was present is an important and
unexpected ﬁnding (Fig. 4). Most likely, mannitol contributes to optimizing the tonicity
of the vaginal environment, and has recently been considered for this use in develop-
ing effective therapeutics for altering the vaginal microbiota (43, 44). Even more,
mannitol may assist L. crispatus in adhering to the epithelial
layer, a strategy the
organism may use to competitively inhibit other microbes from colonizing, potentially
by drawing out excess water in the mucin layer and altering the mucin structure (45).
Irrespective of the biochemistry, these genes, and mannitol in general, represent very
speciﬁc markers of a community where L. crispatus was most abundant.

Although it is known that homofermentative lactic acid bacteria (LAB) such as L.
crispatus (46) convert glucose primarily to lactic acid,
it is unclear why mannitol
accumulates in this niche. Interestingly, there was no difference in the glucose abun-
dance between the four distinct vaginal communities. Further, metabolomic analysis of
our CVF samples failed to capture signiﬁcant levels of the mannitol precursor fructose;
however, previous studies have indicated an appreciable amount of fructose within the
cervical mucus of humans (47) and the capability of L. crispatus to utilize fructose as a
carbon source (48, 49). We speculate that this high extracellular mannitol abundance
phenotype may underlie the cell’s need to regenerate NAD(cid:5) for use in glycolysis. When
faced with a limiting amount of pyruvate (or perhaps an upstream glycolytic metabo-
lite) to convert to lactate, homofermentative LAB may be unable to produce sufﬁcient
NAD(cid:5) to allow glycolysis to continue. To this end, reducing fructose 6-phosphate to
mannitol-1-phosphate may be an alternative and vital way L. crispatus regenerates
NAD(cid:5) for glycolysis (50, 51). We did ﬁnd the gene mannitol-1-phosphate dehydroge-
nase, responsible for converting fructose 6-phosphate to mannitol-1-phosphate, was
highly correlated (R2 (cid:2) 0.9) with the relative abundance of L. crispatus. The genes for
the conversion of mannitol-1-phosphate to mannitol (presumably an M1P phospha-
tase) and its subsequent export are currently unknown (51). This may imply that
mannitol accumulation is a marker of a cellular switch to NAD(cid:5) regeneration by
fructose reduction rather than converting pyruvate to lactic acid. Consequently, the
decrease in lactic acid production may contribute to community dysbiosis due to a rise
in pH (Fig. 6). Future experiments using culturing to elucidate whether these in vivo
community data are recapitulated with axenic cultures in vitro are needed.

Furthermore, this study enabled comparison of two metabolomic methods (GC-TOF
MS and LC-MS/MS lipidomics) for analysis of the pregnancy and early-life metabolomes.
Our data showed that metabolite intensities obtained by GC-TOF MS were more tightly
correlated with microbial community composition than those obtained by lipidomics,
perhaps indicating that GC-TOF MS is more effective at detecting microbial metabolites
than lipidomics, especially during pregnancy. We also show that both the saliva and
urine metabolomes of children are more similar to their own mother than to unrelated
individuals (Fig. 6). Strikingly, the ability of lipidomics to differentiate mothers from July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 mbio.asm.org 11 Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest Oliver et al.

Overall, we provide a broad look at the metabolome during pregnancy and early life,
detailing the utility of GC-TOF MS, lipidomics, and MALDI-MSI for saliva, urine, and CVF.
In conclusion, here, we share a high-resolution characterization of the vaginal
microbiome, longitudinally sampled throughout healthy pregnancies. We show that,
despite the generally accepted view that lactobacilli are indicative of healthy vaginal
communities, many women in our healthy pregnancy cohort had non-Lactobacillus-
dominated communities. The vaginal communities were characterized by a high abun-
dance of one or a few acid-tolerant species, which dictated the physiologic potential
and the metabolic proﬁles of the vaginal microbiome. Many of the metabolites that
were speciﬁc to these different organisms warrant further investigation, especially
considering the recent development of vaginal microbiota transplantation (VMT) as a
treatment for BV (28). The metabolites we found to be associated with L. crispatus may
be useful as microbiome cultivation approaches are developed to intentionally direct
the composition of the vaginal microbiome. For example, indole-3-lactate may support
L. crispatus colonization, while mannitol may indicate a shift in metabolism away from
fermentation and the production of acid, relaxing the low-pH selection pressure, which
normally gives L. crispatus an advantage.

intrauterine pregnancy, and nondiabetic. Additional Sample collection. Samples were collected at each trimester of pregnancy for women and through-
out the ﬁrst year of life for infants. At each time point, maternal saliva, urine, and cervical vaginal ﬂuid
were collected. For infants, urine was collected at birth, 6 months, and 12 months, whereas saliva was
sampled at 6 months and 12 months of age. Maternal saliva was collected using a Salivette collection kit,
including a small cotton roll contained in a plastic container (Salimetrics, Carlsbad, CA). Mothers were
instructed to place the cotton rolls in their mouths until saturated with saliva (approximately 1 to 3 min)
and then reseal the swabs in plastic Salivette tubes. Infant saliva was collected using Weck-Cel spears and
a swab extraction tube system. Infants were allowed to suck on the spear for 2 min, ensuring saturation.
Maternal urine was collected using a sterile collection cup. Infant urine was collected using an adhesive July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 mbio.asm.org 12 Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest Microbiome Composition in Healthy Pregnancy ® U-Bag attached to the genital region of the infant. A minimum of 2 ml of urine was collected. Cervical
vaginal ﬂuid (CVF) was collected by placing three Dacron swabs into the cervix for 10 s to achieve
saturation. Each swab was then placed in a plastic vial with 500 (cid:2)l of sterile phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS). All samples were initially stored at (cid:7)20°C, and then saliva, CVF, and infant urine were subsequently
moved to (cid:7)80°C storage.

Metabolomics. Prior to processing, samples were thawed from (cid:7)80°C storage. Fifty microliters of
each sample were subjected to gas chromatography-time of ﬂight mass spectrometry (GC-TOF MS) (59)
and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS, lipidomics). Urine, saliva, and CVF
from each time point were sent to the West Coast Metabolomics Center (WCMC) for untargeted
metabolomics. GC-TOF MS metabolites were extracted with a mixture of 3:3:2 acetonitrile-isopropyl
alcohol-water according to standard operating procedures from the Fiehn Lab at the WCMC (60).
LC-MS/MS samples were extracted using a variant of the Matyash method (61). Data were acquired for
complex lipids in positive and negative electrospray mode on a Waters CSH column and an Agilent 6530
QTOF mass spectrometer (61). Metabolites were identiﬁed by retention time MS/MS matching using
MassBank of North America (http://massbank.us) and NIST 17 libraries.

Amplicon gene sequencing. To amplify the V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene, 10 ng of DNA
template was combined with PCR master mix (0.2 mM deoxynucleoside triphosphate [dNTP] mix,
0.56 mg/ml bovine serum albumin [BSA], 0.4 (cid:2)M Illumina adapter sequence-tagged forward primer
[515F] [63], and 0.025 U/(cid:2)l Taq DNA polymerase) and 0.4-(cid:2)M barcode-tagged reverse primers (806R) and
then ampliﬁed in triplicate 25-(cid:2)l reactions, along with a no-template control, for 30 cycles (98°C for
2 min; 98°C for 20 sec, 50°C for 30 sec, and 72°C for 45 sec; repeat steps 2 to 4 29 times; 72°C for 10 min).
PCR conditions were identical for ITS2 ampliﬁcation (primer pair fITS7 [5=-GTGARTCATCGAATCTTTG-3=]
and ITS4 [5=-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3=]) except for the annealing temperature, which was 52°C.
Triplicate reactions were combined and puriﬁed using the SequalPrep normalization plate kit (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s speciﬁcations. Puriﬁed amplicons were quantiﬁed using the Qubit
double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) HS assay kit and pooled at equimolar concentrations. The amplicon
library was concentrated using the Agencourt AMPure XP system (Beckman-Coulter), quantiﬁed using
the Kapa library quantiﬁcation kit (Kapa Biosystems), and diluted to 2 nM. Equimolar PhiX was added at
40% ﬁnal volume to the amplicon library; the 16S rRNA amplicon pool was sequenced on the Illumina
NextSeq 500 platform on a 153-bp by153-bp sequencing run, and the ITS2 amplicon pool was sequenced
on the Illumina MiSeq platform on a 290-bp by 290-bp run.

July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 mbio.asm.org 13 Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest Oliver et al.

July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20 mbio.asm.org 14 ® Downloaded from  http://mbio.asm.org/  on September 9, 2020 by guest Microbiome Composition in Healthy Pregnancy TABLE S2, XLSX ﬁle, 0.01 MB.
TABLE S3, XLSX ﬁle, 0.01 MB