17_PARAGRAPHS

Perhaps the foremost lesson of these recent efforts has been that all humans, both healthy
and critically ill, are intimately associated with a vast population of microbial organisms.
Uncertainty remains regarding the precise number of bacteria in the human body, but it is
generally agreed that there at least 10 bacterial cells for every 1 human cell [7]. This has led
authorities in the field to describe humans as “superorganisms” composed of both human
and microbial cells [8]. Although clinicians have not historically thought about their patients
in this way, it is easy to recognize the evolutionary logic of a symbiotic relationship between
humans and microbes. By supporting lifelong colonization by organisms that possess a
diverse set of metabolic capabilities, the host effectively augments its own genome; this is a
much more efficient arrangement than waiting for humans to evolve new metabolic
capacities on their own [9]. In return for their contributions, microbes associated with the
body are rewarded with a relatively safe, predictable, and nutrient-rich niche for
colonization. As will be discussed in subsequent sections, the impact of critical illness on
this symbiotic relationship remains poorly understood.

Surg Clin North Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1.

Surg Clin North Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1.

Genomic analysis of gut bacteria offers vivid examples of the role of microbes in nutrient
utilization. For example, in 2003, Xu, et al. published the complete genome sequence of the
gram-negative anaerobe Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, a prominent member of the normal
intestinal microbiota [10]. Annotation and analysis of the genome revealed a sophisticated
apparatus for acquiring and digesting otherwise unusable dietary polysaccharides. This
apparatus, including a complex, multi-component, multi-enzyme complex starch utilization
system (SUS), consists of over 230 glycoside hydrolase and 15 polysaccharide lyase genes
[15]. The genomic analysis demonstrated that B. thetaiotaomicron has evolved the
remarkable capacity to sense the availability of carbohydrates in its microenvironment, and
that it also has the ability to forage and utilize host-derived glycans (e.g., mucin and
heparin). Mechanistic studies in gnotobiotic animals further demonstrated that, when B.
thetaiotaomicron senses a scarcity of fucose in the intestinal lumen, it actually induces the
gut epithelium to upregulate expression of fucosylated glycans that can be used by the
bacteria as an energy source without harming the host [16]. This body of work illustrates
how the remarkable host-microbe symbiosis can be teased apart by pairing genomic
sequencing efforts with creative in vivo laboratory studies.

Surg Clin North Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1.

Surg Clin North Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1.

Vitamins Page 6 Most human diets provide a robust supply of vitamins, the essential human nutrients that
must be obtained from exogenous sources. However, it has long been recognized that gut
microbes also contribute to vitamin synthesis. The magnitude of this contribution in healthy
and unhealthy patients is currently poorly understood.

Why would a microbial community enriched in Firmicutes promote obesity? Recent work
has suggested that the microbiota of obese individuals has an increased capacity to harvest
energy from the diet [35]. Landmark papers, utilizing high-throughput metagenomic
sequencing platforms to identify as many genes as possible from all members of a mixed
population of bacteria, from Gordon, Turnbaugh, Ley and colleagues, have conclusively
demonstrated that the metabolic potential of the gut microbiome varies according to the Surg Clin North Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1.

Page 7 microbial community composition. Molecular analysis of the microbiota of lean and obese
mice demonstrated that the obese microbiome is markedly enriched in genes enabling
breakdown of dietary polysaccharides, e.g., glucosidases, galactosidases, and amylases, and
genes encoding proteins that transport and metabolize the products of polysaccharide
metabolism [37]. Biochemical and bomb calorimetry analyses in the same experiments
demonstrated increased concentrations of SCFA’s (indicating a higher degree of bacterial
fermentation) and significantly less energy remaining in the feces of obese mice relative to
their lean counterparts [37]. Finally, these phenotypic traits were transmissible; colonization
of GF animals with the microbiota of obese animals led to higher weight gain than
colonization with microbiota from lean WT mice.

In 1968, Tennant, et al. demonstrated that GF mice do not survive as long as WT mice
during starvation despite similar patterns of starvation-induced weight loss. However, this
group did not characterize the microbiota of the WT animals [43]. In 1974, Tannock and
Savage used a culture-based approach to characterize the intestinal bacteria of mice exposed
to a stress model that included deprivation of food, water, and bedding for 48 hours[44].
They concluded that stressed animals had a reduction in Lactobacilli and total mucosal-
associated bacteria relative to control animals, but maintained a similar number of colonic
anaerobes. In 1989, Deitch, et al. similarly reported that starvation induced a decrease in
Lactobacilli in the murine GI tract, however they noted a bloom of gram-negative enteric
organisms. Subsequently, several studies have contrasted gut microbes in newborn animals Surg Clin North Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1.

Page 8 WHAT HAPPENS TO THE MICROBIOME DURING CRITICAL ILLNESS? receiving either enteral or parenteral nutrition. These studies suggest that TPN-fed animals
have an increased relative abundance of potential pathogens, such as Clostridium
perfringens, that can forage on glycans lining the gut epithelium [45, 46]. However, it is not
known if these findings can be extended to critically ill adults that have shifted abruptly
from the fed to the fasting state.

Although we lack a comprehensive molecular readout of gut microbes in the ICU, several
human and animal studies provide clues about how the microbiota is altered by common
ICU exposures. Several excellent studies have demonstrated that the pervasive, site-specific,
and drug-specific effects of antibiotic therapy on the microbiota can be long-lasting [55–57].
Multiple host factors relevant to the critically ill, including epithelial inflammation and Surg Clin North Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1.

If one accepts that a “healthy” intestinal microbiota serves important biological functions,
then it is reasonable to hypothesize that gut microbial communities can be manipulated or
“optimized” during critical illness to increase the chances of achieving desired clinical
outcomes. In theory, manipulation of the gut microbiota could be used to improve energy
balance and decrease the incidence of infectious complications. A fundamental problem
with clinical application of this theory has been that we lack a detailed understanding of if
and how the microbiome is altered during critical illness. As a result, interventions in this
field have been introduced with a limited scientific foundation. Nonetheless, several
strategies to optimize the microbiome have now been evaluated clinically. Some, such as the
recent description of fecal transplantation for Clostridium difficile colitis [62], will not be
discussed here. Others with obvious relevance to nutrition are discussed.

Gut decontamination Probiotics The administration of probiotics and prebiotics represents an increasingly popular
alternative to gut decontamination protocols. Probiotics are defined as live microorganisms
that confer health benefits upon humans and animals that ingest them in adequate amounts
[66]; prebiotics are nondigestible food ingredients that confer health benefits by selectively
inducing the growth of probiotic species [67]. Commonly, probiotics and prebiotics are
administered together as a food or dietary supplement known as a synbiotic [67]. Although Surg Clin North Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1.

Several studies have been conducted to test the hypothesis that outcomes in critically ill
patients can be improved by administering probiotics and prebiotics. These studies,
including a randomized trial comparing the effects of early enteral nutrition with and
without prebiotic supplementation, indicate that the incidence of sepsis and multi-organ
dysfunction syndrome among patients with severe pancreatitis is lower after treatment with
probiotics/prebiotics [70]. However, in 2008, the Dutch Acute Pancreatitis Study Group
released results of a well-publicized multicenter, randomized, controlled study
demonstrating increased mortality among patients with severe acute pancreatitis that
received probiotic prophylaxis. The increased mortality was attributed to a high incidence of
intestinal ischemia, although a direct link between the probiotic and bowel ischemia was not
proven [71]. A subsequent meta-analysis concluded that probiotics do not influence
mortality in the treatment of acute pancreatitis [72], however, the results of the Dutch study
have raised important questions about the whether and how probiotics should be
administered to vulnerable populations. Nonetheless, several other studies conducted in Surg Clin North Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1.

Another possible approach to improve outcomes for critically ill patients is to manipulate the
intestinal microenvironment to maintain the local microbial ecology of the GI tract
indirectly. It is well established that the use of vasoactive pressors, antibiotics, and highly
processed nutrients will change not only the local microbiota, but also pH, oxygen tension,
SCFA production, and various critical micronutrients that maintain the health of normal
intestinal microbes. Our group and others have shown that maintenance of a more acidic
intestinal pH through the course of surgical injury and administration of oral pH solutions
enhance local intestinal immunity and prevent lethal gut-derived sepsis [74]). Most recently
we have shown that surgical injury causes a rapid depletion of mucus phosphate, thereby
inducing certain strains of pathogenic bacteria to upregulate their virulence against the
intestinal epithelial barrier [75]. Most bacteria that cause serious infections in ICU patients
are equipped with exquisite sensory mechanisms to detect the level of local phosphate
concentration. Phosphate concentration is a key trigger by which bacteria activate their
virulence machinery to, in some cases, cause lethal sepsis. When phosphate levels are high
at sites of local microbial colonization, such as the intestinal mucus, microbes use the PhoB
phosphosensory/phosphoregulatory system to repress virulence activation. However, during
phosphate depletion, the PhoB system is derepressed and virulence is activated even to the
point of tissue invasion, immune activation, and organ failure [75]. The PhoB and analogous
systems are highly conserved among microbes and offer an opportunity for clinicians to
understand the precise host signals that trigger microbes to transform from indolent
colonizers to lethal pathogens rapidly. We have shown in animal studies that maintenance of
local phosphate concentration can suppress virulence activation among highly pathogenic
bacteria such as P. aeruginosa even during periods of severe physiologic stress [74]. This
also appears to be the case for other pathogens such as C. albicans and E. faecalis
(unpublished observations). Therefore, providing therapies at the microenvironmental level
could be a novel approach to create molecular diplomacy between pathogen and host
through the course of severe physiologic stress such as that which occurs during human
critical illness.

CONCLUSIONS The intersection between the microbiome, nutrition, and critical illness will undoubtedly
grow more interesting in the coming years. While the studies discussed in this paper provide
clear evidence that gut microbes contribute to human nutrition and metabolism, it is too
early to know if this information will be translated into meaningful improvements in current
practice patterns. However, it is easy to identify clinical scenarios in critical care that are Surg Clin North Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1