23_PARAGRAPHS

that occur In this review, we describe the pronounced microbial
changes
female, as well as
in the pregnant
provide an overview of the initial exposure of the fetus to
microbiota—from the placenta,
through birth and infancy.
We hypothesize that an appropriate microbiota is essential
for healthy early development, pregnancy maintenance, and
the ﬁrst years of childhood. Moreover, we suggest that the
changes in the human microbiome are deeply connected to
the host’s physiological status, and that
these associations
have developed throughout co-evolution of microbiome and
host
to ensure improved ﬁtness. Therefore, understanding
the role of the microbiome throughout pregnancy and early
development, as well as its role in health and disease, is of
great importance for opening new research avenues, establishing
developmental concepts, and perhaps even suggesting new
therapeutic approaches.

PHYSIOLOGICAL CHANGES DURING
PREGNANCY During gestation,
the female body undergoes hormonal,
immunological, and metabolic changes to support fetal growth
and development (Kumar and Magon, 2012). During this
period, levels of secreted hormones (especially progesterone and
estrogens) rise dramatically, and there are major alterations in
the immune response (Kumar and Magon, 2012). The immune
changes are complex, and may be referred to as immune
modulation, as on the one hand, some degree of immune
suppression is needed to accept the growing fetus bearing its
own developing immune system, whereas on the other hand,
strict immunity must remain in order to protect the mother and
fetus from infections. While many consider pregnancy to be an
anti-inﬂammatory state, others consider pregnancy to be a multi-
stage process including inﬂammatory stages at implantation
and parturition, and anti-inﬂammatory stages in mid-pregnancy,
when the fetus grows rapidly (Mor and Cardenas, 2010).

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 2 July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031 Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Pregnancy and the Microbiome FIGURE 1 | Microbiome changes during pregnancy. Text and arrows refer to: general changes (pink), changes in speciﬁc taxonomy (green) and community
diversity (orange).

CHANGES IN GUT MICROBIOTA DURING
PREGNANCY Healthy pregnancy is characterized by an increase in the
bacterial load and profound alterations in the composition of
gut microbiota (Collado et al., 2008; Koren et al., 2012). In the
ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy, the gut microbial composition is
similar to that of healthy, non-pregnant women. However, from the ﬁrst to the third trimester, the gut microbiota composition
changes dramatically. These changes are characterized by
increased abundance of members of the Actinobacteria and
Proteobacteria phyla, as well as a reduction in individual richness
(alpha diversity; Koren et al., 2012). In addition,
levels of
Faecalibacterium, a butyrate-producing bacterium with anti-
inﬂammatory activities, which is depleted in metabolic syndrome
patients (Haro et al., 2015), are signiﬁcantly decreased in the Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 3 July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031 Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

The gut microbiota during pregnancy is inﬂuenced not only
by internal cues, but also by environmental factors, primarily by
diet. In a recent study in mice, Gohir et al. (2015) demonstrated
that the maternal diet prior to and during pregnancy had an
eﬀect on gut microbiota. Female mice fed a high-fat diet in
the periconceptional period and during gestation demonstrated
changes in the gut microbiota later in pregnancy, in contrast to
those fed on a normal chow diet (Gohir et al., 2015). An obese
state was also correlated to microbial composition during human
gestation (Collado et al., 2008). Bacteroides and Staphylococcus
were shown to be signiﬁcantly higher in the feces of overweight
pregnant women, compared to those of normal weight (Collado
et al., 2008). Additionally, in overweight and obese pregnant
women, speciﬁc metabolic hormones including insulin, gastric
inhibitory polypeptide (GIP), and adipokines were found to be
correlated with alterations in bacterial abundance, reinforcing
a connection between the microbiota and metabolic hormones
in pregnancy (Gomez-Arango et al., 2016). Interestingly, it was
shown that pre-pregnancy maternal body mass index (BMI)
correlated to neonatal gut microbiota composition in vaginally
delivered, but not C-section delivered oﬀspring (Mueller et al.,
2016). Overall, most studies showed signiﬁcant alterations in gut
microbiota during pregnancy, with correlations to initial weight
and diet, weight gain, inﬂammation, and metabolic parameters.
An exception is a recent longitudinal study of 49 women sampled
weekly, during gestation and monthly post-partum. This study
found no dramatic changes during gestation or upon delivery in
gut microbiota composition or richness indexes (DiGiulio et al.,
2015). This strengthens the fact that more studies are needed to
understand the eﬀects of pregnancy on the gut microbiota.

The eﬀects of antibiotics administered during pregnancy on
the microbiome have been studied in rats (Khan et al., 2016).
Use of category B antibiotics (azithromycin, amoxicillin, and
cefaclor) during pregnancy was shown to increase the fecal
relative abundance of Proteobacteria and Enterobacter, while
reducing the relative abundance of Firmicutes and Lactobacillus.
Moreover, antibiotics during pregnancy signiﬁcantly reduced
bacterial diversity, and promoted weight gain. Another study
found that maternal antibiotic treatment during pregnancy and
lactation in mice reduced adaptive antiviral immune responses
in the infant mice, suggesting a broad immune eﬀect on
the oﬀspring (Gonzalez-Perez et al., 2016). Most strikingly,
non-absorbable antibiotics given to pregnant mice altered
oﬀspring behavior in a manner by which they exhibited low
locomotor activity at 4 weeks of age, and less exploratory
behavior in central regions at both 4 and 8 weeks of age.
However, these behavioral phenotypes were reversed when pups
were fostered by control mothers starting at postnatal day 1
(Tochitani et al., 2016).

The postpartum period is also characterized by signiﬁcant
changes in the microbiota, and it has been reported that at least Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 4 July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031 Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Pregnancy and the Microbiome 1 month after birth the mothers’ microbiotas do not yet return
to their baseline (Koren et al., 2012). Only a few studies have
studied this timeframe, and it would therefore be of interest
to investigate how long the postpartum transition period lasts,
and whether a return to baseline microbial populations ever
occurs. Since the postpartum period is also associated with
dramatic hormonal changes including a signiﬁcant decrease
in progesterone and estrogen levels, it would be interesting
to test the direct eﬀects of the hormonal changes on the
microbiome.

As in the gut, the vaginal microbiome undergoes signiﬁcant
changes during pregnancy, including a signiﬁcant decrease in
overall diversity, increased stability (the community composition
changes over time), and enrichment with Lactobacillus species
(Aagaard et al., 2012). These correlate with a decrease in the
vaginal pH and an increase in vaginal secretions (Prince et al.,
2014a). Vaginal microbial compositions were found to diﬀer
according to gestational age, while the communities at the later
stages of pregnancy resembled those of the non-pregnant state
(Aagaard et al., 2012). The dominant Lactobacillus species in
pregnancy varies according to ethnic group; while L. jensenii
is predominantly observed in women of Asian and Caucasian
ethnicity, L. gasseri is absent in samples from Black women
(MacIntyre et al., 2015).

Contrastingly, a recent study by DiGiulio et al. (2015)
did not identify any signiﬁcant alteration in vaginal microbial
components
they found
throughout pregnancy. However,
in the post-partum period in which
distinct diﬀerences vaginal communities were more similar to the gut microbiota
communities, with Lactobacillus being replaced by various
including Peptoniphilus, Prevotella, and
anaerobic bacteria,
Anaerococcus. These various alterations may persist
for as
long as a year after delivery (DiGiulio et al., 2015). The
postpartum vaginal microbiome was also characterized by
gradual depletion of Lactobacillus species,
increased alpha-
diversity, and enrichment of bacteria associated with vaginosis,
such as Actinobacteria, in 40% of the subjects at 6 weeks after
birth (as opposed to only 2% of the subjects during pregnancy;
MacIntyre et al., 2015).

THE PLACENTAL MICROBIOTA The placenta is one of the most poorly understood human organs,
particularly with regard to the presence of microbes within it.
Until recently, the dogma was that the fetus and the placenta
are germ free, and that such a sterile environment is essential
to protect the fetus from infections. It was believed that cases Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 5 July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031 Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

In 1982, Kovalovszki et al. were the ﬁrst to describe the
presence of aerobic bacteria in 16% of tested placenta samples
using a culture-dependent approach, and concluded that bacteria
can be detected in the placenta without any histological evidence
of chorioamnionitis (Kovalovszki et al., 1982). Since then,
several additional reports described bacteria in the placenta
(Goldenberg et al., 2000; Dominguez-Bello et al., 2010; Hyman
et al., 2014; Romero et al., 2014a; MacIntyre et al., 2015).
Using whole genome shotgun sequencing (WGS) of samples
from 320 subjects, Aagaard et al. reported that the placenta
contains a unique microbiome (Aagaard et al., 2014). When
characterizing the placental microbial community, the major
phylum was Proteobacteria, and compared to all other organs, the
composition was most similar to the oral microbiota, including
species such as Prevotella tannerae and Neisseria (Aagaard
et al., 2014). The similarity between the oral and placental
microbiota suggests that bacteria may pass from the oral cavity
to the placenta, possibly explaining the many observations of
women with periodontal disease that have an increased risk of
pregnancy complications (Gibbs et al., 1992; Jeﬀerson, 2012;
Mysorekar and Cao, 2014; Prince et al., 2014b). Additionally,
several studies (Figure 1), using cultivation and PCR techniques,
found microbes in amniotic ﬂuid and umbilical cord blood in
healthy asymptomatic women, as well as in those with pregnancy
complications (DiGiulio et al., 2010a,b; Romero et al., 2014b).
It is important to note that the microbial density present in
the placenta is very low, requiring precise veriﬁcation in all
cases that research results are not due to contamination. This is
especially true with samples in which the placenta was collected
after vaginal delivery and is therefore prone to contaminations
from the birth canal, as opposed to samples in which the placenta
was collected during C-section in a sterile manner.

infections Correlations between oral and pregnancy
complications have been shown in various studies (Zi et al.,
2014). Maternal periodontal disease has been shown to increase
risk of preterm birth (Oﬀenbacher et al., 2006). While at ﬁrst, the
connection between oral infections and pregnancy complications
may sound farfetched; there are several mechanisms by which
such a link may occur. One theory posits that lipopolysaccharides
(LPS) from Gram-negative periodontopathic bacteria such as
Porphyromonas gingivalis may increase inﬂammatory mediators
and prostaglandin production, leading to preterm birth (ElAttar,
1976; Kim and Amar, 2006). Alternatively, it was suggested that
hematogenous spread of oral microbes to the placenta might be
a driver of preterm birth (Aagaard et al., 2014).

as for Finally, evidence a placental microbiome is
accumulating, one emerging question is whether these bacterial
communities are diﬀerent in cases of pregnancy complications
such as preterm births. When comparing placental bacterial
populations in preterm vs. term deliveries, higher abundance
of several taxa, such as Burkholderia, Streptosporangium, and
Anaeromyxobacter, were found in the placentas of pregnancies
delivered preterm, while Paenibacillus was enriched in placentas
term (Romero et al., 2014a). However, using
delivered at Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 6 July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031 Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

EARLY BACTERIAL COLONIZATION OF
THE FETUS Until recently, it was assumed that newborns are born completely
germ free, and that the initial colonization of the newborn gut
occurs during birth. However, several studies suggest that the
colonization of the fetus begins prior to birth. In 2008, Jimenez
et al. orally inoculated pregnant mice with a genetically labeled
Enterococcus faecium strain and, afterward, were able to isolate
this bacterium from the meconium (ﬁrst stool) of oﬀspring
delivered by C-section (no labeled bacteria were found in the
uninoculated control group; Jimenez et al., 2008). This ﬁnding
implies that maternal bacteria can enter the GI tract of the
fetus. However, direct proof for microbial colonization of the
fetus, as well as the potential mechanisms by which bacteria pass
from the mother to the fetus are still unknown. In a human
study in which pregnant mothers received probiotics compared
to placebo controls, bacterial alterations were detected in the
infant meconium, and placenta (Rautava et al., 2012b) once
again alluding to a prenatal eﬀect on microbial composition.
The notion of early microbial colonization of the fetus suggests
that from the very beginning of development, there are dual
interactions between the developing host and microbiota, and
that there is some type of early inheritance of the maternal
microbial components.

Interestingly, the mode of delivery has an eﬀect on the infant’s
oral microbiome, as well (Lif Holgerson et al., 2011). Immediately
after delivery, the oral microbial communities of C-section and
vaginally delivered newborns resemble that of the mother’s skin
or vagina, respectively (Dominguez-Bello et al., 2010). It was
further shown that the oral bacterial populations diﬀer at 3
months of age between C-section and vaginally delivered infants.
Generally, more bacterial taxa were detected in the infants
delivered vaginally compared with infants delivered by C-section,
with Slackia exigua detected only in infants delivered by C-
section. In a diﬀerent study of infants infected with S. mutans,
involved in dental caries, those delivered by C-section acquired
infection almost 1 year earlier than did vaginally delivered
infants, and the genotype of these bacteria, was similar to that
of their mothers (Li et al., 2005).

It has been suggested that disruption of vaginal bacteria
transmission via C-section can have
long-term medical
implications: a few studies reported that C-section delivery
increases
the incidence of celiac disease (Decker et al.,
2010; Marild et al., 2012), obesity and asthma (Kero et al.,
2002). Moreover, the administration of probiotics (including
Lactobacillus sp.) from birth until age 6 months reduced the
incidence of allergy at 5 years of age in C-section, but not
vaginally delivered children (Kuitunen et al., 2009). However,
none of
these studies directly tested the role of bacteria
colonizing the newborn in the development of disease. The
mode of delivery may also have an eﬀect on the maturation
of the immune system. Jakobsson et al. found lower levels of
the T helper cell-related chemokines CXCL10 and CXCL11
in the blood of
infants delivered by C-section compared
with vaginally born infants. Moreover, bacteria from the
genus Bacteroides (which are more abundant after vaginal Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 7 July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031 Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Maternal weight was found to be a major inﬂuencing factor in
shaping milk bacterial composition. In obese pregnant women,
higher abundance of the genus Staphylococcus, namely S. aureus
was reported over the ﬁrst 6 months of lactation, as well as
higher abundance of Lactobacillus in the ﬁrst month, compared
with samples from mothers of normal weight (Cabrera-Rubio
et al., 2012). Interestingly, high levels of S. aureus are also
found in the gut microbiota of overweight children; however,
the source of this bacterium is, as yet, unclear (Kalliomaki et al.,
2008). Future research is needed to determine whether the milk
microbial populations associated with maternal obesity may have
implications on the oﬀspring’s weight.

EFFECTS OF BREAST-FEEDING VS.
FORMULA ON INFANTS are profound diﬀerences There
in the gut microbiota
composition of breast-fed vs. formula-fed infants (summarized Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 8 July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031 Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

the in Figure 2B). Breast milk contains oligosaccharides, complex
carbohydrates that cannot be digested by the infant. However,
infant’s bacteria including Biﬁdobacterium,
some of
Lactobacillus, and Bacteroides have the ability to degrade these
oligosaccharides into small sugars that may be utilized as an
energy source (e.g., lactose), giving them an advantage over
competing bacteria (Sela et al., 2011; Manthey et al., 2014). The
remaining small sugars can be further metabolized by glycolytic
microbes present in the infant,
including lactate-producing
bacteria such as Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, and Enterococcus.

Studies in the last two decades revealed that Biﬁdobacteria
are the most abundant organisms in breast-fed infant guts,
whereas the gut microbiota of formula-fed infants is dominated
by Enterococci and Clostridia (Balmer and Wharton, 1989).
Furthermore, Bezirtzoglou et al. observed that the gut of formula-
fed infant contained fewer bacterial cells and more species Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 9 July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031 Nuriel-Ohayon et al.

Finally, the beneﬁcial Identifying and detrimental microbial
components and their roles during pregnancy, parturition,
post-partum, and in early development may have extremely
important implications in terms of diet, antibiotic treatments,
probiotics, and potential therapies for disease states throughout
all developmental stages. Therefore, the microbial interactions
during these times may have clinical relevance in the design of
the desired type of antibiotics and/or probiotics for pregnant
women or newborns. For instance, if speciﬁc microbial species
in human milk prove to have long-term health beneﬁts,
they may be administered to formula-fed newborns, as well.
Alternatively, probiotic or antibiotic treatments could be
designed to alleviate pregnancy complication states, or at least,
microbial biomarkers could be identiﬁed for the early diagnosis
of such conditions. We are therefore conﬁdent that future
research in these ﬁelds will provide useful clinical knowledge, Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 10 July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031 Nuriel-Ohayon et al