11_PARAGRAPHS

As different gut microbial compositions generate different levels of TMAO [18], higher blood
TMAO levels and an increased CVD risk can be attributed to a TMA-producing microbiome harboring
TMA lyases. These ﬁndings support the idea that prevention of CVD is feasible through gut microbial
modulation. However, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, based on TMA lyases,
was not sufﬁcient to predict the incidence of CAD (Area Under the Curve = 0.63). Moreover, a recent
clinical trial has shown that ﬁsh consumption increases the circulating TMAO levels, highlighting
the substantial limitations in our current understanding of the relationship between diet and gut
microbial TMAO production [18]. Moreover, all available clinical studies are cross-sectional studies
or cohort studies, not interventional studies. Further research is needed to elucidate whether TMAO
contributes directly to the progression of CVD or reﬂects the presence of a deleterious colonic microbial
metabolism, dietary habits, or renal tubular dysfunction. In addition, the distribution of TMAO levels
in the general population is unknown, and standard reference values are not currently available [19].
A detailed understanding of the biological role of TMAO in CVD patients is crucial for evaluating
the feasibility of developing drugs that affect the TMAO levels or the possibility of using TMAO as a
marker of CVD.

Coronary artery disease 26 in China Coronary plaque vulnerability assessed by
optical coherence tomography - Follow-
Up Period 3 years 5 years 5 years 1 year Increased TMAO levels were associated
with an increased risk of major adverse
cardiovascular events or death Elevated TMAO levels portended higher
long-term mortality risk Higher TMAO levels were associated with a
higher incidence of death/transplantation Elevated levels were associated with a higher
incidence of death/HF Plasma TMAO level was signiﬁcantly higher in
patients with plaque rupture than in those
without plaque rupture 2017 Clin. Chem.

4. Alterations of the Gut Microbial Structure Associated with CVD Several studies have been conducted to elucidate which gut bacterial species are involved in the
incidence and progression of CVD (Table 2) [17,26–28]. We were the ﬁrst to report that the incidence
of CAD was linked to an alteration of the gut microbial composition [28,29]. We have reported a
lower abundance of the phylum Bacteroidetes and a higher abundance of the order Lactobacillales
in patients with CAD compared to non-CAD patients with coronary risk factors, such as diabetes,
hypertension, or dyslipidemia, and healthy volunteers using terminal restriction fragment length
polymorphism analysis, which is one of the most well-established and reliable 16S rRNA-based
methods. The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, an indicator of dysbiosis, increased in the CAD patients
compared with the non-CAD controls. Interestingly, our data revealed that the CAD patients were
signiﬁcantly more likely to be categorized as enterotype III, which is characterized by low levels
of Bacteroides, compared with the non-CAD controls. Last year, a metagenome-wide association
study of fecal samples from 218 CAD patients and 187 healthy subjects from China was reported [17].
The abundance of Enterobacteriaceae was signiﬁcantly higher in the CAD patients compared to the
healthy subjects. The abundance of Streptococcus spp. was also signiﬁcantly higher in the patients
with CAD than in the healthy subjects. This may be due to the use of proton pump inhibitors in
CAD patients [30]. Consistent with our results, Bacteroides spp. were signiﬁcantly depleted in the
CAD patients. Given that Bacteroides spp. are known to have an important role in maintaining a
healthy gut ecosystem [31], and that the abundance of Bacteroides spp. was found to decrease in
patients with atherosclerotic ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack [27], Bacteroides spp. may
have the potential to regulate atherosclerosis progression. Furthermore, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii,
which exhibits anti-inﬂammatory effects [32], was also signiﬁcantly depleted in the CAD patients.
Of note, the co-abundance network structure differed between the two groups. The negative Diseases 2018, 6, 56 5 of 10 correlations between Streptococcus spp. and Bacteroides spp. were observed only in the CAD patients.
On the other hand, the positive correlation between Bacteroides spp. and Erysipelotrichaceae bacterium
was seen only in the healthy subjects. These results implied that a peculiar inter-species relationship in
the gut microbiome may exist in CAD patients compared to healthy subjects.

Additionally, there are some studies that have demonstrated the relationship between the
gut microbiome and heart failure (HF). Kamo et al., ﬁrst reported the gut microbial difference in
Japanese heart failure patients [33]. They performed a 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis of fecal
samples from 12 HF patients and 12 age-matched healthy subjects. They further compared the gut
microbiome in HF patients according to age; the gut microbiome in the 12 HF patients younger than
60 years of age were compared with those of the 10 HF patients 60 years of age or older. Although
the richness and diversity of the gut microbiota were not signiﬁcantly different between the HF
patients and healthy subjects, Dorea and Clostridium were less abundant in the HF patients than
in the healthy subjects. Moreover, older HF patients had a lower abundance of Bacteroidetes and
a higher abundance of Proteobacteria compared to the younger HF patients. There is also a report
from China that shows a metagenomic analysis of fecal samples from patients with chronic HF [34].
They enrolled 53 HF patients and 41 controls with risk factors and compared the compositions of
their gut microbiomes. Ruminococcus, Acinetobacter, and Veillonella increased in the HF patients,
whereas Alistipes, Faecalibacterium, and Oscillibacter decreased.
In line with the previous report,
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii decreased in the HF patients compared to the controls. The results of
these studies suggest that an altered gut microbiome may have an impact on the development and
progression of heart failure. This evidence paves the way for further studies investigating the gut
microbiome in the prevention and management of CVD.

Diseases 2018, 6, 56 6 of 10 Table 2. Clinical reports demonstrating the gut microbiome in patients with CVD.

China 16S rRNA V4 region Enterobacteriaceae ↑, Proteobacteria ↑, Escherichia/Shigella ↑, Bacteroidetes ↓,
Bacteroidales ↓, Bacteroidaceae ↓, Bacteroides ↓ in stroke/TIA patients.

Japan Terminal restriction fragment
length polymorphism Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio ↑, Lactobacillales ↑, Bacteroides + Prevotella ↓ in CAD.

China Gut metagenome Enterobacteriaceae (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., and Enterobacter aerogenes),
Streptococcus spp., Lactobacillus salivarius, Solobacterium moorei, Atopobium parvulum,
Ruminococcus gnavus, Eggerthella lenta ↑, Roseburia intestinalis ↓, Faecalibacterium cf.
prausnitzii ↓, Bacteroides spp. ↓, Prevotella copri ↓, Alistipes shahii ↓ in ACVD.

Diseases 2018, 6, 56 7 of 10 5. Alternations in Gut Microbial Function Associated with CVD In addition to the compositional characteristics, the functional characteristics of the gut
microbiome have been investigated in order to delineate the mechanisms related to the development
of CVD. Although metagenomic shotgun sequencing analysis is the main method to examine the
functional characteristics, methods are being developed to predict functional proﬁles from taxonomic
proﬁles. Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt)
is a bioinformatics software package designed to predict metagenomic functional content from the
16S rRNA gene [35]. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) modules are usually
used to construct a functional map of the gut microbiome [36].

With regard to HF, Cui et al., have investigated the metabolic patterns of the gut microbiome
in patients with chronic HF to provide direct evidence and a comprehensive understanding of
gut microbial dysbiosis [34]. Fifty-three chronic HF patients (ischemic cardiomyopathy, n = 29;
dilated cardiomyopathy, n = 24) and 41 controls with risk factors were enrolled. They found
an elevation in the microbial genes for lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, tryptophan, and TMAO
generation in the chronic HF patients. This result provides a convincing explanation for the increased
plasma lipopolysaccharide levels in HF patients [37], because the main source of lipopolysaccharides
is the gut/gut microbiome. Moreover, increased expression of the genes for phosphotransferase
systems and decreased gene expression for the synthesis and transport of amino acids, nucleotide
sugar biosynthesis, and the iron transport system were observed in the HF patients compared with the
controls. These disease-dependent unique features in the functional capacity may give us clues for
novel therapeutic approaches.

6. Issues to Be Considered When Interpreting the Studies Most clinical studies compare the gut microbial composition between patients and healthy controls.
Administration of medication has a substantial effect on the gut microbiome, and medication-matched
controls are required to elucidate the impact of the gut microbiome on disease progression. Moreover,
the studies mentioned above have provided useful characterization of the fecal microbial proﬁle
in patients with CVD; however, we are still struggling with these descriptive data. A speciﬁc gut
microbiome-based target to prevent CVD has yet to emerge, which is the greatest challenge that we
are currently facing. It may take a little more time to conduct a large cohort study or a translational
study to promote a deeper understanding of how the gut microbiome directly contributes to CVD.
While we already know that diet, prebiotics, probiotics, a speciﬁc IgA antibody, and enzymes can
modulate the gut microbiome and its function [38,39], these interventions for patients with CVD are
constrained by ethical considerations or funding limitations. In such cases, an in vitro fermentation
system simulating the human intestinal tract may help to evaluate the functionality or safety of these
interventions under highly reproducible conditions without the ethical issues [40]. Speciﬁcally, we can
culture feces from patients with prebiotics or probiotics in an in vitro fermentation system and analyze
how the gut microbiome, and its metabolites and functions, are changed after the intervention. Of note,
we have observed some discrepancies between the ﬁndings in humans and mice. These may be due to Diseases 2018, 6, 56 8 of 10 the differences in the natural gut microbiome. It is important to pay attention to the complexities of
translating the ﬁndings from an animal model to humans