28_PARAGRAPHS

  Mei Wang Sharon M. Donovan Introduction Over the past decade, the essential role that the gut micro-
biota plays in the developmental programming of the neo-
nate, including growth trajectories, metabolism, and immune 
and cognitive development, has been demonstrated [1–3]. 
Thus, fostering the development of the microbiome in the 
first 1000 days of life is critical to supporting lifelong health. 
Due to the rapid changes in the gut microbiome in the early 
postnatal period, most pediatric microbiome research has 
focused  on  differences  between  breast-  and  formula-fed 
infants in the first year of life [4]. Few studies have evaluated 
the microbiota of toddlers and children, and the prevailing 
thought is that children attain an adult-like microbiota by 
3 years of age [5, 6]. However, recent studies suggest that 
maturation of the gut microbiota is influenced by diet, and 
differences from an adult-type microbiota persist into later 
childhood [6, 7]. Therefore, the goal herein was to review 
the current evidence for the role of dietary intake and pre- 
and probiotic interventions on the gut microbiota from birth 
through adolescence.

Digestive Diseases and Sciences Early Life (0–2 years) Breast‑ and Formula‑Feeding Among pediatric populations, gut microbiota composi-
tion of breastfed (BF) and formula-fed (FF) infants is most 
extensively studied and has been reviewed elsewhere [3, 
4]. While heterogeneity exists among demographics, infant 
age, formula type, and sampling and analytical techniques 
applied in the published literature, most studies show that 
both diversity and richness of the microbiome are lower in 
BF than FF infants [4, 7–10]. Breastfeeding, particularly 
of longer duration, is associated with a more stable bacte-
rial composition [4, 8] as well as a lower microbiota age 
[8, 11]. BF infants tend to have higher Actinobacteria [4] 
and lower Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes than FF infants [2, 
6]. Breastfeeding is strongly associated with Bifidobacte-
rium [4, 7–9, 11] and Bifidobacteriaceae abundance [10]. 
For example, in the TEDDY (The Environmental Deter-
minants of Diabetes in the Young) cohort, BF infants had 
higher relative abundance of B. breve, B. bifidum, and B. 
dentium than FF; while B. longum was the most dominant 
species in this study, it did not differ by feeding group [7]. 
Lactobacillus abundance has also been associated with 
breastfeeding [9, 11]; however, results vary considerably 
among published studies [4]. In a recent meta-analysis of 
seven studies, infants who were not exclusively BF har-
bored higher relative abundances of Bacteroides, Eubac-
terium, and Veillonella [8].

Feeding mode interacts with other perinatal factors to 
influence the infant gut microbiota. Ho and colleagues 
reported  that  non-exclusively  BF  infants  have  a  lower 
abundance of Proteobacteria, but only among those deliv-
ered via cesarean section (C-section) [8]. However, breast-
feeding  appears  to  moderate  the  detrimental  effects  of 
C-section delivery and intrapartum antibiotics on the early 
microbiota, producing a microbiota profile more similar to 
that of vaginally delivered infants or those not receiving 
antibiotics [4]. Geography and ethnicity are also important 
to take into account. Across five European countries, the 
effect of country was more pronounced than delivery or 
feeding method, with dominant bifidobacteria in north-
ern countries and greater early diversification in southern 
European countries [12]. Within the USA, Bifidobacterium 
abundance differed between white and Hispanic BF and FF 
infants, but not black infants [9].

Compared to BF infants, the functional capacity of the 
microbiome of FF infants is more similar to that of adults, 
consisting  of  genes  related  to  bile  acid  synthesis  and 
methanogenesis, but considerable variation exists among 
recent studies [4]. For example, the BF infant microbi-
ome has an increased abundance of genes associated with  1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences  carbohydrate and lipid metabolism and fatty acid biosyn-
thesis than FF [7], although another study reported similar 
data related to fatty acid biosynthesis genes, but opposite 
results for carbohydrate and lipid metabolism [8]. Com-
pared to FF infants, the BF infant’s microbiome has more 
genes associated with vitamin and cofactor metabolism 
[8], free radical detoxification [8], and glutathione metabo-
lism [13]. Discrepancies among the studies could be due to 
differences in infant age or the inclusion of mixed-feeding 
infants (MF) in different feeding groups. Thus, more work 
is needed to understand the functional ontogeny of the 
infant gut microbiota.

Microbiota composition increases in both diversity and rich-
ness during the transition from a milk-based to an adult-
like  diet  [4,  9].  Introduction  to  complementary  foods  is 
accompanied  by  marked  increases  in  Lachnospiraceae,  Although studies on gut microbiota composition in children 
after 2 years of age are more limited, available evidence sug-
gest that the microbiota of young children differs from that  Beyond the 2 Years of Age 1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences Burkina Faso children
and Treponema (Spirochaetes) were higher in 
rides (Prevotella, Xylanibacter (Bacteroidetes), 
3 genera involved in utilization plant polysaccha- Faso children
was ~ sixfold higher in Italian than Burkina 
Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio (F/B ratio)  [29] in children than adults
Bacteroidetes were higher 
(Ruminococcaceae), and 
Clostridium cluster IV 
Actinobacteria, Bacilli, 
microbiota than adults
Children had less diverse  spp., and Bacteroides spp.
teriaceae, Clostridium 
and increased Enterobac-
bacterium, Lactobacillus, 
Weaning decreased Bifido- [28] [26] 3-d dietary questionnaire
on children’s diet and a 
vided in-depth interview 
Burkina Faso parents pro- lifestyle survey
detailed medical, diet, and 
Italian parents completed a  rules and regulations
local state and federal 
requirements defined by 
adhering to nutritional 
Children attended daycares  V5–V6 16S rRNA by 454-pyrose- quencing Cross-sectional N = 29
1–6 y
Italy and Burkina Faso rRNA and qPCR Microarray targeting V1–V6 16S  Cross-sectional N = 28
1–4 y and adults
USA (North Carolina) Targeted qPCR analysis FFQ at 9-, 18-, and 36-mo  Observational  visits cohort (SKOT) n = 330
0–3 y
Denmark taiotaomicron
increased B. the-
degradation; 
sugar and starch 
for complex 
enriched in genes 
12-mo microbiota  degradation
genes for HMO 
biota enriched in 
4-mo micro-
Newborn and 
Anaerostipes
Clostridium, and 
Roseburia, 
roides, Bilophila, 
increased Bacte- BF cessation  and Veillonella
Megasphaera, 
Collinsella, 
Lactobacillus, 
Bifidobacterium, 
predominate in  [27] BF infants  Metagenomic shotgun sequencing by  Feeding practices question- Cross-sectional Illumina HiSeq 2000 naires assessing BF cessation
BF, FF, MF  = 98 yN Sweden and number of participants
Country of study, age range,    Table 1  Characteristics of studies investigating dietary effects on microbiome composition in infants and children Citations Outcomes Method of diet assessmentMethod of microbiota assessment Study design 1 3enterotype
enterotypes, but not Bifidobacterium 
with Bacteroides and Prevotella 
plasma insulin levels in children 
dietary fiber consumption and low  Negative correlation between high  than adults
teria (Bifidobacterium) in children 
Higher Bacteroidetes and Actinobac- sequencing
by Illumina 
sequencing 
shotgun 
Metagenomic  Parent-report FFQ Cross-sectional [33] Bangkok children had higher Actinobacteria,  V1–V2 16S rRNA by Illumina MiSeq 7-day dietary records Comparative  Thailand—Rural (Buriam)  cross-sectional and urban (Bangkok) [32] V6–V8 16S rRNA by 454 pyrosequencing Cross-sectional [34]
caceae and higher butyrate and propionate
streptococcaceae and unclassified Ruminococ-
Buriram children had more Clostridiales, Pepto- Bacteroidales and Selenomadales Lachnospiraceae)
Bifidobacteriaceae, Ruminococcaceae, and 
BB-type cluster (defined by Bacteroidaceae, 
Ormoc samples were included in the termed 
(defined by Prevotellaceae) and 78.9% of the 
87.5% of Baybay children fell into P-type cluster  rium and lower Dorea and Eubacterium
higher Cyanobacteria and Phascolarctobacte-
legumes, nuts and seeds) was associated with  Dietary Pattern 2 (intake of grains, dairy and  Roseburia
lower Bifidobacterium, Prevotella, Blautia, and 
roidetes, Bacteroides, and Ruminococcus and 
snacks and sweets) was linked to higher Bacte-
and sweetened beverages, kid’s meals and 
refined carbohydrates, vegetables, fruit, juice 
Dietary Pattern 1 (intake of fish, protein foods,  microbial taxa and composition Fruit intake negatively associated with Ruminococcus  Soy, pulse, and nut positively associated with Bacteroides  gnavus xylanisolvens nospira habits of Filipino children
and adapted to dietary 
National Dietary Survey 
modified from Singapore 
viewed using FFQ 
Parents/guardians inter- dietary patterns
(YAQ) FFQ was used for  Youth and Adolescent 
3-day food diaries N = 281
6–9 y
Netherlands N = 45
9–10 y N = 43
7–9 y City)
bay) and urban (Ormoc 
Philippines—Rural (Bay- N = 22
4–8 y
USA (Illinois) N = 37
2–3 y
Australia and number of participants
Country of study, age range,  Table 1  (continued) [31] Two dietary patterns were associated with  V3–V4 16S rRNA by Illumina MiSeq Nutrient intake assessed by  Cross-sectional Digestive Diseases and Sciences  Vegetable protein intake positively associated with Lach- toclostridium spp. and the F/B ratio
cies richness and diversity and positively with Erysipela-
V6–V8 16S rRNA by Illumina MiSeqDairy intake negatively associated with Bacteroidetes, spe- [30] 24-h recall
(FFQ)
Adolescent Eating Survey  Australian Child and  Cross-sectional Citations Outcomes Method of diet assessmentMethod of microbiota assessment Study design 1 3  Digestive Diseases and Sciences F/B Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio, BF breastfed, FF formula-fed, FFQ Food Frequency Questionnaire, MF mixed-fed, SCFA short-chain fatty acids, USA United States of America [38] Egyptian consumed Mediterranean-type diet, and Ameri- V4 16S rRNA by Illumina  Not reported Cross-sectional MiSeq [37] Bangladeshi children had lower  Not reported Cross-sectional quencing
by 454 pyrose-
V1–V3 16S rRNA  ride-degrading genera
saccharide degradation-encoding genes, and polysaccha-
Egyptian children had higher fecal SCFAs, microbial poly- can children had Bacteroides enterotype Egyptian children had Prevotella enterotype, and Ameri- can children consumed a Western diet rice, bread, and lentils
enriched foods and meat and high in 
Western diet low in refined-sugar-
Bangladeshi children consumed non- Butyrivibrio, and Oscillospira
Bacteroides and higher Prevotella,  curry foods
positively associated with fruits and 
sugar-enriched foods; Collinsella 
positively correlated with refined- Bifidobacterium, and Collinsella  changes
is a major delineator of microbiome 
Southern Chinese or Malay children) 
diet), rather than ethnicity (i.e., 
Geographical-related factors (i.e.,  with fish and beef
bacterium spp. negatively associated 
Lactobacillus and Prevotella; Bifido-
Vegetables positively correlated with  [36] [35] Board validated FFQ qPCR Singapore Health Promotion  Cross-sectional China and Malay- Citations Outcomes Method of diet assessmentMethod of microbiota assessment Study design qPCR Self-administered FFQ Cross-sectional and number of participants
Country of study, age range,  Table 1  (continued) N = 14
10.1–15.7 y
USA (Ohio)
N = 28
13.3–14.5 y
(Giza) Egypt  N = 4
12–14 y
USA
N = 10
8–13 y
Bangladesh N = 210
7–12 y
sia N = 60
8–11 y
Thailand 1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences  of adults [28]. As children consume a more complex diet, 
associations between dietary patterns and the gut microbiota 
emerge, and their microbiota composition becomes more 
similar to adults [28]. How diet affects the gut microbiota 
can be interrogated at several levels, starting with specific 
nutrients, such as fiber [31], to categories of foods, or food 
groups [30, 31], to more complex assessments of dietary 
intake, such as dietary patterns [30]. A summary of the 
impact of diet on gut microbiota composition is shown in 
Table 1 and is discussed below.

Toddlers (2–3 Years of Age) In Australian 2- to 3-year-olds, both habitual diet, as meas-
ured by a Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ), and recent 
dietary intake, as measured by a 24-h recall 3 days prior to 
fecal sample collection, influenced fecal microbiota com-
position [30]. Dairy intake was negatively associated with 
species richness and diversity and Bacteroidetes abundance, 
but was positively associated with Erysipelatoclostridium 
spp. and the Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio [F/B ratio]. 
Vegetable  protein  intake  was  positively  associated  with 
abundances of the Lachnospira; soy, pulse, and nut intake 
were positively associated with Bacteroides xylanisolvens, 
and fruit intake was negatively associated with the relative 
abundance of microbes related to Ruminococcus gnavus 
[30]. Dairy and vegetable-source proteins explained 7–10% 
of the variation in microbiota composition and fruit intake 
explained 8%. Among the dairy group, yogurt explained 9% 
of the variance in microbiota [30].

Young Childhood to Adolescence (4–14 Years of Age) Moving beyond the first 1000 days of life, Berding and cow-
orkers [31] investigated the temporal stability of the fecal 
microbiota and whether dietary patterns were associated 
with microbial taxa and composition in American 4–8-year-
olds at 3 time points over a 6-month period. Dietary intakes 
were assessed over the previous year using the Young Ado-
lescent Questionnaire, and two dietary patterns were identi-
fied by principal components analysis (PCA) and factor anal-
ysis [31]. Temporal stability of microbiota over the 6-month 
period was associated with baseline dietary patterns. Dietary 
pattern 1, defined by intake of fish, protein foods, refined 
carbohydrates, vegetables, fruit, juice and sweetened bev-
erages, kid’s meals and snacks and sweets, was linked to 
higher relative abundance of Bacteroidetes,  Bacteroides, 
and Ruminococcus and lower Bifidobacterium, Prevotella, 
Blautia, and Roseburia relative abundance. Dietary pat-
tern 2, defined by intake of grains, dairy and legumes, nuts 
and seeds, was associated with higher Cyanobacteria and 
Phascolarctobacterium abundance and lower Dorea and 
Eubacterium abundance [31]. Additionally, the intake of  snacks and sweets and refined carbohydrates were nega-
tively correlated with both Shannon and the Chao1 Indices, 
respectively, demonstrating reduced microbial diversity with 
greater intake of sugars and refined grains.

Residing in rural vs. urban environments can also affect 
food availability and choices, which has been investigated 
in a series of studies. A study of Filipino children (7 to 
9 years) living in rural (Baybay) and urban (Ormoc) com-
munities showed distinct differences in dietary habits and 
fecal microbiota composition [32]. Nearly all (94%) of urban 
children consumed fast food four times per week on average 
compared to 42% of rural children who consumed fast food 
less than once per week. Urban-dwelling children also con-
sumed a diet higher in meat, fat, and confectionaries, such 
as sweetened pastries and biscuits, and lower in complex 
carbohydrates compared to rural children. Using family-level 
bacterial composition to execute PCA and clustering analy-
sis in conjunction with a dataset from five other Asian coun-
tries, it was observed that 87.5% of rural children fell into 
the termed P-type cluster [defined by Prevotellaceae] and 
78.9% of the urban samples were included in the termed BB-
type cluster (defined by Bacteroidaceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, 
Ruminococcaceae,  and Lachnospiraceae).  Additionally, 
Prevotellaceae, including only the genus Prevotella and 
consisting of mostly Prevotella copri, were more abundant 
in the feces of rural children, making up 10% of the total 
community, whereas it represented < 1% of the fecal micro-
bial sequences in most urban children. These findings may 
reflect the higher consumption of complex carbohydrates in 
rural children. [32].

Greater Bifidobacterium abundance in 1- to 4-year-olds 
compared to adults has been reported [28], and recent stud-
ies have shown that the relative abundance of Bifidobac-
terium in older children is related to dietary intake and is  1 3  Digestive Diseases and Sciences associated  with  metabolic  phenotypes.  Studying  Dutch 
children in the KOALA Birth Cohort Study, Zhong and col-
leagues documented higher levels of Bifidobacterium at 6 
to 9 years of age compared to adults [34]. They also classi-
fied children into three enterotypes and observed that cor-
relations between dietary and metabolic phenotypes were 
dependent on fecal microbial enterotype. For example, a 
negative correlation between dietary fiber intake and plasma 
insulin was only reported in children with Bacteroides and 
Prevotella enterotypes, but not the Bifidobacterium entero-
type [34]. This latter microbiome possesses lower microbial 
gene richness, alpha diversity, and functional potential for 
butyrate and succinate production, suggesting that children 
exhibiting a Bifidobacterium enterotype have a less mature 
gut microbiome [34]. Additionally, a study of 8- to 11-year-
olds in Thailand living in two different geographical regions 
observed that frequency of vegetable intake was positively 
correlated with Lactobacillus and Prevotella, while Bifido-
bacterium spp. was negatively correlated with fish and beef 
intake [35].

Parallel to these findings, comparing Bangladeshi and 
American  children  (9–14  years),  Bangladeshi  children 
exhibited lower levels of Bacteroides and higher levels of 
Prevotella,  Butyrivibrio,  and Oscillospira,  indicative  of 
their consumption of a non-Western diet low in refined-
sugar enriched foods and meat and rich in rice, bread, and 
lentils [37]. Furthermore, the American children consuming 
Western diets had higher Bacteroides abundance than chil-
dren in Bangladesh [37]. A Bacteroides enterotype is more 
common in adults consuming a Western diet, whereas the 
Prevotella enterotype is more common in those consuming 
high amounts of fiber [39].

Lastly,  a  study  comparing  Egyptian  teenagers  (mean 
13.9 years) consuming a Mediterranean-style diet to Ameri-
can teenagers (mean 12.9 years) consuming a Western diet, 
found that Egyptian children clustered to the Prevotella ente-
rotype and American children clustered to the Bacteroides 
enterotype [38]. Furthermore, the gastrointestinal environ-
ment of Egyptian children contained higher levels of SCFAs, 
microbial polysaccharide degradation-encoding genes, and 
polysaccharide-degrading genera [38].

Taken  together,  these  findings  provide  evidence  that 
the microbiome in children and adolescents is shaped to a 
greater degree by dietary intake [32–38] than by ethnicity 
[36]. While it is has been postulated that the microbiota after 
age 3 resembles that of adults [5], emerging evidence sug-
gest that, while the microbiota of children can be assembled 
into enterotypes [34, 37, 38], differences persist between 
children  and  adults.  Additionally,  children  may  also  be 
more similar to each other than adults are. For example, 
in  pre-adolescent  children  (ages  7–12)  intragroup  simi-
larity in the fecal microbiota was greater in children than 
adults [40]. Adults also displayed greater abundances of 
Bacteroides spp., while children displayed enhanced Bifi-
dobacterium spp., Faecalibacterium spp., and members of 
Lachnospiraceae [40]. However, the current literature on 
the impact of diet in this age group has some noted limita-
tions. Nearly all studies are cross-sectional, they use differ-
ent types of questionnaires to collect dietary intake data, and 
many of the studies have compared children living in rural 
vs. urban settings. While dietary intake differs between rural 
and urban communities, many other environmental factors 
are also likely contributing, including socioeconomic status, 
exposure to agricultural species and routine medical care, 
which could also be influencing the gut microbiota.

Fiber and Prebiotic Interventions in Children 
on Gut Microbiota A consistent finding of the observational studies summa-
rized above is that consumption of a Western-style diet, 
characterized by low ratio of whole grains-to-refined carbo-
hydrates, detrimentally influences microbiome composition 
and fecal SCFA concentrations in children [30–37]. Dietary 
fiber (DF) has documented health benefits for adults, includ-
ing reducing intestinal transit time, plasma cholesterol and 
postprandial glycemic response and improving resistance 
to pathogens and epithelial barrier function [41–43]. The 
underlying mechanisms of these beneficial effects are not 
fully known; however, gut microbiome modulation and for-
mation of SCFAs by bacterial fermentation are proposed 
[43]. DF is also thought to be beneficial for gut health of 
children [44], although more studies are needed. In the USA, 
the recommended dietary fiber intake is 14 g/1000 kcal or 
25 g for females and 38 g for males. Most Americans only 
consume about half of the recommended intake (13.5 and 
18 g, respectively) [41]. The fiber intake recommendations 
for children between the ages of 1 and 13 years, range from 
5 to 31 g/day, depending on the organization, however, in 
most cases children are not meeting the recommended fiber 
intakes [44]. Thus, various strategies have been developed 
for modulation of gut microbiota, including administration 
of DFs, pre- or/and probiotics.

1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences  In 2009, the Codex Alimentarius Commission defined 
DF as “carbohydrate polymers with 10 or more monomeric 
units, which are not hydrolyzed by the endogenous enzymes 
in the small intestine of humans” [43]. DF includes non-
digestible carbohydrates naturally occurring in food, isolated 
from food or synthesized, the latter two requiring evidence 
to support their physiological benefit to health [45]. Most 
countries adopted the 2009 Codex [43] definition by inclu-
sion of carbohydrate polymers with degrees of polymeriza-
tion between 3 and 9 [46]. DFs have been classified based 
on their physiochemical properties such as particle size, fer-
mentability, solubility, and viscosity, and these properties 
influence the functionality of a DF, including its ability to 
modulate gut microbiota [47]. Soluble and readily ferment-
able DFs are referred to as prebiotics, which are “a substrate 
that is selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring 
a health benefit.” [48]. Most prebiotics are DF, but not all DF 
are considered to be prebiotics.

Two HMOs, 2′-fucosyllactose (2′-FL) and lacto-N-ne-
oteraose (LNnT), are added to infant formula. Both are well 
tolerated  and  support  age-appropriate  growth  of  infants 
[49–51]. A multicenter, randomized, double-blind trial com-
pared the fecal microbiota of healthy infants fed formula 
with 2′-FL and LNnT from < 14 days to 6 months of age 
to infants consuming with control formula. Findings dem-
onstrated a fecal microbiota closer to that of BF infants in 
the infants fed formula with HMO, with higher numbers of 
Bifidobacterium and lower potential pathogens than placebo 
at 3 months of age [51].

DF and Prebiotics in Children Only a few studies have studied DFs and prebiotics on the 
gut microbiota in healthy 3–6-year-old children [52] and  adolescents (8–15 years) [53–56] (Table 2). As prebiotic 
fibers, both GOS and inulin-type fructans have been shown 
to increase abundance of Bifidobacterium [52–54]. Several 
studies have demonstrated that the intake of DFs shape the 
gut microbes of children; however, their effects on micro-
biota  composition  depend  on  the  type  of  fiber  studied. 
For example, administration of wheat bran extract (5 g/d 
for 3 weeks) increased fecal Bifidobacterium [53], while 
consumption of soluble corn fiber (SCF; 10 or 20 g/d for 
4 weeks) modulated the overall microbiota, increased the 
alpha diversity and altered the relative abundances of some 
bacterial genera, including Parabacteroides and unclassi-
fied Lachnospiraceae [54]. This same group also showed 
that GOS [55] and SCF [56] increased calcium absorption 
in adolescent girls and boys, demonstrating a health benefit 
for this age population. The authors proposed that bacte-
rial fermentation of SCF to SCFAs reduced the luminal pH, 
which increased calcium solubility and transcellular absorp-
tion [54]. Calcium absorption was negatively correlated with 
Parabacteroides relative abundance, but positively corre-
lated with Clostridium and unclassified Clostridiaceae abun-
dance [54]. The authors speculated that the two groups of 
bacteria were cross-feeding, with the Bacteroidetes (Para-
bacteroides) fermenting SCF to acetate or lactate, and the 
Firmicutes (Clostridium) further fermenting these substrates 
to butyrate [54]. The limited studies suggest that prebiotic 
and DF doses of 5–20 g are well tolerated in children, pro-
mote the expansion of bifidobacterial populations, and may 
exert other health benefits. Further large-scale studies are 
needed with different fiber sources.

Probiotic Interventions in Children on Gut 
Microbiota Probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered 
in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” 
[57]. The most commonly administered probiotic bacteria 
belong to the genera Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus, 
but can be provided either as single or mixtures of strains. 
The beneficial effects of probiotics in pediatric populations 
have  been  previously  reviewed  [58–61],  although  most 
studies have not been conducted in healthy children. Pro-
biotics shorten the duration of acute gastroenteritis, prevent 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea, reduce the risk of necrotiz-
ing enterocolitis in preterm infants and lower the incidence 
of eczema in high-risk children [58–61]. The mechanisms 
of action of probiotics are not fully understood; however, 
modulation of gut microbiota has been postulated as one of 
the mechanisms [62].

Two general probiotic approaches have been taken to 
influence the infant or child microbiota. The first approach 
is to administer the probiotic to the mother during pregnancy  1 3  Digestive Diseases and Sciences ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
DGGE denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, GOS galactooligosaccharides, OTU operational taxonomic unit, qPCR quantitative PCR, SCF soluble corn fiber, SCFA short-chain fatty acids,  ↔ SCFA concentrations 10 g Fecal pH: SCF 20 g < control, SCF 
Bacteroides and Lachnospira
unclassified Lachnospiraceae, ↓  SCF 20 g ↑Parabacteroides and 
reclassified Ruminococcus
unclassified Lachnospiraceae, ↓  SCF 10 g ↑Parabacteroides and 
samples with and without SCF
Overall microbiota differed between  pyrosequencing quencing
454 pyrose-
rRNA gene by  V3–V5 16S 
treatment
end of each 
Baseline and the 
DGGE, qPCR
treatment
end of each 
Baseline and the  [56] ↑ Chao 1 and observed OTUs at  species level V3–V4 16S rRNA gene by 454 
Before and after each intervention beverage
Muffin and  (n = 27) SCF (10 g), SCF (20 g) and control  trial with 3–4-wk washout Randomized double-blind crossover  4 wk
12–15 y
USA (Indiana) [55] [54] [53] Peptostreptococcaseae ↓ Enterococcus, Anaerofustis, Coprococcus, and other  and other Ruminococcaceae ↑ proportions of Parabacteroides, other Clostridiales 
↔ bowel movement frequency and stool consistency 10 g, control Change in Bifidobacterium counts: GOS 5 g > GOS 
↔ numbers of DGGE bands and stool frequency ↔ fecal pH, each SCFA levels, percentage of moisture  groups, and F. prausnitzii
histolyticum/C. liteseburense, R. rectale/E. rectela  ↔ counts of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus, C. 
↑ Bifidobacterium level
↔ fecal pH and stool consistency perfringens, C. difficile, and Enterobacteriaceae ↔ numbers of total bacteria, relative abundances of C.  [52] ↑ relative abundances of Bifidobacterium and Lactoba- Soluble maize fiber (12 g/d) and potato chips SCF and control (n = 23)
trial with 7-d washout Spaghetti, hamburgers, sandwiches  Randomized double-blind crossover  3 wk
12–15 y
USA (Indiana) GOS (5 or 10 g/d)
Smoothie drinks GOS 5 g, GOS 10 g and control  trial with 2-wk washout Randomized, double-blind crossover  3 wk
10–13 y
USA (Indiana) (n = 20) FISH 19 or 20 Baseline and d  noxylan oligosaccharides (5 g/d)
Wheat bran extract containing arabi-
Soft drink 2-wk washout
controlled crossover trial with 
Randomized, double-blind, placebo- Wheat bran extract and control  (n = 29) cillus qPCR week 24
Baseline and  Inulin-type fructans (6 g/d)
Mixed with food or drink Randomized, double-blind, placebo- Placebo (n = 109)
Prebiotic (n = 110)
controlled trial  wk y 3 ven) Belgium (Leu- 24 wk
3–6 y
Hungary (Pécs) vention
duration of inter-
age range, and 
Country of study,  Citations Outcomes Study design and participants/groupNutrition base and fiber type and  assessment
Microbiota  amount Table 2  Characteristics of studies investigating effects of dietary fibers and prebiotics on the fecal microbiota of healthy children and adolescents 1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences  and  then  to  either  the  mother  and/or  infant  postpartum 
[63–70] (Table 3), and the second is to administer the pro-
biotic directly to the infant or child [71–84] (Table 4). For 
the first approach, most studies gave probiotics to the moth-
ers of infants with high-risk of allergy, with the goal of 
prevention of allergic disease, such as eczema, asthma and 
allergic rhinitis [63–65, 69, 70]. The impact of maternal pro-
biotic supplementation on the abundances of bacterial taxa 
were studied [63–70]; however, the results are inconsistent, 
even when the same probiotic strain was used [63, 64, 69] 
(Table 3). For example, supplementation of pregnant and 
lactating women with L. rhamnosus GG (LGG), L. acidophi-
lus La-5 and B. animalis subsp. lactis BB-12 from 36-week 
gestation until 3 months postnatal during breastfeeding did 
not affect the proportions of bacteria classes and genera of 
the infants at 3 months and 2 years [67]. In contrast, a Finish 
study evaluated the effect of administration of L. rhamnosus 
LPR and B. longum BL999 to mothers 2 months before and 
2 months after delivery. They observed that infants whose 
mother received probiotics had lower counts of Bifidobacte-
rium and a higher percentage of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus 
than placebo at 6 months of age [68]. In addition, several 
groups investigated the diversity of infant microbiota, report-
ing that administration of probiotics during pregnancy and 
lactation, or directly to infants after delivery have no or lim-
ited effects on alpha and beta diversity of infant microbiota 
[65, 67, 70] (Table 3).

Probiotics have been administrated directly to infants and 
children [71–84] (Table 4). These studies varied in terms of 
age of the children (newborns to age 18), type of probiotic, 
dose administered, and duration of the intervention. Despite 
these differences in study design, no effects of probiotic 
administration were observed on microbiome alpha or beta 
diversity between children in probiotic and control groups, 
with the exception of one study [73]. In that study, formula 
or L. reuteri DSM 17938-supplemented formula was fed for 
6 months to newborns born by either vaginal or C-section 
delivery [73]. The L. reuteri-supplemented formula had a 
limited effect on the microbiota of vaginally born infants; 
however, the overall microbiota composition of C-section-
delivered infants consuming the probiotic-supplemented 
formula differed from that of placebo and was similar to 
vaginally delivered infants at 2 weeks of age [73].

Similar to the findings when probiotics were adminis-
tered  to  the  mother,  inconsistent  results  were  observed 
on the abundances of bacterial taxa when probiotics were  supplemented  directly  to  the  children;  some  probiotics 
affected the proportions of individual bacterial taxa, while 
others did not (Table 4). These conflicting results may be 
related to differences in probiotic strain/strains used, the 
dose use, duration of administration, and the methods used 
for microbiota analysis. Furthermore, factors that influence 
the development of gut microbiota, such as delivery mode, 
children’s age, and diet, likely confound the effects of pro-
biotic supplementation in this population [73].

1 3  Digestive Diseases and Sciences year, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
interspace profiling, mo month, qPCR quantitative PCR, T-RFLP terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism, RT-qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, VD vaginally delivered, y 
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12, CFU colony-forming unit, CS cesarean section, d day, FISH fluorescent in situ hybridization, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-pro  6 mo Metagenomic sequencing by Illumina 
0, 3, 12 and 24 mo of age HiSeq 2500 9 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. animalis subsp. lactis HN019
L. rhamnosus HN001
Powder in capsules Placebo (n = 315)
HN019 (n = 50)
HN001 (n = 285) ing); infants 5 d–2 y
6 mo postpartum if breastfeed-
Mothers at 35-wk gestation until  placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind  Wellington) New Zealand (Auckland and  Bacteroides at 24 mo ↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and  perfringens/histolyticum group at 24 mo ↑ counts of Lactobacillus and C.  bacillus, and Bacteroides at 6 mo ↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium, Lacto- [70] ↑ count of C. perfringens/histolyticum subgroup at  ↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and Bacte- roides at 24 mo group at 24 mo ↑ counts of Lactobacillus and C. perfringens/histolyticum  lus, and Bacteroides at 6 mo ↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium, Lactobacil-
↑ count of C. perfringens/histolyticum subgroup at 6 mo FISH
6 and 24 mo of age (n = 96 infants) [69] ↓ Colonization rate of B. longum in ST11 + BL999
↓ Colonization rate of B. infantis in LPR + BL999
Bifidobacterium in LPR + BL999 at 6 mo of age [68] ↑ Percentage of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus and ↓count of  FISH, qPCR
6 mo of age L. paracasei ST11 + B. longum BL999 
L. rhamnosus LPR + B. longum BL999 or
Powder in water (109 CFU/strain/d)   1010 CFU/d
LGG
Infants: powder in water
Mother: powder in capsules (5 × 109 CFU/d)
lus La-5 (5 × 1010 CFU/d) + BB-12 
LGG (5 × 1010 CFU/d) + L. acidophi-
Fermented milk
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. breve M16V + B. longum BB536
Powder in water, milk or formula
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d lactis W58 B. bifidum W23 + B. lactis W52 + L. 
Powder in water, milk or formula 1.0 × 1010 CFU/d
LGG
Powder in water 1.8 × 1010 CFU/d
LGG
Powder in capsules Placebo (n = 47–52)
Probiotic (n = 46–53) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Placebo (n = 22)
ST11 + BL999 (n = 28)
LPR + BL999 (n = 28) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind  Placebo (17–45)
Probiotic (20–37) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Control (n = 26)
Probiotic (n = 122)
Open trial
Placebo (n = 17–45)
Probiotic (n = 20–37) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Placebo (n = 82)
Probiotic (n = 77) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Placebo (n = 57)
Probiotic (n = 59) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind  infants 0–6 mo
until delivery; BF mothers or 
Mothers at 2–4 wk prior to and 
Finland (Turku) delivery during breastfeeding until 2 mo after Mothers at 2 mo before delivery 
Finland (Turku) feeding
3 mo postnatal while breast-
Mother at 36-wk gestation until 
Norway (Trondheim study) delivery; infants 0–6 mo Mothers at 34-wk gestation until 
Japan until delivery; infants at 0–1 y
Mothers at 6 wk before delivery 
Netherlands delivery; infants 0–6 mo Mothers at 36-wk gestation until 
Finland (Turku) delivery Mothers at 36-wk gestation until 
Australia (Melbourne) [67] ↔ alpha and beta diversity and proportions of bacterial  classes and genera at age of 3 mo and 2 y MiSeq 16S rRNA gene by 454 Illumina 
3 mo and 2 y of age pyrosequencing ↑ proportion of Bacteroidetes at 4 mo
Limited change in microbiota composition V6–V8 16S rRNA gene by 454 
4 and 10 mo of age lower at 2 wk
diversity for Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria were 
↔ bacterial abundances and diversity, except Shannon  IS-pro and 6 y of age 1 and 2 wk, 1, 3, 12, and 18 mo, 2  [64] ↔ counts of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and Lactoba- 3, 6, and 12 mo of age (n = 96  cillus/Enterococcus at 3, 6, and 12 mo FISH infants) [63] ↑ prevalence of species belonging to B. longum group at  90 d qPCR, T-RFLP
Infant at 3, 7, 28, and 90 d of age [66] [65] tion
Cita- Outcomes Microbiota assessment amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain and  group
Study design and participants/ tion of intervention
Country of study, age range, dura- Table 3  Characteristics of studies investigating probiotic administration during pregnancy and after delivery on infant fecal microbiota 1 3Ion OneTouch and Ion PGM
V3 region of 16S rRNA gene by 
Before and postintervention 109 CFU/strain/d
BB-12 + LGG
Not reported Infants at 8–13 mo; 6-mo interven-
Denmark (ProbiComp Study) FISH
Selective plating vention 7 wk of study and 2 wk postinter- 108 CFU/g
L. johnsonii La1
Formula qPCR
3 y of age 1 × 107 CFU/g
L. fermentum CECT5716
Formula + 0.3 g/100 ml GOS Selective plating
2, 4, and 11 mo of age 107 CFU/g
B. longum BB536
Formula tion tion Infants at 1 mo; 13-wk interven-
Chile (Santiago) Infants at 1 mo; 5-mo intervention
Spain Infants at 0–7 d; 12-mo interven-
China (Shanghai) tion Control (n = 98)
Probiotic (n = 103) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
BF (n = 46)
Control (n = 61)
FOS (n = 44)
Probiotic (n = 48) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Control (n = 46)
Probiotic (n = 46) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Control (n = 129)
Probiotic (n = 135) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind  CLr (n = 11)
VLr (n = 9)
CCt) (n = 10)
V-Control (VCt) (n = 10) delivery [77] ↑ proportion of Lactobacillus
↔ overall microbiota ↑ number of Lactobacillus at 7 wk and C. histolyticum
Enterococcus, C. perfringens, 
Enterobacteria, Bacteroides, 
↔ counts of Bifidobacterium,  3 y of age
group and B. fragilis group at 
Bifidobacterium, C. coccoides 
↔ fecal counts of Lactobacillus,  2, 4, and 11 mo ↔ count of Enterobacteriaceae at  4 mo [76] [75] [74] ↑ bifidobacteria level at 2 and  time points
CLr > CCt; VLr > VCt at both  Lactobacillus abundance:  VLr at 2 wk
bacteriaceae: CCt > CLr, VCt, 
Proportion of unclassified Entero- VLr at 2 wk
abundance: CCt < CLr, VCt, 
Bifidobacterium occurrence and  at 4 mo
fered from others at 2 wk, not 
Global microbiota of CSCt dif- C. butyricum
coccoides, C. lituseburense and 
Bifidobacterium, groups of C. 
Lactobacillus/Enterococcus, 
quency and counts of  quencing 16S rRNA gene by 454-pyrose-
2 and 4 mo of age 1.2 × 109 CFU/L
L. reuteri DSM 17938
Formula Vaginal (V) or C-section (C) 
placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind  Infants ≤ 3 d; 6-mo intervention
Greece (Athens) [73] [71] Citation Digestive Diseases and Sciences  [72] ↔ colonization fre- FISH
Entry and end of the intervention over the first y
related to B. fragilis and Blautia  ↓ relative abundances of OTUs 
↔ alpha and beta diversity MiSeq 16S rRNA gene by Illumina 
Monthly during intervention 1.0 × 107 CFU/d
LGG
Formula
(2.5 × 106 CFU/strain/g)
BT1 + B. longum BGT
BR3 + B. longum subsp. infantis  B. bifidum BF3 + B. breve 
Formula Control (n = 13)
Probiotic (n = 12) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
EBF (n = 9)
Control (n = 11)
Probiotic (n = 11) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind  Infants 0–2 mo; 6-mo intervention
Finland (Tartu) Infants at birth; 12-mo interven-
Germany tion Outcomes Microbiota assessment and amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain  group
Study design and participants/ tion of intervention
Country of study, age range, dura- Table 4  Characteristics of studies investigating probiotic administration on the fecal microbiota of healthy children under 18 years of age 1 3  Digestive Diseases and Sciences qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, V vaginal delivery, wk week, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
in situ hybridization, FOS fructooligosaccharides, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-Pro interspace profiling, mo month, OTU operational taxonomic unit, qPCR quantitative PCR, RT-
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12, BF breastfed, CFU colony-forming unit, C cesarean section, Ct control, d day, EBF exclusive breastfed, FF formula-fed, FISH fluorescent  [84] ↔ Shannon index IS-Pro
Beginning and end of intervention 6.5 × 109 CFU/d
L. casei Shirota Control (n = 12)
Probiotic (n = 6)
Observational trial Children 12–18 y; 6-wk interven-
Netherlands (Amsterdam) tion after 6 mo of intervention ↓ detection rate of C. perfringens  6 mo of intervention
and Staphylococcus after 3 and  ↓ counts of Enterobacteriaceae  of intervention
Lactobacillus after 3 and 6 mo 
↑counts of Bifidobacterium and  ↓ total coliform
and E. coli ↓ E. cylindroides, C. ramosum, 
aninogenica, and P. oralis
uncultured Mollicutes, P. mel-
coccus, L. gasseri, R. lactaris,  ↑relative abundance of Lacto-
↑ Proportion of Faecalibacterium group, but not in placebo
between 0 and 10 mo in BB536  10 d
coccus and Garnulicatella after 
linsella, Turicibacter, Entero-
Sutterella, ↓ Allobaculum, Col-
↑ proportions of Prevotella and  tion of Bifidobacterium ↔ overall microbiota and propor-
Bacteroides and total anaerobes ↔ the numbers of enterococci, 
↓ clostridia count after 4 wk
↑ numbers of Bifidobacterium [83] [82] [81] [79] RT-qPCR
Beginning and end of intervention Selective plating
Beginning and end of intervention (HITChip) Phylogenetic microarray 
Beginning and end of intervention 4 × 1010 CFU/d
L. casei Shirota
4 × 108 CFU/d
LGG
Oily suspension 4 × 108 CFU/d
LGG
Milk Probiotic (n = 23)
Observational trial Children 4–12 y; 6-mo interven-
Japan (Tokyo) Probiotic (n = 10)
Observational trial Children 5.7 ± 2.6 y; 21-d inter-
Italy tion vention Control (n = 21)
Probiotic (n = 56) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Control (n = 61)
Probiotic (n = 55) placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind  Children 2–7 y; 7-mo intervention
Finland Children 2–6 y; 10-mo interven-
Malaysia tion [80] Overall microbiota differed  by Illumina MiSeq V3–V4 region of 16S rRNA gene 
0 and 10 mo of intervention 5 × 109 CFU/d, 5 d/wk
B. longum BB536
Freeze-dried powder Illumina Genome Analyzer II
V4 region of 16S rRNA gene by  intervention
and 90 following the initiation of  Prior to and on days 10, 30, 60,  1010 CFU/d
BB-12
Yogurt drink placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind  Children 1–5 y; 10-d intervention
USA. (Washington, DC) Control (n = 31)
Probiotic (n = 29) Control (n = 13)
Probiotic (n = 13) [78] ↑ counts of Lactobacillus after  1 wk 1 wk after the intervention
Before, during (1, 3, 4 wk) and  Selective plating 1.6 × 1010 CFU/d
L. paracasei A
Fermented milk placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind  Infants 12–24 mo; 4-wk interven-
Italy tion Citation Outcomes Microbiota assessment and amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain  group
Study design and participants/ tion of intervention
Country of study, age range, dura- Table 4  (continued) 1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences  Key Findings and Implications for Clinicians •  The gut microbiota in infancy and childhood is more  readily shaped by nutrition than during adulthood.

•  The microbiome of BF infants is nurtured by human milk 
components, including HMO, and differs from that of FF 
infants.

•  The addition of HMO and prebiotics to infant formula at 
concentrations found in human milk promotes the growth 
of bifidobacteria and narrows the differences between BF 
and FF infants.

•  Prebiotics  and  dietary  fiber  at  doses  of  5–20  g/day 
modify the gut microbiome of children, increase SCFA 
production, and may exert other health benefits, includ-
ing increasing calcium absorption.

•  Findings on probiotic administration to pregnant or 
lactating women or directly to the infant or child are 
inconsistent, likely due to the variation in the bacterial 
strains, doses, duration and methods of microbiome 
analysis.

•  Better understanding of diet–microbiome–host interac-
tions is needed, but represents an enormous opportunity 
to refine dietary interventions with the goal of supporting 
a healthy microbiome and human well-being.

Funding  This work was supported in part by NIH R01 DK107561 
[SMD].

Compliance with Ethical Standards  Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.
