12_PARAGRAPHS

In this article, we summarize the research that has been
done related to DGMH, with a focus on DGMH data and
computational methods. We begin with a brief overview of key
areas of current knowledge regarding the interaction between
diet, health, and the gut microbiome. We then proceed to
review the available data sources and the computational methods
currently used, investigate the role that machine learning and
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) can play in this area, and summarize
the intellectual property (IP) and legislative regulatory landscape.
We conclude with recommendations to accelerate research
and development eﬀorts through better integration of research
resources and tools, especially in the context of computational
science and data analytics. A glossary of terms is provided
in Table 6.

The composition of the gut microbiota of an adult human
is relatively stable (Shreiner et al., 2015), but several factors can
inﬂuence it, including antibiotic treatment, long-term change
in diet, microbial infections, and lifestyle (Willing et al., 2011;
Conlon and Bird, 2015; Mathew et al., 2019; Zmora et al., 2019).
Several health conditions are linked to changes in a stable and
established gut microbiota such as Crohn’s disease (Manichanh
et al., 2006), psoriatic arthritis (Scher et al., 2015), type 1 diabetes
(de Goﬀau et al., 2013), atopic eczema (Wang et al., 2008), celiac
disease (Schippa et al., 2010), obesity (Castaner et al., 2018),
type 2 diabetes (Qin et al., 2012), and arterial stiﬀness (Menni
et al., 2018). However, further research is required to establish
direct links between these conditions and the composition of
microbial communities in the gut. Interventions, such as oral
administration of probiotics/prebiotics and fecal transplants,
have shown eﬃcacy on reducing the severity of some conditions,
such as diarrhea, acute upper respiratory tract infections, eczema,
Crohn’s disease, and ulcerative colitis (Anderson et al., 2012;
Mansﬁeld et al., 2014; Hao et al., 2015; Saez-Lara et al., 2015;
Goldenberg et al., 2017; Delzenne et al., 2019). See Figure 2 for
illustration of factors aﬀecting the gut microbiota.

Computational Diet, Microbiome and Health FIGURE 1 | The vision for the next nutrition revolution involves microbiome-aware dietary planning and manufacturing. First, DGMH data is collected, homogenized,
and stored, with any new user data integrated as part of a cohesive compendium. Then, DGMH data are analyzed (data analytics) to identify the functional
characteristics and target microbiota, personalized to the individual and the desired phenotype. This includes data processing followed by supervised and
unsupervised learning using a user proﬁle compendium. Bioinformatic tools are used during data processing to extract meaningful information from raw
high-throughput data such as metagenomic sequence reads. Then, the recommendation system provides dietary recommendations to help achieve target
microbiota. This includes the integration of user proﬁles in a compendium along with nutrition DB proceeded by data processing then content-based and
collaborative ﬁltering. Finally, diet engineering is performed to create dietary products for the user. This includes the design of prebiotics, probiotics, synbiotics,
manufactured food, and detailed dietary planning. In practice, taste and ﬂavor of dietary products is very important to help users commit to any given diet, therefore
sensory analysis should inform all dietary engineering efforts.

proﬁling is marker gene sequencing, which relies on sequencing
counts of the hypervariable 16S genes to calculate Operational
Taxonomic Units (OTUs) (Amann et al., 1995). Searching OTUs
against reference databases such as Greengenes (McDonald
et al., 2012) and SILVA (Quast et al., 2012) allows inferring
relative taxa abundances in a microbiome sample (Langille
et al., 2013). Whole-genome or shotgun metagenomics (Quince
et al., 2017) is a recent technique that not only reveals the
microbial community structure, but it can also quantify relative
abundances of genes, taxa, conserved functional groups, or
over-represented pathways. Within-sample (alpha) and cross-
sample (beta) diversity of microbiome can be calculated with
respect to genetic, taxonomic, functional, or metabolic pathway
proﬁles of samples (Turnbaugh et al., 2009; Martiny et al., 2011; Huttenhower et al., 2012; Lozupone et al., 2012; Heintz-Buschart
and Wilmes, 2017; Ranjan et al., 2018). The Shannon index,
Chao1, and Abundance-based Coverage Estimator (ACE) are
used to measure alpha diversity while UniFrac, weighted UniFrac,
and Bray–Curtis calculate beta diversity. In longitudinal studies,
the same measures of diversity, or more sophisticated eigenvalue-
based analyses, can quantify the microbiota stability across
timepoints (Lozupone et al., 2012; Relman, 2012; Coyte et al.,
2015; Mehta et al., 2018). Jackkniﬁng and bootstrapping are
used to estimate the bias in diversity estimates, particularly
when estimating the number of species (i.e., species richness)
in samples (Smith and van Belle, 1984). Some of the most
signiﬁcant publicly available microbiome datasets are listed
in Table 1.

COMPUTATIONAL ANALYSIS There have been various reviews concerning microbiome data
processing and analysis (Tyler et al., 2014; Tsilimigras and Fodor, Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 5 April 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 393 fmicb-11-00393 April 2, 2020 Time: 17:57 # 6 Eetemadi et al.

Computational Diet, Microbiome and Health TABLE 1 | Publicly available data from gut microbiota studies.

Microbiome Data Processing Tools
There are a substantial number of publicly available microbiome
data processing methods and pipelines that can generate the
various types of data discussed. Table 2 provides a representative
summary of such methods and pipelines. For 16S data, QIIME
(Caporaso et al., 2010) and MOTHUR (Schloss et al., 2009)
provide a wider range of options for the user compared to
UPARSE (Edgar, 2013), but all are popular pipelines. QIIME 2
(Bolyen et al., 2019) is now emerging as a powerful replacement Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 6 April 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 393 fmicb-11-00393 April 2, 2020 Time: 17:57 # 7 Eetemadi et al.

Challenges in Microbiome Data Analysis
A number of challenges arise when analyzing microbiome data, as
summarized in Table 3. The ﬁrst challenge is due to compositional
quantities in microbiome data. Quantities such as the number of
reads assigned to a given species, which can only be interpreted as
proportions, are called compositional. These quantities cannot be
compared directly across multiple samples. Conclusions should
not be made based on the number of reads assigned to individual
sample features (e.g., OTUs, genes, and functional groups) since
they do not represent absolute abundances due to instrumental
limitations (Gloor et al., 2017). Instead, the assigned number of
reads should be converted to relative abundances and analyzed
with that in mind. Some studies perform rarefaction to adjust
for diﬀerences in library size due to unexhaustive metagenomic
sampling. Although several pipelines provide this functionality,
it has been found inadmissible for metagenomics microbiome
studies as it discards many reads leading to decreased sensitivity
in diﬀerential abundance testing (McMurdie and Holmes, 2014)
and biased estimates for alpha diversity (Willis, 2019). The
second challenge is due to the high dimensionality associated
with OMICS data. Datasets in which items are characterized by
a high number of features while the number of items is limited
are called high dimensional. In microbiome studies, a limited
number of individuals are characterized using many host, diet,
and microbiome features leading to high dimensional datasets
(Li, 2015). Dimensionality can be reduced by grouping OTUs
into phylogenetic variables, regularization, or unsupervised
dimensionality reduction (DR) (explained below). The third
challenge is about testing multiple hypotheses in an exploratory
analysis. It relates to the fact that, as the number of hypotheses Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 7 April 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 393 fmicb-11-00393 April 2, 2020 Time: 17:57 # 8 Eetemadi et al.

Example: Metagenomic analysis of feces samples tells us that Person A has 5 reads mapped to
bacterium Escherichia coli, while person B has 10. Can we conclude that this bacterium is more
populated in the gut of person B compared to person A? Answer: No, read counts cannot be
compared across samples.
Solutions: (I) Convert read counts to relative abundances before comparison. (II) If an optimization
problem is deﬁned using read counts, add constraint for total counts per sample.

Supervised Learning Methods
Hypothesis testing and variation analysis
Analysis of variation may involve single or multiple variables.
For a single variable hypothesis, the student’s t-test or non-
parametric tests, such as Wilcoxon rank-sum or Kruskal–Wallis,
can be used. For example, the t-test has been used to show
that patients with ADHD have a lower alpha-diversity
index of gut microbiota compared to healthy controls
(Prehn-Kristensen et al., 2018). Non-parametric tests are
good alternatives when the assumptions regarding the data
being normally distributed do not hold. For example,
the
Wilcoxon rank-sum test is used on predicted pathway data,
suggesting that enzymes in the “Glycan Biosynthesis and
Degradation” pathway increase in summer when compared to
winter (Davenport et al., 2014). In cases where a statistical
(i.e., multiple
test
is
signiﬁcance should be
hypothesis
(i.e.,
adjusted by methods repeated with diﬀerent hypotheses such as an FDR adjustment the statistical testing), Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 8 April 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 393 fmicb-11-00393 April 2, 2020 Time: 17:57 # 9 Eetemadi et al.

Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) can be used (Hotelling,
to investigate the correlation between two groups
1992)
of variables
(e.g., abundances of microbiome OTUs and
metabolites). CCA ﬁnds linear transformation pairs that are
maximally correlated when applied to data while ensuring
orthogonality for diﬀerent transformation pairs. The original
CCA, however, fails for high dimensional microbiome data when
the number of variables exceeds the number of samples. This
can be addressed using regularization, giving rise to sparse CCA
methods (Witten et al., 2009). For example, a sparse CCA is
applied to investigate correlations between the gut microbiome
and metabolome features in type 1 diabetes (Kostic et al., 2015).

The relationships among features in a microbiome study
can be used in DR, giving rise to various factor analysis (FA)
methods we review here brieﬂy. Multiple factor analysis (MFA)
is an extension of PCA that considers predeﬁned grouping of
features during DR to ensure equal representation for all groups of features in derived PCs (Abdi et al., 2013). In one study
(Robertson et al., 2018), MFA is used for simultaneous 2D
visualization of host and microbiome features (see Morgan et al.,
2012; Raymond et al., 2016 for other examples). Exploratory
factor analysis (EFA) is used to identify unobserved latent
features called factors to explain the correlations among observed
features (Yong and Pearce, 2013). Factors that are identiﬁed
by EFA are uncorrelated to each other similar to PCs in
PCA; however, PCs are used to explain overall variance instead
of correlations. EFA has been used in a recent study to
extract four factors explaining the correlations among 25 top
taxa for studying the association of microbiome with early
childhood neurodevelopmental outcomes in 309 infants (Sordillo
et al., 2019). Conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) and structural
equation modeling (SEM) can be used to examine the extent
to which a hypothesized model of latent features and their
relationships with observed variables are supported by the
data (Schreiber et al., 2006). In a recent study, a theoretical
framework is proposed and examined using CFA to model the
inﬂuence of maternal and infant factors on the milk microbiota
(Moossavi et al., 2019). The R packages lavaan (Rosseel, 2012) and
FactoMineR (Lê et al., 2008), as well as the IBM SPSS software
(IBM Corp, 2013), are widely used for factor analysis