18_PARAGRAPHS

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133 2 of 21 20 Department of Physiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Murcia, 30100 Murcia, Spain; medit2011@gmail.com (M.S.-C.); elvirada@um.es (E.L.D.) 21 Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Hospital Clínico Universitario Lozano Blesa, 50009 Zaragoza, 22 Neonatology Unit, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, BCNatal, Spain 08028 Barcelona, Spain 23 Department of Neonatology La Paz University Hospital, 28046 Madrid, Spain; miguel.saenz@salud.madrid.org 24 European Network of Excellence for Pediatric Clinical Research, 27100 Bari, Italy
25 Department of Paediatrics-Neonatology Quironsalud, Madrid University Hospital and Biomedical Research
Foundation-IDIPAZ, La Paz University Hospital, 28046 Madrid, Spain; fernando.cabanas@quironsalud.es * Correspondence: mdmesa@ugr.es; Tel.: +34-958-246187
† All the authors are the members of SAMID Network. RETICS funded by the PN I+D+I 2018–2021 (Spain),
ISCIII-Sub-Directorate General for Research Assessment and Promotion and the European Regional
Development Fund (FEDER), ref. RD16/0022.

Received: 28 November 2019; Accepted: 20 December 2019; Published: 2 January 2020 Abstract: Pregnancy induces a number of immunological, hormonal, and metabolic changes that are
necessary for the mother to adapt her body to this new physiological situation. The microbiome of
the mother, the placenta and the fetus inﬂuence the fetus growth and undoubtedly plays a major
role in the adequate development of the newborn infant. Hence, the microbiome modulates the
inﬂammatory mechanisms related to physiological and pathological processes that are involved in
the perinatal progress through diﬀerent mechanisms. The present review summarizes the actual
knowledge related to physiological changes in the microbiota occurring in the mother, the fetus,
and the child, both during neonatal period and beyond. In addition, we approach some speciﬁc
pathological situations during the perinatal periods, as well as the inﬂuence of the type of delivery
and feeding.

Keywords: microbiome; pregnancy; fetus; placenta; newborn; infancy; critical illness; sepsis; allergy 1. Introduction Pregnancy induces a number of immunological, hormonal, and metabolic changes necessary for the
normal development of the fetus and for a timely onset of labor and successful delivery [1]. It has been
described that maternal microbiota inﬂuences prenatal and early postnatal oﬀspring development and
health outcomes [2,3]. There is a lack of consensus about the real nature of microbiome changes during
pregnancy, since discrepant and unpredictable ﬁndings have been described [4–6]. These diﬀerences
could be explained by the diﬀerence in gestational age, genetics, ethnicity, and environmental factors
surrounding the participants included in those studies. Indeed, it has been described that maternal
microbiota composition during pregnancy is related to maternal diet [7–9], and by pre-pregnancy
weight and weight gain over the course of pregnancy [10–13]. Koren et al. described that the amounts
of anti-inﬂammatory butyrate-producer commensal bacteria present in non-pregnant women gut
microbiota decrease while bacteria associated with pro-inﬂammatory responses, such as Proteobacteria,
increase during pregnancy [4]. Similarly, bacterial diversity tends to be reduced in vaginal microbiota
during pregnancy while increasing vaginal Streptococci along with several speciﬁc Lactobacilli strains,
which are thought to prevent the growth of pathogenic bacteria, as well as to help human digestion,
and inﬂuence host innate and adaptive immune system responses [4,14]. Furthermore, the classical
paradigm of the fetus as a sterile organism is under discussion, since a characteristic microbiome has
been identiﬁed in the placenta, the amniotic ﬂuid, and the fetus in healthy pregnancies [15,16]. However,
this issue is under discussion. Perez-Muñoz et al. argued the weakness of evidence supporting the (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Nutrients 2020, 12, 133 3 of 21 “in utero colonization hypothesis”, due to methodological diﬃculties, and concluded that current
scientiﬁc evidence does not support the existence of microbiome within the healthy fetal milieu [17].
Gut microbiota inﬂuences the immune function [18], and thus may modulate the response
through diﬀerent microbial-derived metabolites, especially short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) such as
butyrate, acetate, or propionate [19]. These are the key drivers of T-cell subset proliferation and
activity [19,20]. Gastrointestinal bacteria generate SCFAs after fermentation of complex dietary
carbohydrates. These metabolites may have an inﬂuence both in the mother and in the newborn by
down-regulation of pro-inﬂammatory responses at the speciﬁc sites where the allergens are located,
which typically precedes asthma in childhood [21]. In addition, the may also inﬂuence bone marrow
stimulation by reprogramming the immunological tone of the mammalian ecosystem [22].

2.1. Gut Microbiota The gut microbiota shifts substantially throughout the progression of the pregnancy and is
characterized by reduced individual richness (alpha-diversity) (Figure 1), and increased inter-subject
beta-diversity [4]. These changes are not related to, although they may be inﬂuenced by, the diet,
antibiotic treatments, gestational diabetes, or pre-pregnancy body mass index, but are vital for a healthy
pregnancy [4]. It has been suggested that other factors, such as the state of the host immune and
endocrine systems, may actively contribute to the observed modiﬁcations [24]. During the ﬁrst
trimester, the gut microbiota pattern is similar in many aspects to that of healthy non-pregnant women,
showing a predominance of Firmicutes, mainly Clostridiales, over Bacteroidetes [25]. Then, maternal
gut microbiota declines in butyrate-producing bacteria, while Biﬁdobacteria, Proteobacteria, and lactic
acid-producing bacteria increase from the ﬁrst to the third trimester, when the microbiota resembles
an unpredictably disease-associated dysbiosis that diﬀers greatly among normal pregnancies [4].
Changes in the host immune system of the gastrointestinal mucosa together with metabolic hormonal
changes may trigger a low-grade pro-inﬂammatory status that could facilitate an increased diﬀusion
of glucose from the gut epithelium towards the lumen, and thus may induce weight gain while
modifying the gut microbiota during normal pregnancies [26]. Indeed, changes in the microbiota
may contribute to the evolution of this process. In addition, disruption of maternal gut microbiota
during the third trimester [27] may aﬀect host metabolism in order to provide an energy supply for
the fetus [4,26]. Moreover, it has been reported that the gut microbiota during pregnancy is a critical Nutrients 2020, 12, 133 4 of 21 determinant of oﬀspring health [13,28], and that potentially determines the development of atopy and
autoimmune phenotypes in the oﬀspring [28]. However, the relationship among the immune system,
the gut microbiota, and metabolism in pregnancy is unclear, and more research is needed to stablish
ﬁnal conclusions.

Nutrients 2020, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 21  determines the development of atopy and autoimmune phenotypes in the offspring [28]. However, the relationship among the immune system, the gut microbiota, and metabolism in pregnancy is unclear, and more research is needed to stablish final conclusions.   Figure 1. Alpha-diversity changes in gut microbiota during pregnancy. 2.2. Vaginal Microbiota The composition of the vaginal microbiota is dynamic, corresponding with hormonal fluctuations throughout the woman's reproductive life, and also during pregnancy. A number of protective lactic acid-producing Lactobacillus species dominates the healthy vaginal microbiota in most reproductive-age women. These bacteria protect against vaginal dysbiosis and inhibit opportunistic infections through the direct and indirect protective effects of Lactobacillus products, such as lactic acid and bacteriocin among others. Lactic acid decreases vaginal pH and thus inhibits a broad range of infections [29], can directly affect host immune functions, by inhibiting pro-inflammatory responses, and also help to release mediators from vaginal epithelial cells and stimulate antiviral response [30]. In addition, Lactobacillus-derived bacteriocins may inhibit pathogen growth [31]. The degree of protection varies according to the predominant Lactobacillus specie [30]. Vaginal dysbiosis is comprised of a wide array of strict and facultative anaerobes that correlate to increased risk of infection, diseases, and poor reproductive and obstetric outcomes [32].  During normal pregnancy, the composition of the vaginal microbiota changes as a function of gestational age, with an increase in the relative abundance for Lactobacillus spp., such as L. crispatus, L. jensenii, L. gasserii, L. vaginalis, and a decrease in anaerobe or strict anaerobe microbial species, such as Atopobium, Prevotella, Sneathia, Gardenerella, Ruminococcaceae, Parvimonas, Mobilincus [33]. Those authors reported for the first time, that the composition and stability of the vaginal microbiota of normal pregnant women is different from that of non-pregnant women. In fact, low risk pregnant women have more stable vaginal flora throughout the pregnancy than non-pregnant women. Normal changes in the vaginal flora during pregnancy are transitions to another Lactobacillus community, and this stability would protect against ascending infections through the genital tract. In addition, they reported that Lactobacillus communities vary depending on the ethnicity of the women [33]. Stout et al. [34] confirmed that vaginal microbiota richness and diversity remained stable during the first and second trimesters of gestation in pregnancies ended at term, whereas in woman with preterm born, the richness and diversity decreased early in pregnancy. Therefore, early pregnancy may be an important environment, modulating preterm delivery. A meta-analysis reported significant diversity differences in vaginal microbiomes in the first trimester, between women with term and preterm outcomes, indicating a potential diagnostic utility of microbiome-related biomarkers [35]. In addition, the increase of pathogens in the vagina is associated with complications of pregnancy, in particular with an increased risk of preterm birth and spontaneous abortion [6].    Nutrients 2020, 12, 133 2.3. Oral Microbiota 5 of 21 An increase in the microbial load in the oral cavity during pregnancy has been described. It has
been hypothesized that pregnancy creates a nutrient environment that is more favorable to some
sensitive strains [36]. The presence of pathogenic bacteria Porphyromonas gingivalis and Aggregatibacter
actinomycotemcomitans in gingival sulcus were signiﬁcantly higher during early and middle stages
of pregnancy compared to non-pregnant women [37]. The oral alpha-diversity index was higher
in the third trimester compared to non-pregnant women, and this may be related to the increase of
progesterone and estradiol. [38]. One underlying mechanism refers to estrogens being substituted
for vitamin K in bacterial anaerobic respiration, especially for black-pigmented Bacteroides such as
Bacteroides melaninogenicus and Prevotella intermedia [38].

2.4. Placental Microbiota and Fetal Colonization The classical paradigm of fetal environment as a sterile harbor has traditionally explained that
microbes, and thus microbiome, are acquired both vertically (from the mother) and horizontally (from
other humans or from the environment) during and after birth. However, recent data have questioned
the traditional accepted dogma of human microbiome acquisition, proposing that neither the placenta,
the amniotic ﬂuid, nor the fetus are sterile.

However, it is unclear where the fetal microbiota comes from, and when is the ﬁrst fetal exposition.
The presence of a diﬀerent placental microbiota compared to the vagina raises the possibility that
the infant may be ﬁrst seeded in utero from other sources. Microorganism may pass through the
placenta and colonize the fetus ascending from the vagina, from the oral cavity, from the urinary track,
or from the intestinal lumen of the mother. These microorganisms may reach via the hematogenous
route, the placenta, and then be transmitted to the fetus [48]. Some of those oral bacteria, such as
Fusobacterium nucleatum, may be transmitted hematogenously during placentation by binding to
the vascular endothelium, and modifying its permeability and the translation of other common
commensals, such as Escherichia coli [49]. In addition, Franasiak et al. observed that Flavobacterium and
Lactobacillus represent the majority of endometrial bacterium at the time of embryo transfer, supporting
a new hypothesis of the endometrial environment participation [50].

On the contrary, Perez-Muñoz et al. [17] critically revised scientiﬁc evidence supporting both
the “sterile womb” and “in utero colonization” hypotheses. These authors concluded that there
is more evidence supporting a sterile womb environment. They suggest that methodological
approaches, in which contamination is very easy at diﬀerent steps and does not use appropriate
controls, are responsible for the microorganism colonization described in utero. One well-controlled
study compared oral, vaginal, and placenta samples with paired contamination controls. This study
reported that when using molecular methods, placental samples were undistinguishable from their
paired-contaminated samples. They concluded that while there were distinctive microbial signatures Nutrients 2020, 12, 133 6 of 21 in oral and vaginal samples, they did not ﬁnd a characteristic placental microbiota, evidencing a sterile
environment [54]. Therefore, conclusions remain unachievable, and more studies are needed in
this area.

3. Changes in the Microbiome Related to the Type of Delivery There is great controversy in the scientiﬁc community about the relationship of the meconium
and infant gut microbiota proﬁle, and the type of delivery. Microbiome studies on early infancy
have demonstrated a signiﬁcant inﬂuence of the mode of delivery on the microbiome composition,
suggesting the likely association of the infant gut bacteria with maternal vaginal or skin microbiome
habitats. A systematic review has concluded that the diversity and colonization pattern of the gut
microbiota were signiﬁcantly associated to the mode of delivery during the ﬁrst three months of
life, which is a critical period of life for immunological programming [55]. However, the observed
diﬀerences disappear after 6 months of infants’ life, when solid foods are included in the diet [56].
It is important to clarify the inﬂuence of factors commonly accompanying C-section delivery on the
microbiome, due to the potential inﬂuence on some non-communicable diseases, such as neonatal skin
infection, asthma, allergies, obesity, inﬂammatory bowel disease, or type I diabetes mellitus [56,57].

Vaginally delivered newborn have shown bacterial communities resembling their own mother’s
vaginal microbiota, dominated by Lactobacillus, Prevotella, or Sneathia spp. In contrast, C-section-born
infants harbored bacterial communities similar to those found on the skin surface niche, dominated by
Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium, and Propionibacterium spp. [58] or potentially pathogenic microbial
communities such as Klebsiella, Enterococcus, and Clostridium [57]. Other authors have reported that
Biﬁdobacterium [59] and Bacteroides [55] seem to be signiﬁcantly more frequent in vaginally compared
with C-section delivered infants, which were mainly colonized by Clostridium and Lactobacillus [55].
The high abundance of Biﬁdobacterium species in infants is considered to promote the maturation
of the healthy immune system, while high presence of Clostridium diﬃcile is considered as one of
the major intra-hospital hazards of severe gastrointestinal infections during infancy [55]. Another
study proposed that some species of Propionibacterium were most abundant in the meconium of
vaginally delivered Chinese infants, whereas C-section-born children had higher amounts of Bacillus
licheniformis.
In addition, the diversity of the microbial composition was also higher in vaginal
than in C-section deliveries, although no correlation with maternal microbiome was reported [60].
Similarly, a metagenomic analysis found a Propionibacterium-enriched meconium in vaginal delivery
mothers, which may proceed from skin or fecal microbes through direct contact during the natural
labor [61]. Therefore, there is no consensus regarding the most colonizable pattern of the ﬁrst
microbiota community in the ﬁrst three days after birth, although it seems that according to phyla,
vaginal deliveries are more related to Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes, while C-section deliveries are
more related to Firmicutes. In addition, it has also been suggested that the transfer of maternal vaginal
microbes plays a minor role in seeding infant stool microbiota since the overlap of maternal vaginal
microbiota and infant faecal microbiota is minimal, while the similarity between maternal rectal
microbiota and infant microbiota was more pronounced [62].

Some authors have proposed that the lower presence of Biﬁdobacteria and Bacteroides, and the
abundance of Clostridia and Lactobacillus, in infants delivered by C-section could be explained
by perinatal antibiotics administration [55]. Mothers delivering by C-section receive antibiotic
prophylaxis before the beginning of surgery or, in some countries, after the cord clamping to minimize
the direct exposure of the neonate to antibiotics [64].
In addition, Azad et al. determined that
intrapartum antibiotics both in C-section and vaginal deliveries are associated with infant gut Nutrients 2020, 12, 133 7 of 21 microbiota dysbiosis, although breastfeeding modiﬁes some of these eﬀects [65]. Nevertheless,
Martinez et al. [66] performed antibiotic-free C-section delivery in mice and determined that these mice
did not have the dynamic developmental gut microbiota changes observed in control natural born
mice, evidencing the involvement of maternal vaginal bacteria in a proper metabolic development
even in absence of antibiotics supporting the hypothesis of the antibiotic-modulated dysbiosis. It is
worth to take into account that perinatal antibiotic administration may be associated with increased
risk of developing morbidities such as asthma, allergies and obesity, which may be inﬂuenced by
dysbiosis. In accordance, epidemiological data show that atopic diseases appear more often in infants
born by C-section than after vaginal delivery [67,68].

Furthermore, bacterial richness and diversity were lower in the infant gut of babies born after
elective C-section and higher in emergency C-section, suggesting that colonization may be aﬀected
diﬀerently in both situations. It is important to highlight that emergency C-section and vaginal delivery
labor are frequently accompanied by rupture of fetal membranes, and exposing the fetus to maternal
vaginal bacteria [65].

Some authors have reported changes in meconium microbiota when delaying the collection of
meconium samples by one day, supporting that the type of feeding or the environment has an inﬂuence
after the birth, which may be more determinant to establish the intestinal microbiome during
childhood [53]. Breast milk has been recognized as the gold standard for human nutrition [77]. The type
of feeding has an important impact on gut microbial composition in preterm infants. In preterm infants,
breast milk has been associated with improved growth and cognitive development [78] and a reduced
risk of necrotizing enterocolitis and late sepsis onset [76,79,80]. Occasionally, the absence of mother’s
own milk (MOM) requires the use of donated human milk (DHM). A prospective cohort study has been
launched to determine the impact of DHM upon preterm gut microbiota admitted in a neonatal intensive Nutrients 2020, 12, 133 8 of 21 care unit. Despite the high variability of DHMs, no diﬀerences in microbial diversity and richness
were found, although feeding type signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced the preterm microbiota composition and
predictive functional proﬁles. Inferred metagenomic analyses showed higher presence of Biﬁdobacterium
in the MOM, a genus related to enrichment in the glycan biosynthesis and metabolism pathway, as well
as an unclassiﬁed Enterobacteriaceae and lower unclassiﬁed Clostridiaceae compared with the DHM
or in the formula fed groups. After adjusting for gender, postnatal age, weight, and gestational age,
the diversity of gut microbiota increased over time and was constantly higher in infants fed their MOM
relative to infants with other types of feeding. In addition, DHM favors an intestinal microbiome
more similar to MOM despite the diﬀerences between MOM and DHM [81]. Preterm infants are
prone to develop free radical-associated conditions [82] that may be inﬂuenced by the microbiota.
In a recent study, urine oxidative stress biomarkers such as 8-hydroxy-deoxyguanosine (8OHdG/2dG),
orto-tyrosine, and F2 isoprostanes, neuroprostanes, neurofurans, and di-homo-isoprostanes were
longitudinally measured in preterm infants fed either MOM or DHM using validated mass spectrometry
techniques. No signiﬁcant diﬀerences for any of the markers studied were found between preterm babies
fed MOM or DHM [83]. However, exfoliated epithelial intestinal cells transcriptome of preterm infants
fed their MOM or a DHM induced a diﬀerential gene expression of speciﬁc genes which may contribute
to a more eﬃcient antioxidant response in the postnatal period [84]. Therefore, using DHM could have
potential long-term beneﬁts on intestinal functionality, the immune system, and metabolism [85–87].
However, available pasteurization methods cause changes that may blunt many of the positive aspects
derived from the use of MOM [88–90]. Further studies are needed to understand the complex links
between microbiome and breastfeeding, its impact on health programming, and to develop sensitive
methods capable of providing human milk as similar as possible to their MOM, when the latter is
not available.

5. Microbiome in Pathological and Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes Some studies have compared the fetal and mother microbiome in relation to adverse outcomes
such as prematurity or low birth-weight without reaching ﬁrm conclusions. Ardissone et al. [91]
compared the meconium microbiome in newborn before and after 33 weeks of gestation and concluded
that Enterococcus and Enterobacter negatively correlated with gestational age, and Lactobacillus and
Phortorhabdus were more abundant in newborns with less than 33 weeks of gestation. They indicated
that the composition of the microbiome may be involved in the inﬂammatory response that
leads to premature birth more than the colonization alone. Speciﬁcally, preterm subjects with
severe chorioamnionitis had higher abundance of Ureaplasma parvum, Fusobacterium nucleatum,
and Streptococcus agalactiae [16]. The placental microbiome varies as a consequence of an excess
of gestational weight gain, but is not related to obesity among women with spontaneous preterm
birth. Indeed, this placental dysbiosis aﬀects diﬀerent bacterially encoded metabolic pathways that
may be related to pregnancy outcomes [92]. Furthermore, it has been reported high abundance of
Burkholderia, Actinomycetales, and Alphaproteobacteria in placental samples from gravidae delivered
preterm, and of Streptococcus and Acinetobacter in placental samples from patients with a history of
antepartum urinary infection. In contrast, Paenibacillus predominated in term placental specimens [15].
Other authors have proposed that the fetal intestinal microbiota derives from swallowed amniotic ﬂuid,
and that they may trigger an inﬂammatory response which leads to premature birth [91]. Considering
that some Lactobacillus strains may possess potential anti-inﬂammatory activities, and could regulate
blood glucose levels in diabetic humans [93], the low abundance of Lactobacillus in placentas of low
birth weight neonates reported by Zheng et al. [94] might be related to a pro-inﬂammatory status in
these pregnancies. Thus, the higher sensitivity of fetal intestinal tissue to inﬂammatory stimuli may
induce labor due to an immune-mediated reaction. However, as mentioned previously, the presence
of placental microbiota is under discussion due to methodological doubts, and these data have to be
discussed with caution.

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133 9 of 21 Finally, a number of bacteria, viruses, and protozoa infections have been associated with pregnancy
complications. Liu et al [95] analyzed the gut microbiome in pregnant women aﬀected by preeclampsia.
They showed an overall increase in pathogenic bacteria such as Clostridium perfringens and Bulleidia
moorei and a reduction in probiotic bacteria Coprococcus catus. A correlation between periodontitis and
the risk of spontaneous abortion or miscarriage has also been described [96]. More well-controlled
studies should be carried out in order to identify interactions between pregnancy microbiome and
mother and children health which might help to predict gestational and newborn complications and
search for new therapeutic targets in adverse obstetrical conditions.

6. Microbiome and Obese Pregnancy Epidemiological evidence shows that 50% of women in childbearing age and 20%–25% of pregnant
women in Europe can be aﬀected by overweight or obesity [97], increasing the cardiometabolic risk in
mothers [98] and the susceptibility to metabolic diseases in oﬀspring [99–102]. Pregnancy-associated
changes are diﬀerent in overweight or obese women compared to normal-weight pregnant women.
Overweight pregnant women show a reduction in the number of Biﬁdobacterium and Bacteroides,
and an increase in the number of Staphylococcus, Enterobacteriaceae, and Escherichia coli [11]. Additionally,
higher levels of Staphylococcus and Akkermansia muciniphila, and lower levels of Biﬁdobacterium were
detected in women with excessive weight gain during pregnancy as compared to normal-weight
ones [76]. Consequently, this altered maternal microbiome will contribute to shape an altered
composition of the oﬀspring’s microbiome [103,104] and thus inﬂuence their future health.

In addition to the critical patients, associated dysbiosis, hypoperfusion, and reperfusion of the
intestinal wall produce an intense inﬂammation of the digestive mucosa which alters the gradient of
oxygen concentration and increases the concentration of nitrates favoring the growth of pathogenic ﬂora.
Furthermore, the slowing down of intestinal transit, frequent drugs (sedatives, opioids, catecholamines),
and the alteration of the mechanisms of microbial elimination (decreased production of bile salts and
IgA, pharmacological alkalinization of pH, etc.) may also inﬂuence the alteration of the digestive
functions [122]. Freedberg et al. observed that colonization by some microorganisms prior to admission
in ICU was associated with increased risk of infection by that same germ, and subsequently increased
mortality [123]. This fact indicates that the gastrointestinal microbiome can help stratiﬁcation and early
identiﬁcation of the risk of ICU patient complications.

9.1. Gut Microbiome and Atopy Eczema or atopic dermatitis (AD) is the ﬁrst typical allergic manifestation in newborns [137].
A recent study has reported a high proportion of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii on the gut microbiome
from AD subjects. The presence of these bacteria is lower in Crohn’s disease patients, as well as
anti-inﬂammatory fecal bacteria metabolites [138]. Besides, it has been shown that infants with AD
improved their symptomatology when the abundance of fecal Coprococcus eutactus, a butyrate-producing
bacterium, is increased [139]. Consequently, it has been proposed that dysbiotic gut microbiota and
subsequent dysregulation of the gut inﬂammation may promote an aberrant Th2-type immune response
to allergens altering the epithelial barrier in AD skin [140]