2

Peris Mumbi Munyaka et al.

disease and do not replace studies with patient samples,
they are valuable tools for studying many important
disease aspects that are difﬁcult to address in humans
and they, therefore, provide a platform through which
some of the complex mechanisms can be systematically
investigated  Most of these models require exoge-
nous manipulation based either on chemical induction,
immune cell transfer or gene targeting  and
only a few models occur spontaneously without any
exogenous manipulation  Chemically induced
models of intestinal inﬂammation are among the most
commonly used animal models of IBD as the onset of
inﬂammation is immediate and the procedure is rela-
tively straightforward. Even though they have limitations
like all other models, they present some important
immunological and histopathological aspects of IBD in
humans  The most widely used and characterized
experimental model of erosion and inﬂammation related
to UC in mice is the dextran sulphate sodium (DSS)-
induced colitis, which is developed by DSS administration
either in the drinking water or via intragastric
catheter  The DSS induces a reproducible
acute colitis  however, there is some controversy
regarding the type of inﬂammation that is induced. For
some, the DSS model is recognized as a true model of
colitis, while for others the model represents a model of
epithelial erosion, but it is believed that DSS is directly
toxic to gut epithelial cells of the basal crypts and affects
the integrity of the mucosal barrier  However,
the model induces an acute colitis that is characterized
by ulceration and inﬁltration, and also reﬂects many
of the clinical features of IBD  For example,
among other features, changing the DSS concentration or
administration cycles can easily induce acute, chronic,
and relapsing colitis. Our lab has extensive experience
with this model 

The focus of most DSS studies has been on the
dynamic and proﬁle of mucosal response in relation to
DSS treatment and its similarity to that observed in UC
patients  These studies provide compelling
evidence for changes in the gut mucosal
immune
response in mice treated with DSS compared to controls.
In addition, other studies have investigated the role
of defensins; antimicrobial, and anti-inﬂammatory
components that are produced by paneth cells in the
mucosa 
In this regard, mice with impaired
expression of a-defensins due to destruction of
the epithelium, and hence, the paneth cells, have
been shown to be more susceptible to DSS-induced
colitis, characterized by increased production of pro-
inﬂammatory cytokines  On the other hand, notable
shifts in gut microbiota composition (dysbiosis) have

In addition,

been highlighted in IBD patients at different stages of
the disease  However, given the widespread use
of DSS, not many studies have so far investigated the
compositional shifts in gut microbiota and changes in
their metabolic capacity in relation to DSS treatment
in mice or rat models  In this context, DSS
treatment has been associated with changes in the
composition of gut microbiota, whose dynamics shift
toward an unhealthy state  The nature of
gut microbiota was also reported to inﬂuence sensitivity
to acute DSS-induced colitis independently of host
genotype 
interdependence of the
mucosa-associated bacteria and chronic inﬂammation
has also been reported  Therefore, whether DSS-
induced colitis causes dysbiosis or the nature of existing
microbial colonization affects susceptibility to colitis
remains a topic of discussion worth more explorations. It
is however important to note that, most of the previous
studies used 16S rRNA gene ﬁngerprinting methods,
such as terminal-restriction fragment-length polymor-
phism (T-RFLP), ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
 or sequencing of few clones per
animal  which had either low accuracy and
precision or were limited in data mining. Furthermore,
few studies investigated shifts in microbiota’s functional
potential or activity using metagenomic or metranscrip-
tomic approaches  Therefore, a detailed and
clear understanding of the structural and functional
alterations of the intestinal microbiota in the DSS
model is still required especially with the use of the high-
throughput sequencing technologies.

The aim of the present study was to utilize Illumina
sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene and inferred meta-
genomics by open source software PICRUSt (Phyloge-
netic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of
Unobserved States  to investigate differences in
microbiome composition and function in the fecal and
colonic mucosa of mice treated with 5% DSS for 5 days.
We demonstrated that oral administration of DSS in
C57Bl/6 mice signiﬁcantly decreased bacterial species
richness and shifted bacterial community composition.
Speciﬁc taxa were associated with DSS treatment that
may be important as intervention targets against the
disease.
In addition, DSS largely altered microbial
activities and their functional pathways.

Materials and methods

Animals
Male C57BL/6 mice were purchased from
Charles River (Senneville, QC, Canada) and maintained in

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

the animal care facility at the Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Manitoba. All experiments were approved
by the University of Manitoba Animal Ethics Committee
and conducted according to the Canadian
guidelines for animal research 

DSS colitis
DSS (molecular weight; MW 40 kDa: MP Biomedicals,
Soho, OH, USA) was added to the drinking water at a
ﬁnal concentration of 5% (wt/vol) and administered for
5 days. Controls were time-matched and consisted of
mice that received normal drinking water only. Five
and four mice were included in the DSS and control
groups, respectively.

Disease activity index
Disease activity index; DIA is the combined score for
weight loss, stool consistency and bleeding, and the
scores have historically correlated well with the
pathological ﬁndings in DSS-induced model of IBD
 The scoring system was deﬁned as follows: Weight:
0, no loss; 1, 5–10%; 2, 10–15%; 3, 15–20%; and 4, >20%;
stool: 0, normal; 2, loose stool; and 4, diarrhea; and
bleeding: 0, no blood; 2, presence of blood; and 4, gross
blood. Blood was assessed using the Hemoccult II test
(Beckman coulter, Oakville, ON, Canada). The DAI
scoring was performed from days 0 to 5 over the period
of DSS treatment.

Macroscopic scores
Mice were euthanized on day 6, at the end of d5 of DSS
administration, the abdominal cavity was opened and
the colon was located, isolated and opened longitudi-
nally. Macroscopic damage was next evaluated on the
full colon section, and macroscopic scores were assessed
according to the rectal bleeding, rectal prolapse,
diarrhea and colonic bleeding using a previously
established scoring system 

Characterization of inﬂammation
Colon tissue samples were collected 5 days post-DSS
activation, and blood was collected by intracardiac
puncture under isoﬂurane (Abbot, Mississaugua, ON,
Canada) anesthesia. Serum C-reactive protein (CRP); a
marker for systemic inﬂammation was determined
using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
(R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN,
commercial kit
USA). Colonic samples were homogenized in 700 ml
of Tris–HCl buffer containing protease inhibitors
(Sigma, Mississauga, ON, Canada) and centrifuged
for 12 min at 10,000 (cid:3) g, and the supernatant was
frozen at 80 °C until assay. Cytokine levels (IL-6, IL-1b)

Dextran sulfate sodium and mice gut microbiota

3

were determined using an ELISA commercial kit (R&D
Systems).

DNA extraction and quality control
Approximately 200 mg of each fecal sample was used
for DNA extraction using ZR fecal DNA extraction kit
(Zymo Research Corp., Irvine, CA, USA). For colonic
samples, the tissue was cut open and approximately
50 mg of mucosa scrapings were taken. DNA extraction
from colonic mucosa samples was done using ZR Tissue
and Insect DNA kit (Zymo Research Corp.). Both DNA
extraction kits included a bead-beating step for the
mechanical lysis of microbial cells. DNA was quantiﬁed
using a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo
Scientiﬁc, Wilmington, DE, USA). DNA samples were
normalized to 20 ng/ml, and quality checked by PCR
ampliﬁcation of the 16S rRNA gene using universal

primers
and 342R as described by
Khaﬁpour et al.  Amplicons were veriﬁed by agarose
gel electrophoresis.

27F

Library construction and Illumina sequencing
The V4 region of 16S rRNA gene was targeted for PCR
ampliﬁcation using modiﬁed F515/R806 primers as
described previously  In brief, a reverse PCR primer
was indexed with 12-base Golay barcodes allowing for
multiplexing of samples. The PCR reaction for each
sample was performed in duplicate and contained 1.0 ml
of pre-normalized DNA, 1.0 ml of each forward and
reverse primers  12 ml HPLC grade water (Fisher
Scientiﬁc, Ottawa, ON, Canada) and 10 ml 5 Prime Hot
MasterMix (5 Prime,
Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, USA).
Reactions consisted of an initial denaturing step at
94 °C for 3 min followed by 35 ampliﬁcation cycles at
94 °C for 45 s, 50 °C for 60 s, and 72 °C for 90 s; ﬁnalized by
an extension step at 72 °C for 10 min in an Eppendorf
Mastercycler pro (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). PCR
products were then puriﬁed using ZR-96 DNA Clean-up
Kit (ZYMO Research) to remove primers, dNTPs and
reaction components. The V4 library was then generated
by pooling 200 ng of each sample, quantiﬁed by
Picogreen dsDNA (Invitrogen, Burlington, NY, USA).
This was followed by multiple dilution steps using pre-
chilled hybridization buffer (HT1) (Illumina, San Diego,
CA, USA) to bring the pooled amplicons to a ﬁnal
concentration of 5 pM, measured by Qubit 2.0 Fluorom-
eter (Life technologies, Burlington, ON, Canada). Finally,
15% of PhiX control library was spiked into the amplicon
pool
to improve the unbalanced and biased base
composition, a known characteristic of low diversity
16S rRNA libraries. Customized sequencing primers for

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

4

Peris Mumbi Munyaka et al.

read1 
read2 (50-AGTCAGTCAGCCGGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-
30), and index read (50-ATTAGAWACCCBDGTAGTCCGG-
CTGACTGACT-30) were synthesized and puriﬁed by
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Integrated DNA
Technologies, Coralville, IA, USA) and added to the MiSeq
Reagent Kit V2  The 150 paired-end
sequencing reaction was performed on a MiSeq platform
(Illumina) at the Gut Microbiome and Large Animal
Biosecurity Laboratories, Department of Animal Science,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada. The
sequencing data are uploaded into the Sequence Read
Archive (SRA) of NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra)
and are accessible through accession number SRR2830596.

Bioinformatic analyses
The PANDAseq assembler was used to merge
overlapping paired-end Illumina fastq ﬁles. All the
sequences with mismatches or ambiguous calls in
the overlapping region were discarded. The output fastq
ﬁle was then analyzed by downstream computational
pipelines of the open source software package QIIME

(Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology)
Chimeric reads were ﬁltered using UCHIME and
sequences were assigned to Operational Taxonomic
Units (OTU) using the QIIME implementation of UCLUST
at 97% pairwise identity threshold. Taxonomies
were assigned to the representative sequence of each
OTU using RDP classiﬁer and aligned with the
Greengenes (v. 13.5) Core reference database using
PyNAST algorithms  Phylogenetic tree was built with
FastTree 2.1.3.
for further comparisons between
microbial communities.

Alpha- and beta-diversity analyses
Within community diversity (a-diversity) was calculated
by different indices of species richness and evenness
such as Observed Number of Species, Chao1, ACE
(abundance-based coverage estimators), Shannon, Simp-
son, InvSimpson, and Fisher using the open source R
software. An even depth of 21,000 and 14,500 sequences
per sample for fecal and colon mucosa samples,
respectively, was used for the calculation of diversity
indices. Beta-diversity was measured by calculating
the weighted UniFrac distances using QIIME default
scripts  Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) was
applied on resulting distance matrices to generate two-
dimensional plots using the open source R software
(v. 3.1.0) and the p values were calculated using
PERMANOVA analyses of Bray–Curtis distances 
Differences in alpha-diversity between DSS and control
were determined using SAS (SAS 9.3, 2012). One colon

sample in the control group was lost during DNA
extraction and, therefore, only samples from three mice
were included for all colon microbial analysis.

Partial least square discriminant analysis
least square discriminant analysis (PLS-DA;
Partial
SIMCA Pþ 13.02, Umetrics, Umea, Sweden) was
performed on genus data to identify the effects of
DSS. As described previously  the PLS-DA is a
particular case of partial least square regression analysis
in which Y is a set of variables describing the categories
of a categorical variable on X. In this case, X variables
were bacterial taxa and Y was observations of different
treatments compared together. To avoid over parame-
terization of the model, variable inﬂuence on projection
value (VIP) was estimated for each genus, and genera
with VIP <0.5 were removed from the ﬁnal model. R2
estimates then were used to evaluate the goodness of ﬁt
and Q2 estimate was used to evaluate the predictive value
of the model. Data were presented in loading scatter
plots. The PLS-DA regression coefﬁcients were used to
identify taxa that were positively or negatively corre-
lated with each treatment group.

Prediction of functional metagenome
The open source software PICRUSt (Phylogenetic Inves-
tigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unob-
served States; v. 1.0.0-dev) was used to predict the
functional capacity of microbiome using 16S rRNA
gene sequencing data and Greengenes (v. 13.5) reference
database  To make our open-reference picked
OTUs compatible with PICRUSt, all de-novo OTUs were
removed and only those that had matching Greengenes
identiﬁcations were retained. The new OTU table
was then used to generate metagenomic data after
normalizing the data by copy numbers, and to derive
relative Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG) Pathway abundance  The KEGG data were
analyzed using STAMP (STatistical Analysis of Metage-
nomic Proﬁles) 

Statistical analysis
The UNIVARIATE procedure of SAS (SAS 9.3, 2012) was
used to test the normality of residuals for a-diversity
data. Data were used to assess the effect of treatment
using MIXED procedure of SAS with treatment as the
ﬁxed and animal as the random factor (SAS 9.3, 2012).
Phylum percentage data were also used to evaluate
statistical differences between the DSS and control
treatments. For the disease index activity, macroscopic
scores, weight loss score and inﬂammatory markers,
statistical analysis was performed using one-way ANOVA

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

followed by the Tukey–Kramer multiple comparison
post hoc analysis, using prism (Prism 5, GraphPad,
La jolla, CA, USA). The differences between groups were
considered signiﬁcant at p < 0.05.

Results

loss

score and macroscopic

In this context, weight

Macroscopic score, disease activity index, C-reactive
protein, and cytokines IL-1b and IL-6
As shown in Fig. 1a–c, DSS increased disease activity
index, weight
score
(p < 0.0001).
loss, and the
presence of blood in the feces were increased whereas
stool consistency was decreased. Also, the level of CRP, a
marker of systemic inﬂammation, and inﬂammatory
cytokines IL-1b and IL-6 increased in the DSS group
(p < 0.0001; Fig. 1c–f). These results conﬁrmed the
presence of colitis in our DSS model.

Alpha-diversity of the fecal and colonic mucosa-
associated microbiota (MAM)
Based on the different diversity indices used, DSS
reduced bacterial species richness and evenness in the
fecal samples compared to the control samples .

Dextran sulfate sodium and mice gut microbiota

5

Bacterial a-diversity in the colonic MAM was not
signiﬁcantly different between the control mice and
the DSS mice samples, suggesting that both sample
groups have similar bacterial species richness and
evenness . The signiﬁcance levels were deter-
mined using SAS and the p values are shown on top of
each bar.

Beta-diversity in fecal and colon samples
As shown by the PCoA of weighted UniFrac distances,
fecal samples clustered separately according to treat-
ment group, suggesting that DSS and control samples
were composed of distinct bacterial communities
(p ¼ 0.007; Fig. 3a). Although clustered separately for a
large portion of communities, the colonic MAM still had
an overlap of some bacterial communities, suggesting
that DSS and control mice colon mucosa samples had
shared bacterial communities (p ¼ 0.2; Fig. 3b).

Microbiota composition at phylum and lower
taxonomic levels in the fecal samples
A total of 259,126 sequences were generated after quality
ﬁltering steps with an average of 28,791 high-quality
sequences per sample, which resulted in identiﬁcation of
11 phyla and 86 taxa. Although most taxa were classiﬁed

Figure 1. Dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colonic inﬂammation. Five percent DSS treatment for 5 days induced a signiﬁcant increase in
the; (a) disease activity index, (b) weight loss score, (c) macroscopic scores, (d) C-reactive protein (CRP), (e) IL-1b, and (f) IL-6. Values are
shown as the mean (cid:4) SEM. AU, arbitrary units.

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

6

Peris Mumbi Munyaka et al.

Figure 2. Alpha-diversity analysis, a measure of species richness and evenness based on different diversity indices, from dextran sulfate
sodium-induced colitis and the control group studied at fecal and colon levels. (a) Fecal colitic samples had a lower bacterial diversity compared
to non-colitic samples, suggesting that DSS reduced bacterial species richness. (b) Colonic mucosal bacterial diversity is not different between
colitic and non-colitic samples, suggesting that both sample groups had similar bacterial species richness and evenness. The p values shown
on top of each bar were calculated using SAS. DSS, dextran sulphate sodium.

Figure 3. Principle coordinate analysis (PCoA) of weighted UniFrac distances, a measure of b-diversity of bacterial community. (a) Fecal
samples clustered separately according to treatment status of the mice, suggesting that DSS and control mice samples are composed of
distinct bacterial communities; (b) colon mucosa samples have shared bacterial communities. The p values were determined using
PERMANOVA. DSS, dextran sulphate sodium.

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

at the genus (g.) level, some were only classiﬁed at the
phylum (p.), class (c.), order (o.), or family (f.). Of the
11 phyla, six were abundant ((cid:5)1% of community),
including Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria,
Deferribacteres, Tenericutes, and Verrucomicrobia.
The low-abundance phyla (<1% of community),
in-
cluded Actinobacteria, Cyanobacteria, Fibrobacteres,
Spirochaetes, and TM7. Among the abundant phyla,
DSS treatment reduced Bacteroidetes (P ¼ 0.01) while
Proteobacteria were increased (p ¼ 0.004) compared
to the control. Results of the relative abundances of
various phyla are summarized in Fig. 4a.

Of the 86 taxa, 56 had abundance greater than or equal
to 0.01% of community, whereas 30 were below 0.01%.
Bacterial taxa with relative abundance of (cid:5)0.01% of
community were analysed using PLS-DA to identify
bacteria that were most characteristic of the DSS or
control treatments. As shown in Fig. 5a, Bacteroides
ovatus, Clostridium perfrigens, Helicobacter hepaticus, and
Parabacteroides distasonis; g. Desulfovibrio, Escherichia,
Helicobacter, Clostridium,
Parabacteroides,
Bacilli, Allobaculum, Coprobacillus, Bacteroides, rc4-4; and
unclassiﬁed members of f. Enterobacteriaceae, Clostri-
diaceae, Bacteroidaceae; o. RF39, RF32, Bacteroidales,
and Erysipelotrichales were positively correlated with
the DSS group but negatively correlated with the
control group. In addition, g. Dessulfovibrio, Oscillospira,
Odoribacter, Coprococcus, Dehalobacterium, Adlercreutzia,
Lactobacillus, Prevotella, Biﬁdobacterium; unclassiﬁed mem-
f. Lachnospiraceae, Lactobacillaceae, S24-7;
bers of

Turicibacter,

Dextran sulfate sodium and mice gut microbiota

7

and o. Lactobacillales were positively associated with
the control group but negatively associated with the DSS
group.

Microbiota composition at the phylum and lower
taxonomic levels in colonic mucosa samples
A total of 199,057 sequences were generated after quality
ﬁltering steps with an average of 24,882 high-quality
sequences per sample, which resulted in identiﬁcation
of 14 phyla and 151 taxa. Of the 14 phyla, ﬁve were
abundant ((cid:5)1% of community), including Firmicutes,
Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Deferribacteres,
and
Verrucomicrobia. The low-abundance phyla (<1% of
included Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria,
community),
Cyanobacteria, Fibrobacteres, Lentisphaerae, Planctomy-
cetes, Spirochaetes, TM7, and Tenericutes. No signiﬁcant
difference was observed among the abundant phyla
between DSS and control mice (p > 0.05). Results of the
relative abundances of various phyla are summarized
in Fig. 4b.

Of the 151 taxa, 68 had abundances greater than
or equal to 0.01% of community, whereas 83 were
below 0.01% of community. Bacterial taxa with relative
abundance of (cid:5)0.01% of community were analysed
using PLS-DA to identify bacteria that were most
characteristic of DSS or control treatments. As shown
in Fig. 5b, Lactobacillus reuteri, Bacteroides ovatus; g. rc4-4,
Rikenellaceae, Biﬁdobacterium, YS2, Clostridium; f. Bacter-
oidaceae, Clostridiaceae; o. RF32, RF39, Bacteroidales,
Clostridales; and p. Proteobacteria were positively

Figure 4. Percentage of relative abundances of bacterial phyla for: (a) fecal samples and (b) colon mucosa samples. The DSS signiﬁcantly
decreased Bacteroidetes and increased Proteobacteria in fecal samples but no signiﬁcant difference was observed in the colonic mucosa
samples. DSS, dextran sulphate sodium.

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

8

Peris Mumbi Munyaka et al.

Figure 5. Partial least square discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) of bacterial communities comparing taxa that were associated with the control or
DSS treatments in the mice’s (a) fecal samples and (b) colon mucosal samples. All taxa are colored based on the phyla to which they belong to.
The bubble size is representative of relative abundance of each taxa within the community. While majority of taxa were classiﬁed at the genus
level, some could only be afﬁliated to phylum (P), class (C), order (O), or family (F) levels. – or þ signs and their color are indicative of signiﬁcant
negative or positive association between each taxon and the associated group. DSS, dextran sulphate sodium.

associated with DSS, but negatively associated with
the control. Also, Mucispirillum schaedleri; g. Oscillospira,
Acinetobacter, Yersinia; and f. Pseudomonadaceae were
positively associated with the control but negatively
associated with the DSS.

Functional metagenome of colonic MAM and fecal
microbiome
The analysis provided insights into functional shifts
in the murine intestinal microbiome. A number of
metabolic pathways were highly enriched in the colonic
MAM and fecal microbiome in the DSS-treated mice
compared to the control. In this context, the fecal
microbiome of DSS-treated mice was associated with but
not limited to, increased fatty acid biosynthesis, lysine
degradation, pyruvate metabolism, propanoate metabo-
lism, replication, recombination and repair proteins,
and transcription machinery . In addition, the
colonic MAM of the DSS-treated mice was associated
with increased DNA repair and recombination proteins,
peptidoglycan biosynthesis, DNA replication proteins,
alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism, ribosome
biogenesis, and several other pathways .

Discussion

The indigenous gut microbiota are thought to play a key
role in the pathogenesis of IBD. Part of the evidence for
the involvement of intestinal bacteria in IBD comes from
studies with murine models of the disease supporting
the hypothesis that a deregulated immune response

against components of the intestinal microbiota is
critically involved in the pathophysiology of IBD 
This is supported by the fact that antibiotic administra-
tion reduces the severity of disease in these models
and rederivation of the mice to the germfree state
prevents initiation of disease  Conversely,
some germfree mice have been shown to have a high
mortality rate when given DSS in drinking water as
compared to conventional mice  suggesting that
different subsets of normal microbiota may play
certain roles in terms of the initiation, development
or attenuation of disease.

We evaluated the fecal and colonic mucosal bacterial
community dynamics,
their functional alterations,
as well as selected host variables in DSS-treated mice
compared to control
to elucidate which bacteria
are most characteristic of DSS treatment, and which
bacterial functional activities or metabolic pathways are
affected. From the macroscopic assessment of disease
severity in the colon, it was apparent that mice in the
DSS-induced colitis treatment exhibited overt features of
colitis compared to the healthy control group, which is
in agreement with previous results where a DSS model
was used  Also, analysis of the inﬂammatory
markers including serum CRP level, a marker of systemic
inﬂammation, showed signiﬁcant differences between
the two groups as DSS up-regulated this marker. In line
with our ﬁndings, previous studies reported an extensive
accumulation of neutrophils and an increase in the
serum CRP level and colonic myeloperoxidase in DSS-
colitis  We next considered other potential pro-
inﬂammatory mediators that also play central role in

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

Dextran sulfate sodium and mice gut microbiota

9

Figure 6. (a) Subsystems and pathways enriched or decreased within mice fecal samples isolated from colitic and non-colitic groups.
Corrected p values were calculated using the Storey FDR correction. Subsystems or pathways overrepresented in the DSS or (control) fecal
samples have a positive or (negative) difference between mean proportions and are indicated by red or (blue) coloring, respectively.
(b) Subsystems and pathways enriched or decreased within mice colon samples isolated from the colitic and non-colitic groups. Subsystems
or pathways overrepresented in the DSS or (control) mice colon samples have a positive or (negative) difference between mean proportions
and are indicated by red or (blue) coloring, respectively.

the pathogenesis of IBD including UC and CD. The
DSS signiﬁcantly up-regulated inﬂammatory cytokines
IL-1b and IL-6, a condition that has also been reported
previously in colon of mice as a result of DSS-induced
colitis 

Decreased richness or diversity of bacterial species
has been reported widely in both fecal and intestinal
MAM samples of human patients with UC and CD, in
intestinal MAM of dogs with IBD, and in fecal samples
of rats with DSS-induced colitis  This is
consistent with our observation in fecal samples in
which diversity analysis of bacterial species richness of
the control and DSS-treated mice showed signiﬁcant
differences between these two groups. Also, our results
on shifts in bacterial community composition are in
agreement with Berry et al.  who reported differ-
ences in bacterial community composition in a pool of
colonic and cecal contents of wild type mice, which
was mostly a result of DSS treatment, although the

authors did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant differences in a-diversity
analysis. Furthermore, a loss of species diversity and a
distinctive microbial community composition in intesti-
nal MAM of DSS-treated mice and in both fecal and
intestinal MAM samples of humans with IBD have
also been reported. Interestingly, in our study, colonic
MAM proﬁles from DSS-treated mice were not signiﬁ-
cantly different from bacterial proﬁles of the control
mice in terms of bacterial richness and community
composition at the phylum level. This may suggest
possible differences in the effect of DSS on the richness
and composition of microbiota at different anatomical
sites or between mucosal and fecal samples. However,
this was only limited to diversity and community
composition at phylum level as bacterial differences
were observed at lower taxonomical levels in both fecal
and colon samples. This indicates that proﬁling of
fecal and colonic bacteria by Illumina sequencing may
be sensitive for investigating changes associated with

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

10

Peris Mumbi Munyaka et al.

colitis and may reveal bacterial shifts at lower taxonomic
levels that could otherwise be missed. In this regard, it
was worth noting that more taxa were signiﬁcantly
associated with the DSS treatment in fecal samples
compared to the colonic samples; however, several
taxa including: Bacteroides ovatus, g. Clostridium, rc4-4;
f. Clostridiaceae, Bacteroidaceae; and o. Bacteroidales,
RF39, and RF32 were positively associated with the DSS
treatment in both fecal and colonic mucosa samples.
Some of these taxa have been reported to increase
as a result of DSS  and although they may have
different roles, their association with DSS in both colonic
mucosa and in feces may indicate that they may play
signiﬁcant roles in the potentiation of the abnormal
inﬂammatory response seen in DSS-treated animals, and
could therefore be important as intervention targets
against the disease. Lending support to these results,
Berry et al. also found that the overall abundances of
the dominant phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes were
not affected by DSS treatment in mice, but taxa within
the two phyla showed clear changes in abundance with
respect to DSS treatment.

Members of the Bacteroidetes, such as o. Bacteroidales
and f. Bacteroidaceae, have been identiﬁed as possible
indicators of disease onset in the mouse model of
colitis  and were also previously shown to be capable
of inducing colitis in antibiotic-pretreated mice 
However, data on members of p. Bacteroidetes are
more ambiguous, and thus, inconsistent ﬁndings have
been reported for their presence in IBD compared to
healthy controls  Moreover, although still
under investigations, some bacteria that were charac-
teristic of DSS in the fecal samples, such as Helicobacter
hepaticus and the f. Enterobacteriaceae, speciﬁcally
g. Escherichia, have been implicated in IBD patients
and in animal models of IBD 
Similar ﬁndings for increased levels of Enterobacter-
iaceae have also been reported in murine colitis, and
after antibiotic treatment or infection by enteric
pathogens  Therefore, a variety of con-
ditions seem to drive the increase of Enterobacteria-
ceae, suggesting that the group may be a general
indicator of a disrupted intestinal microbiota, but not
necessarily a trigger of colitis  However, there is
strong data in support of the association of Enter-
obacteriaceae with IBD, especially CD. Generally,
despite these differences in relative abundances of
speciﬁc phylotypes, there appear to be a consensus in
overall decrease in biodiversity in IBD patients and in
murine models of colitis 

The mechanisms by which DSS induced stronger
bacterial shifts in the feces than in the colon mucosa

are not fully understood. A similar observation has
also been reported in IBD subjects whereby, changes in
microbiome composition were more associated with
the sample origin (stool or biopsy), and minor changes
were observed in biopsy samples as opposed to stool
samples  It is possible that because DSS-induced
colitis interferes directly with the intestinal epithelium
and its barrier function as well as causing crypt
damage  this may lead to sloughing of
mucosal epithelium, thereby decreasing the number of
bacteria adhering to the mucosa, and consequently
increasing the abundances of bacteria in the fecal
matter.

Studies applying metagenomics, metatranscriptomics
or metaproteomics investigating functional capacities of
gut microbiota in humans  and in mouse model
of colitis  reported alterations in metabolic pathways
that might affect host-microbiota interactions. These
ﬁndings are in agreement with our results whereby,
several alterations in microbial metabolic pathways in
both the colon mucosa and fecal samples were observed.
Given that the microbial analysis of diversity, commu-
nity composition and also changes at phylum level for
colonic samples did not show any signiﬁcant difference
between the DSS and control mice, the results suggest
that analysis at microbial functional level might reveal
important colitis-related changes in gut microbiome
that are otherwise not noticeable at higher phylogenetic
or community levels.

The microbial community shifts associated with IBD
are still poorly understood, and intense investigation
continues to determine whether these changes are
responsible for disease etiology, or alternatively, an
indirect consequence of IBD. However, we present a
rigorous analysis of DSS-induced colitis, a commonly
used animal model of UC that has analyzed microbial
shifts and functional alterations in colonic mucosa
and fecal samples. Although acute DSS colitis is
different from UC, there are some similarities, such
as shifts in microbiota composition, reduced species
diversity and increment or decrease of speciﬁc groups
of bacteria; therefore, the mechanistic outcome of
this study might be relevant for research on human
IBD. In this context, restoring microbial homeostasis
by targeting colitis-associated taxa through speciﬁc
microbiological
interventions could form the basis
for novel therapeutic strategies for IBD. Together,
our data provide important insight into DSS-induced
dysbiosis or perturbations in gut microbiota in the
colonic and fecal samples, supporting the DSS model as
a useful tool to examine the role of different bacteria
in the pathogenesis of IBD.

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

Acknowledgments

This study was supported by grants from Crohn’s and
Colitis Canada, the Children’s Hospital Research Insti-
tute of Manitoba, the Canada Foundation for Innovation,
and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to J.E.G.,
and a University of Manitoba start-up grant to E.K.

Conﬂict of interest

The authors have declared no conﬂict of interest.
