Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

2 of 13

The crucial role of the intestinal microbiota in modulating insulin resistance and the inﬂammatory
response in GDM pregnancies has been reported by a few studies  It is well known that diet is
able to modulate the microbiota composition rapidly, within a few days  Emerging evidence
has shown a differential role of speciﬁc nutrients on metabolic outcomes, based on the individual
microbial pattern. This is an intriguing and very important ﬁnding, suggesting that a food is not
necessarily universally healthy per se but instead more suitable for speciﬁc individuals or conditions,
thus strongly supporting a personalized approach to human nutrition. The potential impact of speciﬁc
dietary interventions on the gut bacteria composition and function is of considerable interest in the
search for the optimal strategy to prevent and treat GDM. At present, very few and controversial data
are available.

Herein, we examine the updated evidence about this emerging topic. In particular, we analyze
the changes in the gut microbiota and the diet–microbiota interactions occurring during healthy
pregnancies and pregnancies complicated by GDM. Furthermore, we discuss the possible modulation
of the gut microbiota composition by speciﬁc nutrients and foods, and the impact on the metabolic
pattern of pregnant dysmetabolic women.

2. Methods

The following electronic databases were queried: PubMed (National Library of Medicine),
the Cochrane Library, EMBASE, and Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature
(CINAHL). The search strategy was performed using database speciﬁc subject headings and keywords;
restrictions to human studies were placed. Hand searching the references of the studies and reviews
on the ﬁeld was employed to augment the search strategy.

3. Microbiota and Host Interactions

The term gut microbiota refers to all the microorganisms colonizing the human gastrointestinal
tract  Residential microbes have a symbiotic relationship with their host, since they are able
to extract energy from foods that humans cannot digest, producing bioactive compounds, such as
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) with proven beneﬁcial effects on the host metabolism  The gut
microbiota can be considered a big virtual endocrine-metabolic organ, controlling many human
pathways 

Dysbiosis, an altered microbiota composition, has been hypothesized to play a key role in the
pathogenesis of many acute and chronic conditions, including metabolic diseases, such as obesity,
insulin resistance, and both type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)  Several mechanisms
linking dysbiosis to dysmetabolic conditions have been identiﬁed, such as abnormal gut permeability,
increasing absorption of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), abnormal SCFA production, aberrant conversion of
primary bile acids to secondary bile acids, increased production of bacterial toxic substances, such as
trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO)  These abnormalities lead to the activation of inﬂammatory
and autoimmune pathways, autoantigen mimics, stimulation of the endocannabinoid system, aberrant
gut peptide secretion, impairment of insulin signaling, increased energy extraction, and host fat
storage 

4. Gut Microbiota Changes during Pregnancy

A variety of factors inﬂuence the gut microbiota composition, such as host genetic factors,

comorbidities, antibiotic/prebiotic/probiotic use, dietary habits, and pregnancy 

In healthy pregnancy, the gut microbiota composition undergoes dramatic alterations from the ﬁrst
to the third trimester  Increased between-individual diversity (β-diversity) and decreased
richness (intra-individual or α-diversity) have been reported, and a microbial pattern similar to that
of non-pregnant adults with metabolic syndrome was found in late pregnancy (Figure 1) 
Indeed, profound hormonal, immunological, and metabolic changes take place above all during the
third trimester to promote maternal weight gain, increasing circulating pro-inﬂammatory cytokines,

Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

3 of 13

and insulin resistance  The reduced insulin sensitivity of late pregnancy is considered to be
beneﬁcial to support fetal growth and increased nutrient absorption  The pregnancy variations
in the gut microbial composition may contribute to all these metabolic changes 

Figure 1. Gut microbiota changes during the course of normoglycemic pregnancies and GDM
pregnancies. GDM: gestational diabetes mellitus. upward arrows mean an increased abundance,
downward arrows mean a decreased abundance.

However, at present, literature on microbiota composition in pregnancy is highly discordant,
reporting no variations  increased Proteobacteria/Actinobacteria abundance, Roseburia intestinalis
and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii reduction, and α-diversity decrease  Gestational weight gain
has been associated with higher concentrations of Bacteroides species 
Enterobacteriaceae and Escherichia coli  reduced abundance of Biﬁdobacterium and Akkermansia
muciniphila  Many correlations among speciﬁc taxa and gestational
metabolic variables have been found, such as direct relationships between Collinsella and circulating
triglycerides, and very-low-density lipoproteins; Sutterella and C-reactive
levels of insulin,
protein; Ruminococcaceae/Lachnospiraceae and leptin; Bacteroidaceae and ghrelin; Coprococcus
and gastrointestinal polypeptide (GIP). Moreover, inverse relationships between Blautia and insulin
values; Faecalibacterium/Fusobacterium ratios and blood glucose; Odoribacter and arterial blood pressure;
Ruminococcaceae and GIP, and Prevotellaceae and ghrelin have been reported  Therefore,
gut microbiota might contribute to gestational metabolic changes through different mechanisms,
although further studies on this topic are necessary.

5. Gut Microbiota in Pregnancies Complicated by GDM

The physiological insulin resistance of late-pregnancy is accentuated in women developing GDM,
thus their insulin secretion is not sufﬁcient to maintain euglycemia, leading to glucose intolerance 
Overall, insulin resistance has been found to be associated with a higher Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes

Nutrients 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 13  to be beneficial to support fetal growth and increased nutrient absorption  Overall, insulin resistance has been found to be associated with a higher Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

4 of 13

ratio and a reduced abundance of butyrate-producing bacteria such as Roseburia and Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii 

Koren et al., reported a reduced microbial richness in the ﬁrst gestational trimester in women
who later developed GDM, but no difference in the microbiota composition when compared to
healthy pregnant women  On the contrary, speciﬁc differences between GDM and normoglycemic
Increased gut abundance of Parabacteroides distasonis,
women were reported by a few studies.
Klebsiella variicola  Collinsella, Rothia, Desulfovibrio,
Actinobacteria and reduced gut richness of Methanobrevibacter smithii, Alistipes
species, Biﬁdobacterium species, Eubacterium species Akkermansia, Bacteroides, Parabacteroides,
Roseburia, and Dialister were reported in GDM patients compared to normoglycemic controls
(Figure 1). Some of the changes in the bacterial species related to GDM have been reported also in
T2DM patients, such as the reduction in Roseburia and Akkermansia muciniphila, and the increase in
Proteobacteria 

Functional analyses showed a greater abundance of membrane transport and energy metabolism
pathways, lipopolysaccharide and phosphotransferase systems, and lower amino acid metabolic
pathways in the microbiome of GDM patients 

If the changes in the gut microbiota contribute to or are a consequence of the development of
GDM is a debated question. A different microbiota composition was found to precede the onset of
GDM in early pregnancy, since both reduced microbial richness and increased abundance of
Ruminococcaceae family with a supposed subsequent increased energy harvest, pro-inﬂammatory
status, and impaired insulin signaling, have been reported 

A few studies described a different microbiota within 3–16 months after delivery in women with
a previous GDM (GDM+) compared to those with a previous normoglycemic pregnancy (GDM−).
In particular, GDM+ women showed a higher abundance of Prevotellaceae, Collinsella, Olsenella,
and Clostridium and a reduction in Firmicutes, Fusobacterium and the parent family Fusobacteriaceae,
and genus Ruminococcus (Ruminococcus from Lachnospiraceae family)  Indeed, no gut microbiota
differences between GDM+ and GDM− women were found 5 years postpartum  Therefore,
the possibility that aberrant microbiota could contribute to the future development of T2DM in the
GDM+ women becomes less probable.

Finally, the microbiota of GDM patients can be transmitted to the offspring, and colonization
before birth by speciﬁc taxa associated with GDM occurs  The ﬁnding of microbial inheritance
during pregnancy underscores the importance of its early modulation.

6. Diet-Microbiota Interactions in Pregnancy

Diet is one of the most important factors that modulate the intestinal microbiota 
Foods inﬂuence the microbiota composition through direct and indirect mechanisms. Nutrients
are able to interact directly with microbes by promoting or inhibiting their growth. On the other hand,
dietary compounds affect the host metabolism and immune system and the subsequent changes shape
the gut microbiota  The effect of food nutrients on intestinal microbiota is rapid, and changes to the
gut microbiota can occur within days after changing diet. However, the gut microbiota is considered
to be relatively stable and generally reverts to its original status after short-term dietary changes 
Because of its resilience, early colonization of the infant gut by microbes sets the stage for the lifelong
relatively stable adult microbiome, and pregnancy offers a window of opportunity for the microbiota
shaping of the newborn.

Only a few studies have evaluated the role of nutrition on maternal gut microbiota
during pregnancy. A lower ﬁber intake has been reported to be associated with reduced gut
microbiota diversity and richness  greater abundance of Collinsella, a genus associated with
T2DM  and greater abundance of Sutterella, a Proteobacteria with known pro-inﬂammatory
capacity  In pregnancy, vegetarian diets resulted in increased relative abundances of Roseburia and
Lachnospiraceae, but no difference in α-diversity when compared to omnivorous diets  A lower

Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

5 of 13

bacterial richness was found in pregnant women with high-fat, low-ﬁber intakes  Furthermore,
in overweight/obese women at early pregnancy stages, a high intake of saturated fatty acids (SFAs)
was associated with the reduction of all indexes of microbiota richness  while, early after delivery,
an increased SFA consumption was associated with reductions in Proteobacteria and Firmicutes
abundance relative to the other phyla  Monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) has been associated
with increase in the abundance of Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Bacteroidetes  In pregnant
women, fat-soluble vitamins seem to act as modulators of gut microbiota. Higher intakes of vitamin
D were associated with reduced microbial α-diversity. The consumption of retinol and vitamin
D was associated with a relative increase in abundance of the pro-inﬂammatory Proteobacteria
phylum. On the contrary, vitamin E intake was associated with a relative decrease in abundance of
Proteobacteria  In overweight pregnant women, dietary ﬁber and n–3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFAs) were associated with higher microbiota richness and lower serum zonulin levels  a protein
that adversely modulates the permeability of gut tight junctions. Indeed, caution should be used in
the interpretation of these results, since intakes were assessed by food frequency questionnaires or
food diaries  and, owing to the subjective nature of these data, associations between microbiota
and micronutrients might be overestimated.

In pregnancy, different nutrients were found to be related with gut microbiota diversity and
composition. Owing to the emerging evidence of the potential role of human gut microbiota on
metabolism and inﬂammation, future research is warranted in order to test the intriguing possibility
that microbiota manipulation may improve maternal (and consequently neonatal) health.

7. Diet-Microbiota Interactions in GDM

The impact of diet on the microbiota of GDM patients was recently addressed by an observational
study  Forty-one overweight women with GDM diagnosed at 24–28 weeks of gestation
received dietary recommendation from a registered dietitian, and their nutritional intakes and
microbiota were evaluated after the diagnosis of GDM (enrolment) and at the 38th week of gestation.
Women were considered as adherents to the given dietary recommendations if their intakes of
rapidly absorbed sugars and ﬁber were respectively <10% of total energy and at least 20 g/day,
and if they abolished alcohol intake at the end of the pregnancy. Adherents showed a signiﬁcant
decrease in Bacteroides  which is a genus that has been associated with high-fat animal-based
diets  Moreover, at enrolment, total fat intake was associated with higher abundance of Alistipes
and protein intake with Faecalibacterium genus, while, at the end of the pregnancy, ﬁber intake was
associated with the genus Roseburia  However, none of these bacteria were associated with the
changes in metabolic variables occurring during pregnancy in patients with GDM 

Therefore, the meaning of these associations remains unclear.
Gut microbes are able to use dietary methylamines (choline, l-carnitine, and phosphatidylcholine)
and produce trimethylamine (TMA), which is further oxidized to TMAO by the hepatic enzyme
ﬂavin-containing monooxygenase 3  Red meat, eggs, dairy products, and salt-water ﬁsh are the
main dietary sources of methylamines. Elevated circulating levels of TMAO have been associated with
increased risk of T2DM and cardiovascular diseases  Recently, in a large cross-sectional study,
TMAO plasma concentrations in early and mid-pregnancy were positively related to increased odds
of developing GDM  In mice fed with a high-fat/high-sugar diet, TMAO promoted impaired
glucose tolerance and adipose tissue inﬂammation  At present, the pathogenetic role of plasma
concentrations of TMAO on glucose metabolism is mostly unknown. Moreover, scarce information is
available about the taxonomic composition of TMA-producing bacteria in humans, which are widely
distributed across Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Proteobacteria phyla 

Further studies are needed on this important topic. Randomized controlled trials in which
strategies of dietary manipulation during pregnancy are employed to shape the gut microbiota
composition (such as reducing methylamines-contained foods, changing types of ﬁber intake) are
strongly advisable in order to evaluate the possibility of GDM prevention or control.

Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

6 of 13

8. Microbiota: A Novel Potential Therapeutic Target in GDM?

Despite the well-known role of MNT in the treatment of GDM  at present, there is no
consensus about the optimal composition of the diet and about which nutritional scheme should be
recommended  Historically, the main focus of MNT in GDM was carbohydrate restriction,
in particular simple sugar reduction  because this limitation reduces postprandial blood glucose
levels, thus leading to a lower glucose exposure for the fetus and consequently a reduced risk for
neonatal macrosomia  Nevertheless, evidence of the beneﬁts of carbohydrate restriction in GDM
is scarce, and recently this strategy has been questioned due to the unintended consequences of the
unavoidable increase in fat intake, if protein consumption remains in the recommended levels (15–20%
total energy)  It is well known that the amount and quality of fatty acids play relevant roles in
the modulation of insulin resistance  High-fat diets, in particular diets rich in SFAs, may promote
insulin resistance through several mechanisms, such as insulin signaling interfering  the promotion
of inﬂammation through tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) production  and increased oxidative
stress 

We do not eat alone, but also feed our microbiota, therefore we should also consider the effects
of food and nutrients on the composition of our intestinal microorganisms. From a “microbiota
point of view”, the high fat intake could potentially increase pro-inﬂammatory bacteria, resulting in
enhanced insulin resistance. High-fat diet has been associated with increased intestinal permeability
caused by high LPS serum levels, endotoxemia, and low-grade inﬂammation  In animal
studies, the consumption of high-SFA diets was observed to reduce the phylum Bacteroidetes (in
particular, Bacteroides and Prevotella genera), and the species Lactobacillus and Biﬁdobacterium 
In humans, high-fat diets have been reported to increase total anaerobic microbes, in particular the
Bacteroides genus, while low-fat diets led to an increase in the abundance of Biﬁdobacterium concomitant
with fasting glucose and total cholesterol reductions  In human pregnancy, a high-fat diet
determines an unfavorable microbial pattern, with a reduced bacterial richness, as described above 
Furthermore, the association between GDM and SFA intake has been documented 

A decade ago, doubts about the effectiveness of low-carbohydrate diets in GDM began to emerge
and nowadays the focus has moved from carbohydrate restriction to carbohydrate quality; in particular,
diets with low glycemic index (GI) and/or rich in complex unreﬁned carbohydrates have been studied
with promising results  Different types of complex carbohydrates exert different impacts on
microbiota composition. First of all, the terminology used needs to be clariﬁed. The generic term
“ﬁber” (i.e., undigestible carbohydrates) in the context of microbiota is misleading. Not all ﬁbers can be
used by gut microbes, such as cellulose, while other carbohydrates that are not ﬁbers can be fermented
by our intestinal microorganisms, such as resistant starches. Recently, the term microbiota accessible
carbohydrates (MACs) has been proposed  Microbial fermentation of MACs produces SCFAs
(acetate, propionate, and butyrate), which are able to activate G-protein-coupled receptors (GPRs),
such as GPR41 and GPR43, triggering the secretion of gut hormones (glucagon-like peptide 1 -GLP-1,
and peptide YY -PYY) by intestinal epithelial L-cells, and the secretion of leptin by adipocytes 
resulting in appetite decrease  SCFAs can suppress
lipolysis, and the release of inﬂammatory mediators, such as nitric oxide (NO), TNF-α, interleukin
1-beta (IL-1β), and interleukin 6 (IL-6)  Butyrate and propionate are generally considered
beneﬁcial  Indeed, the role of SCFAs in
energy homeostasis is ambiguous. Fecal SCFAs have been found to be increased in the gut microbiota
of people with obesity and this might indicate a greater ability to extract energy from undigested
foods contributing to the development of obesity 

The intakes of different MACs were associated with different microbe growth: prebiotic ﬁbers,
such as fructans, polydextrose, fructooligosaccharides (FOS), and galactooligosaccharides (GOS) were
linked to the growth of intestinal Biﬁdobacteri and Lactobacilli  resistant starch was reported to
increase the abundance of Ruminococcus, E. rectale, and Roseburia  In animal studies, low-MAC
diets resulted in over-grazing the mucus layer by the gut microbiota, potentially compromising the

Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

7 of 13

integrity of the mucosal barrier and increasing inﬂammation and susceptibility to pathogens 
Intriguingly, the selective use of speciﬁc MACs could have a different impact on microbiota composition
and consequently on host metabolism. Therefore, not only carbohydrate quality but also the type of
MAC should be considered in the deﬁnition of the optimal diet for GDM patients.

9. Towards Personalized Nutrition for GDM

The “one-size-ﬁts-all” diet approach has been called into question for most metabolic disorders.
The individual response to diets is inﬂuenced by genetic, epigenetic, and microbial inﬂuences 
The metabolic response to speciﬁc foods based on the individual gut microbiota composition is
one of the emerging topics of interest in the ﬁeld of personalized nutrition  Recent studies
have identiﬁed individual enterotypes with different responses to speciﬁc diets  Based on the
predominant genus, people can be divided into three different clusters, called “enterotypes”: Bacteroides,
Prevotella, and Ruminococcus  with a high predominance of the ﬁrst two enterotypes around
the world. These clusters appear to be independent from nationality, sex, age, and body mass
index (BMI), but substantially determined by dietary habits  Prevotella (P-type) enterotype was
associated with a plant-based diet, rich in carbohydrates, resistant starch, and ﬁbers, whereas Bacteroides
(B-type) enterotype was associated with high-fat, low-ﬁber Western diets  Due to the speciﬁc
microbial enzymatic capacity, the P-type would have a greater ability to produce propionate from ﬁber
fermentation (in particular, arabinoxylans and β-glucans), with increased production of the satiating
PYY and GLP-1 hormones  The P-type subjects have been proven to lose weight with a high-ﬁber
diet rich in arabinoxylans and β-glucans  while the B-type individuals do not beneﬁt from
these ﬁbers. In a recent study, 3 days of barley kernel-based bread supplementation improved the
glucose metabolism only in subjects with higher Prevotella/Bacteroides ratios  conﬁrming the role
of arabinoxylans and β-glucans in the P-type individuals. On the other hand, the B-type individuals
could lose weight and improve their glucose metabolism with biﬁdobacteria-increasing interventions,
including prebiotics, such as inulin and oligosaccharides, or symbiotic treatment 

A Prevotellaceae-dominated intestinal microbiome has been observed after 3–16 months
from delivery in women with previous GDM when compared to women after a normoglycemic
pregnancy  Other studies conﬁrmed an increased abundance of the genus Prevotella in GDM in
the second trimester of gestation compared to normoglycemic subjects. Therefore,
overall, in GDM patients it could be hypothesized that there is a beneﬁcial effect resulting from the
increased consumption of foods containing arabinoxylans and β-glucans, such as rye, wheat, barley,
oats, sorghum, maize, millet, psyllium, and ﬂaxseed. In GDM patients, Bacteroides abundance has
been found to be either increased  A reduced abundance of Bacteroides at the
end of pregnancy has been described in women with GDM with a higher intake of total ﬁber and
oligosaccharides  This reduction in Bacteroides abundance could be considered positive, as this
genus has been associated with greater gestational weight gain  Therefore, only in the subgroup
of GDM patients with a higher relative abundance of Bacteroides, biﬁdogenic prebiotic ﬁbers (FOS,
GOS and inulin, contained in foods such as legumes, chicory roots, Jerusalem artichokes, onions, garlic,
asparagus, daikon, and leek) might be beneﬁcial to control the gestational weight gain.

A step towards personalized recommendations based on microbiota composition in a clinical
setting was the recent production of a tool that is able to predict the individual impact of foods
on postprandial glycemic responses based on an algorithm integrating clinical variables and gut
microbiota composition  Furthermore, lower glycemic response after eating different types
of bread (artisanal sourdough bread and industrially made white bread) can be predicted in each
person based only on microbiome data  This suggests once again that giving the same dietary
recommendations to all people has limited efﬁcacy.

Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

8 of 13

10. Limitations and Future Perspectives

The key points of this review are reported in Table 1. However, the limitations of the current
knowledge should be recognized. At present, we are still far from ﬁnding a personalized dietary
treatment for GDM patients. First of all, our knowledge about gut microbiota and diet response in
pregnancy complicated by GDM is limited. Furthermore, gut microbiota is just one of the components
that can determine personalized responses to diet therapy; future studies on personalized nutrition
should take into account and integrate all the possible variables, including genetics and clinical
parameters. Finally, doubts have recently been raised about the beneﬁt of probiotics in preventing
GDM, thus questioning the role of microbiota in pregnancy hyperglycemia 

Table 1. Key points about diet-microbiota interactions in patients with GDM (gestational diabetes
mellitus).

Clinical Impact

Future Perspectives

Limitations

An impaired gut microbiota
has been found in pregnancies
complicated by GDM.

The microbiota of GDM
patients can be transmitted
to the offspring.

Early modulation of the gut
microbiota might be warranted in
women at risk of developing GDM.

Diet can shape the gut
microbiota and the microbiota
can use nutrients to produce
bioactive compounds.

The metabolic response to
speciﬁc foods is based on the
individual gut
microbiota composition.

The gut microbiota rapidly
changes with dietary
modiﬁcations. However, it
generally reverts to the
original status with
short-term dietary changes.

Long-term dietary manipulation
during early pregnancy (or before
pregnancy) to shape the gut
microbiota composition might be a
potential strategy for the prevention
or control of GDM.

Weight change or glycemic
responses to ﬁber-containing
foods vary according to the
predominant individual
microbial pattern.

The recommended type of ﬁber
could be individualized in GDM
patients on the basis of the speciﬁc
gut microbiota composition in order
to obtain better metabolic outcomes.

Few, contrasting data available.
Uncertainty about the causal
relationship between gut
dysbiosis and GDM.

Limited data available.
Randomized controlled trials
are lacking.

Limited data available.
Randomized controlled trials
are lacking.

Nevertheless, in addition to the traditional recommendations of consuming an adequate caloric
intake, and reducing simple sugars and SFAs, the recommendation to increase the intake of speciﬁc
type of ﬁbers could be given. In particular, if there are no improvements in weight and metabolic
outcomes, it could be beneﬁcial to vary the type of MACs, increasing arabinoxylans and β-glucans
rather than FOS and GOS.

11. Conclusions

The search for the optimal nutritional strategy in GDM patients remains an unresolved issue.
In the study of the optimal nutritional scheme for GDM women, it is important that the potential
beneﬁts of diet for the mother, the fetus, and the maternal microbiota, which in turn will impact on the
newborn microbiota, are taken into consideration.

Author Contributions: V.P. participated in the conception of the paper, collection and interpretation of the
references, manuscript writing and revision. D.F., I.G., F.L., A.L., C.M., C.F., and E.G. participated in the collection
and interpretation of the references, manuscript writing and revision. S.B. participated in the conception of the
paper, collection and interpretation of the references, manuscript writing and revision. All authors have read and
approved the ﬁnal manuscript.

Funding: This research was funded by a grant from the Ministry of Education, University and Research of Italy
(ex-60% 2017).

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.

Nutrients 2019, 11, 330
