Husain et al.

in

use

symptomatic

including preterm birth (PTB).1–4 Antibiotics are effective
in eradicating BV during pregnancy5 and are recommended
The
for
consequences of antibiotic use during pregnancy have been
poorly studied,7 but
there are concerns that antibiotic-
related changes in the vaginal microbiota8 are associated
with short- and long-term morbidity in infancy and later
years.9

pregnant women.6

Probiotics might be a safe and effective alternative to
antibiotics in restoring the imbalance of the vaginal micro-
biota found in BV. Probiotics are deﬁned as ‘live micro-
organisms that confer a health beneﬁt on the host when
administered in adequate amounts’.10 Limited evidence
suggests that they have several beneﬁcial roles including
the ability to displace and kill pathogens, and modulate the
body’s immune response.11,12 Lactobacilli, primarily the
strains that produce higher levels of hydrogen peroxide,
appear to protect against BV13–15 but the importance of
hydrogen peroxide in this is unclear.16

Evidence in non-pregnant women suggests that oral pro-
biotics can colonise the vagina, restore its microbiota in
imbalance, and eradicate or
the presence of microbial
reduce the incidence of urogenital infections.17–21 Several
commercial probiotic products are marketed for
the
restoration and maintenance of a ‘healthy vaginal micro-
biota’ in both non-pregnant and pregnant women22,23 but
evidence of colonisation or beneﬁt in pregnant women is
lacking.

We therefore performed a randomised trial of a com-
available probiotic preparation in pregnant
mercially
women to assess its biological effects on the vaginal micro-
biota. The constituents of the preparation have been shown
to colonise the vagina in some non-pregnant women. We
hypothesised that the probiotic preparation containing Lac-
taken orally from early pregnancy (9–14
tobacillus spp.
completed weeks) would colonise the vagina and reduce
the prevalence of BV. The probiotic preparation selected
has been shown to be safe when taken during preg-
nancy.14,15

Methods

conducted using an analysis plan agreed in advance with
the independent trial steering and data monitoring com-
mittee.

Participants
Women in early pregnancy were recruited from the mater-
nity departments of
four East London hospitals during
their routine dating ultrasound scan appointment. All par-
ticipants provided written informed consent. Eligible
women were aged 16 years and above at consent and
between 9 and 14 weeks’ gestation as conﬁrmed by the dat-
ing ultrasound scan. We excluded those unable to provide
written informed consent or who had a poor understand-
ing of verbal or written English. There were no other exclu-
sion criteria. Maternal demographic, medical and obstetric
history, and antibiotic and probiotic use data were col-
lected.

Interventions
The treatment group received oral probiotic capsules con-
taining 2.5 billion CFUs each of L. rhamnosus GR-1and L.
reuteri RC-14, while the placebo group received identical
capsules containing excipients alone (Chr. Hansen, Hør-
sholm, Denmark). The contents of both capsules are stable
at room temperature, and enough capsules were provided
to each participant at the time of enrolment to last until
42 weeks’ gestation. We cultured the lactobacilli
from a
sample of the probiotic capsules before the start of the trial
to ensure they were viable and could be detected by our
culture techniques. Participants were instructed to take one
capsule daily until delivery and self-report compliance at
each study visit.25

Outcomes
Our primary outcome was the rate of BV at 18–20 weeks’
gestation, measured using the Nugent
(Nugent
score ≥7 shows presence of BV). Secondary outcomes were
vaginal colonisation rates at 18–20 weeks’ gestation of the
probiotic or other Lactobacillus spp., two common neonatal
pathogens (Escherichia coli and Group B streptococcus),
and the composition of the vaginal microbiota.

score

A pragmatic randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial with microbiome analysis was carried out to determine
the biological effects of oral probiotics on the vaginal
microbiota and the feasibility of conducting a full-scale
trial of oral probiotic supplementation of women from
early pregnancy to delivery in preventing PTB. The study
received ethics approval from the UK National Research
Ethics Committee and was registered on
ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02692820). We followed CONSORT
guidelines24
report, and analysis was

to produce this

Study plan
Research midwives approached potentially eligible women
attending their routine dating ultrasound scan appoint-
ment. After conﬁrming eligibility,
informed consent was
obtained and baseline data recorded. A double-headed
vaginal swab was collected, and the research midwife dis-
pensed randomised packs of placebo or probiotic capsules.
Vaginal swab samples were obtained again at two time
points, 18–20 weeks’ and 34–36 weeks’ gestation, during
scheduled routine antenatal appointments. At each visit,

2

ª 2019 The Authors. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

participants were asked to report on antibiotic use and any
side effects from the intervention.

Sample size
A sample size of 366 was calculated to estimate the propor-
tion of recruited women who would complete the study.
Based on studies carried out on non-pregnant women trea-
ted orally with the same lactobacillus strain,20 this sample
size would allow us to detect with at least 80% power a
decrease in BV of at least 50%, assuming a baseline risk of
25%, following treatment with the Lactobacillus spp. inter-
vention.26

Randomisation
The random allocation sequence was generated based on
permuted blocks of random block sizes of four, six, and
eight, stratiﬁed by participating site and without adaptive
or minimisation strategies. Allocation was done on a 1:1
ratio. The sequence was given to a trial support company,
Sharp Clinical Services (SCS, Crickhowell, Wales), which
labelled and packaged the probiotic and placebo capsules
into identical tamper-proof boxes for the study. Only the
trial statistician and SCS were aware of
the allocation
sequence.

Blinding and allocation concealment
The probiotic
and placebo capsules, made of hard
hypromellose, were provided in identical plastic tubes by
the manufacturer and shipped directly to SCS. The alloca-
tion sequence was used to label the tubes with details of
the products’ expiry date, storage instructions, and direc-
tions for use. These were then packaged into tamper-proof
boxes. Participants, investigators, and analysing microbiolo-
gists were blinded to the study grouping.

Microbiology methodology
The double-headed swab was separated in the laboratory.
One swab was used to prepare a glass slide for Gram stain,
and the other was extracted into 3 ml of Brain Heart Infu-
sion broth (Unipath Ltd, Basingstoke, UK) containing 10%
glycerol and 0.005% cysteine hydrochloride. The swab used
to prepare the slide was stored at (cid:1)70 °C and later used in
the vaginal microbiota DNA proﬁling.

Gram-stained glass slides prepared from the swabs were
examined by microscopy and scored between 0 and 10
based on bacterial morphotypes according to the Nugent
method.27 Stored samples were thawed and diluted through
a series of 10-fold dilutions in saline before being inocu-
lated onto a range of selective and non-selective culture
media (Unipath). These included Mann Rogosa Sharpe
(MRS) agar incubated for 48 h at 35 °C in 10% CO2,
Columbia blood agar incubated aerobically at 37 °C for
48 h, Fastidious Anaerobe agar with 5% horse blood and

Probiotics and vaginal microbiota in pregnancy

kanamycin incubated anaerobically at 36 °C for 48 to 72 h,
Sabouraud’s agar plates incubated micro-aerophilically at
36 °C for 24–48 h, and MacConkey agar incubated aerobi-
cally at 37 °C for 48 h. Colony counts from serial dilutions
allowed an estimate of the numbers of different species and
strains identiﬁed. These cultures allowed identiﬁcation of
Lactobacillus
and Group B
streptococci. Isolates were identiﬁed using matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionisation-time of ﬂight (MALDI-TOF)
analysis.28

Enterobacteriaceae,

spp.,

speciﬁc

primers

template

Vaginal bacterial community proﬁling
DNA was extracted from thawed samples by means of the
(Sigma-Aldrich,
GenElute Bacterial Genomic DNA kit
Poole, UK), modiﬁed to optimise lysis of Gram-positive
bacteria, following the manufacturer’s instructions. From
each DNA extract, variable regions V1 and V2 of the 16S
rRNA gene were ampliﬁed by PCR using fusion primers
incorporating
27F-YM
(AGAGTTTGATYMTGGCTCAG) and 338R-R (TGCTG
CCTCCCGTAGRAGT) and MiSeq adapters and barcodes
to achieve a double indexing system. Amplicons were puri-
ﬁed and normalised using the SequalPrep Normalization
Plate Kit (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc, Dartford, UK). Sequenc-
ing was performed at the Barts and The London Genome
Centre using an Illumina MiSeq instrument, with a 2 9
250 ﬂow cell for paired-end sequencing. Sequence reactions
were spiked with 10% 12.5 pM PhiX DNA. Reads were ﬁl-
tered by quality score using DADA229 to remove sequences
with an expected error over 2 bp. The forward and reverse
sequences were truncated at 250 and 200 bp, respectively.
The ﬁltered sequences were analysed using the mothur
pipeline
at https://
www.mothur.org/wiki/MiSeq_SOP. Sequences were clus-
(OTUs) at a
tered into operational
sequence dissimilarity distance of 0.015 using an average
neighbour algorithm and then classiﬁed using a Na€ıve
Bayesian classiﬁer implemented in mothur with the Human
Oral Microbiome Database release 14.51 reference dataset.
The alpha diversity of the samples was estimated by calcu-
lating the Inverse Simpson index and compared between
groups by the Wilcoxon test. A dissimilarity theta-YC
matrix between the samples was constructed with the same
subsampling approach averaging over 1000 replicas. The
beta diversity between subject groups was then compared
using the AMOVA test.

to the SOP available

taxonomic units

according

Statistical analysis
We used descriptive analysis to report baseline characteris-
tics of trial participants by allocated group. Continuous
variables were reported as means and standard deviations,
and ordinal/categorical variables were reported as absolute
the microbiological
and relative frequencies. To assess

ª 2019 The Authors. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

3

Husain et al.

effects of probiotics on vaginal microbiota, we compared
the proportion of women with BV and the proportion of
women with vaginal colonisation of the intervention spe-
cies at 18–20 weeks’ gestation between the groups. Nugent
score was dichotomised as BV (score ≥7) and no BV (score
0–6).

We estimated treatment effect using binary logistic
regression model adjusting for possible confounders, as this
approach has known beneﬁts including enhancement of
power.30 A covariate was considered a confounding factor
if the difference between adjusted and unadjusted model
coefﬁcients for the intervention variables varied by more
than 10%. In such cases, the odds ratio (OR) was shown
along with the list of confounders used for adjustment.
Otherwise, we reported the model without adjusting for
confounders. Mean Nugent score and its 95% conﬁdence
interval (CI) were also plotted by group from baseline to
34–36 weeks’ gestation to compare evolution of the marker
during pregnancy.

All analysis was carried out using STATA software ver-

sion 14.31

Patient and public involvement
Patient representatives provided input into the design, pro-
tocol development, and conduct of the study. Prior to this
trial, a qualitative study was conducted to obtain input
from women.32 The available core outcome set for PTB33
had an inﬂuence on data collected. We are planning to dis-
seminate ﬁndings in the form of a newsletter and PPI feed-
back session, following primary publication of these results
through our patient network.34

Results

We screened 1301 pregnant women between 3 May and 1
July 2016 for their eligibility to participate in the study. A
total of 997 women were excluded from the trial either
because they did not meet the inclusion criteria 
or they declined to participate. Those who declined to par-
ticipate did so mostly because of an unwillingness to take
the study intervention and not being interested
in research study participation  After exclusions,
304 women were recruited and randomised to the probiotic
groups. At 18–
20 weeks’ gestation, 123 women remained in the probiotic
group and 115 in the placebo group. Complete data for
primary analysis were therefore available for 238 
randomised women (Figure 1).

There were no differences in characteristics of partici-
pants between the two groups at baseline (Table 1). In a
random sample of probiotic capsules tested for Lactobacilli,
the mean count was 2 9 109 for L. rhamnosus GR-1 and
1 9 109
for L. reuteri RC-14. No other bacteria were

detected. Self-reported compliance to the intervention at
18–20 weeks’ was 93% in the probiotic group
and 98% in the placebo group. No serious
adverse events related to the study interventions were
reported.

At 18–20 weeks’ gestation, the rate of BV in the probi-
otic group was 15% 
in the placebo group. There were no differences between
the groups
in the rates of vaginal colonisation with
L. rhamnosus GR-1  E. coli
or Group B strepto-
cocci  Vaginal colonisation with
L. reuteri RC-14 was not detected in either
group
(Table 1). After adjusting for Nugent score at baseline,
there were no differences between the groups in the odds
of BV (adjusted OR 1.82, 95% CI 0.64–5.19; P = 0.26).

Of

the women who provided a swab sample at 18–
20 weeks’ gestation, vaginal samples were available in 70%
of women at 34–36 weeks’ gestation (72% (83/
115) in the placebo group and 68% in the probi-
otic group. The mean Nugent scores at 9–14, 18–20, and
34–36 weeks’ gestation in the probiotic group were 1.74
 and 1.74
 respectively. In the placebo group, the
mean Nugent scores at the same time points were 1.17
 and 1.33
 The rates of
BV in the groups over the same period were 17% 
13% in the probiotic group and
6%  at all three time points in the placebo group.

Although the secondary outcomes did not differ between
the two groups, this trial was not powered to assess these
adequately. There was one miscarriage in the placebo group
and three in the probiotic group, all occurring between 9–
14 weeks’ and 18–20 weeks’ gestation. There were nine and
eight PTBs in the placebo and probiotic groups, respec-
tively, giving PTB rates of 8.2% and 6.7%; these rates are
consistent with the 7.7% PTB rate reported for England
and Wales in 2015.35 In each group, the mean duration of
pregnancy was 39 weeks, and in those who delivered pre-
term, 36 weeks.

Participants (n = 152) who attended at all time-points
were selected for the microbiome analysis. PCR ampliﬁca-
tion at baseline failed in two participants in each group,
and the 18–20 weeks’ gestation swabs from three partici-
pants were unavailable, leaving 147 participants who pro-
vided 299 samples (75 in each group at baseline, and 74
and 75 in the probiotic and placebo groups, respectively, at
18–20 weeks’). The 16S rRNA genes were successfully
ampliﬁed and sequenced from these, and 6714 sequence
reads were sub-sampled from each sample. The composi-
tion of the vaginal community was as expected, with sub-
sets dominated by Lactobacillus crispatus, Lactobacillus

4

ª 2019 The Authors. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

Probiotics and vaginal microbiota in pregnancy

Assessed for eligibility (n = 1301)

Excluded (n = 997)
-Did not meet inclusion criteria (n = 270)
-Declined to participate (n = 727) 

Recruited and randomised (n = 304)

Placebo group (n = 152)

9–14 weeks

Probiotic group (n = 152)

Lost to follow up (n = 37)

-Post consent withdrawal (n = 10)
-Did not attend appointment visit  (n = 26)
-Did not provide baseline swab sample (n = 1)

Lost to follow up (n = 29)
-Post consent withdrawal (n = 7 )
-Did not attend appointment visit  (n = 22)

Included in primary analysis (n = 115)

Included in primary analysis (n = 123)

18–20 weeks 

Adhered to intervention (n = 113, 98%)

Adhered to intervention (n = 114, 93%)

Figure 1. Flow chart showing numbers of participants at each stage of the trial.

iners or Lactobacillus jensenii. A further group was charac-
terised by a diverse community, which included anaerobic
species and Gardnerella vaginalis (Figure 3).

There were no signiﬁcant differences (Wilcoxon) in
alpha diversity (Inverse Simpson index) or composition
(AMOVA) of the bacterial community in the probiotic and
placebo groups at either 9–14 or 18–20 weeks’ gestation
(Figure 3). The stability of the microbiota within subjects
assessed by determining the theta-YC distance between the
baseline and 18–20 weeks’ gestation samples was not signif-
icantly different between the probiotic and placebo groups
(Wilcoxon).

Discussion

The aim of this trail was to compare the effects on the
vaginal microbiota of oral probiotic capsules containing
L. rhamnosus GR-1 and L. reuteri RC-14 versus placebo
taken orally from early pregnancy until delivery. The bio-
logical effects were measured by Nugent scoring and cul-
three time points
ture of vaginal samples collected at
during pregnancy.

Main ﬁndings
The oral administration of L. rhamnosus GR-1 and L. reu-
teri RC-14 daily from early pregnancy did not affect the
prevalence of BV or common neonatal pathogens, or alter

the composition of the vaginal microbiota at 18–20 weeks’
gestation. Previous observational studies and small-scale
randomised controlled trials in non-pregnant populations
have suggested that oral administration of probiotics can
alter the vaginal microbiota in a signiﬁcant number of
women where microbial imbalance exists.18–21 It is on this
basis that several commercial probiotic products are mar-
keted for the restoration and maintenance of a healthy
vaginal microbiota in both non-pregnant and pregnant
women.19,20 Our ﬁndings have not shown any effect on the
vaginal microbiota with the probiotic preparation used in
this trial.

The microbiota at human colonisation sites is resistant
to perturbation; this resistance is referred to as colonisation
resistance.36,37 It
is likely that stable colonisation with
desirable probiotic strains will
require a reduction in
colonisation resistance. Little is known about modulation
of vaginal colonisation resistance at the present time.

Strengths and weakness of the study
This study was a large and pragmatic multicenter, ran-
domised trial carried out in pregnant women to assess the
effect of probiotic supplementation on the vaginal micro-
biota. We recruited women in early pregnancy and the
time to our primary endpoint was long enough to observe
the intervention on the vaginal micro-
an effect of
biota.15,19,20,38 The
and participant

sample

large

size

ª 2019 The Authors. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

5

9–14 weeks

34–36 weeks

18–20 weeks
Gestational Age

Placebo

Probiotics

Figure 2. Mean Nugent scores with 95% conﬁdence intervals from
9–14 to 34–36 weeks’ gestation of participants in the trial.

douching, which may alter the vaginal microbiota with
adverse health consequences.40

The study has some limitations. The trial was underpow-
ered as a result of the lower than anticipated event rate, so
we can’t be certain of the magnitude of effect observed.
Secondly, we recruited and randomised fewer women than
planned, with only 23% of eligible women
agreeing to participate in the trial. The 2-month recruit-
ment phase of the trial was devised to estimate the feasibil-
ity of recruiting to a full-scale trial of oral probiotic
supplementation of women from early pregnancy to pre-
vent PTB. This response rate is, however, not unusual in
trials on apparently healthy participants who may not have
an expressed health need,41 particularly in pregnancy,
where there may be impediments to participation, mainly
due to perceived risk to the fetus.42 Thirdly, 77% (997/
1301) of eligible women were excluded from the trial
mainly due to refusal to participate. Fourthly, we had a
to follow up, which
higher than expected number lost
tends to affect the ability to detect a difference. However,
as
the direction of mean effect was opposite to that
hypothesised, our negative ﬁnding merits consideration.
Finally, adherence to the trial intervention, although over
90% in both groups, was reliant on self-reporting because
participants rarely remembered to bring in unused capsules
for a count at their scheduled antenatal visits. However, it
has been shown that self-reported compliance is a reliable
substitute for capsule count, particularly in trials where
there is regular in-person follow up.25

Comparison with other studies
Results of clinical
trials in non-pregnant women have
reported positive effects of probiotics on BV.43 However,

01234567

Nugent Score

Husain et al.

Table 1. Baseline characteristics* and outcome at 18–20 weeks’
gestation of participants allocated to placebo or probiotics

Characteristic/Outcome

Placebo group
(n = 152)
Mean (SD)
or n (%)

Probiotic
group (n = 152)
Mean (SD)
or n (%)

31.3 
25.1 

74 
18 
51 
9 
6 

9 
3 

Maternal characteristics
Age (years)
Body mass index
Ethnicity
White
Black
Asian
Mixed/Other
Participant born preterm
Supplements/Medication use at baseline
Antibiotics
Other probiotics
Microbiological assessment at baseline
Bacterial vaginosis
(Nugent score ≥7)
Lactobacillus colonisation
reuteri
rhamnosus
Others
Escherichia coli
Group B Streptococcus

2 
6 
95 
39 
23 

10 

Microbiological assessment at 18–20 weeks
Bacterial vaginosis
(Nugent score ≥7)**
Lactobacillus colonisation
reuteri
rhamnosus
Others
Escherichia coli
Group B Streptococcus

0
6 
67 
29 
9 

31.1 
25.4 

64 
27 
50 
11 
6 

7 
6 

1 
5 
93 
39 
17 

19 

0
6 
74 
29 
5 

18 

27 

Placebo group
(n = 115)

Probiotic
group (n = 123)

*There were no signiﬁcant differences between the groups.
**P = 0.11.

retention ensured internal validity, while the multicentre
recruitment and broad inclusion criteria enhanced external
validity. We used probiotics that are safe during pregnancy
and have been reported to colonise the vagina in some
non-pregnant women within 2 weeks of treatment.19 Before
the start of the study, we conﬁrmed the viability of the lac-
tobacilli in the probiotic capsules and that our laboratory
techniques would detect them in culture. Antibiotic pre-
scribing during pregnancy is common in the UK39 and we
took account of antibiotic exposure as a potential con-
founding variable. We did not take account of vaginal

6

ª 2019 The Authors. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

Probiotics and vaginal microbiota in pregnancy

Figure 3. Heat map showing the composition of the vaginal microbiota at baseline and at 18–20 weeks’ in placebo and probiotic groups.

ª 2019 The Authors. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

7

Husain et al.

support

conclusive evidence has been hampered by inadequacies in
trial design (for example sample size), variations in the
interventions strains that were used, in the outcome mea-
sures, mode of administration, and control of confounding
factors such as use of antibiotics and topical antimicrobials.
Our ﬁndings
those recently reported by Gille
et al.44 In a randomised, controlled trial, 320 women at
<12 weeks’ gestational age were allocated to once-daily oral
capsules of L. rhamnosus GR-1 or L. reuteri RC-14 or pla-
cebo for 8 weeks. No differences were found in the preva-
lence of BV assessed by Nugent score between probiotic
and placebo groups before (placebo group 5.4% versus
probiotic group 2.8%, P = 0.376) and after the intervention
period (placebo group 1.5% versus probiotic group 2.2%,
P = 1.000).

Implications for clinical practice and research
The current study was part of a trial assessing the feasibility
of conducting a deﬁnitive trial on PTB prevention with
probiotics. PTB is the major determinant of adverse new-
born outcome. The rate of PTB is rising globally45 and cur-
rent strategies to stem its growth are ineffective.46 The
association between BV and PTB, and the reported beneﬁts
of probiotic therapy on BV, mainly in non-pregnant
women, have raised interest in the role of probiotics in the
prevention of PTB.47 The observed beneﬁt of dietary probi-
otic intake on the risk of spontaneous PTB48 supports this
concept. Although the probiotic supplements used in this
trial did not affect vaginal microbiota during pregnancy,
we believe that the notion of using probiotics to reduce the
risk of PTB merits
investigation. Future work
should ﬁrst focus on identifying the probiotic strain(s) and
mode of administration that have a beneﬁcial effect on the
vaginal microbiota during pregnancy before their role in
the prevention of PTB can be assessed.

further

Conclusion

Our study did not show evidence of an effect of oral probi-
otics on the vaginal microbiota in pregnancy.

Disclosure of interests
All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure
form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and declare no
conﬂict of interest. Completed disclosure of interests forms
are available to view online as supporting information.

Contribution to authorship
The trial was conceived by MM and MW, and designed by
SH and KK. ZD coordinated the trial with supervision
from JA and JD. JZ and BMF generated the randomisation
sequence and analysed the results. AW and MM carried
the primary
out

the microbiological

assessment

for

outcome. EP and WW carried out the DNA sequencing.
ST, CC, and BMT provided overall support to the conduct
and delivery of the trial. JA wrote the ﬁrst draft, which was
further developed by SH and KK. All authors contributed
to the preparation and approval of the ﬁnal manuscript.

Details of ethics approval
The National Research Ethics Service Committee London -
City Road & Hampstead (reference 15/LO/1549), approved
this study on 26 October 2015. All participants provided
informed consent to take part in the trial.

Data sharing
The research team will consider reasonable requests for
sharing of patient level data. Requests should be made to
KK or SH. Consent for data sharing has been obtained and
will be provided in an anonymised format, which will ren-
der the risk of identiﬁcation low.

Funding
This report summarises independent research funded by
Barts Charity (grant reference 1082/2243) under its Large
Programme Grant
funding stream. The study was sup-
ported by the NIHR CRN portfolio with recruitment and
follow up of participants, and was sponsored by Queen
Mary University of London. As agreed with Chr Hansen as
part of the condition of support for the trial, the ﬁnal
report was provided to them for review before submission.
Neither the funders nor sponsors had any role in design,
conduct, data collection, management, analysis or interpre-
tation of data, writing of the report or the decision to sub-
mit the paper for publication.

Acknowledgements
investigators, research midwives,
We thank the principal
and researchers: Umme Ali, Sarah Davenport, Bashir Daw-
latly, Laurie Deeks, Melonie Gouldbourne, Sarah Hanks,
Sal Higgins, Vivian Holmes, Joanne Hutchinson, Prudence
Jones, Rehan Khan, Zandile Maseko, Sharon Mcduell,
Yvonne Muwalo, Vincent Oon, Maryam Parisaei, Alice
Rossi, Amrithpaul Sandhu, and Amy Thomas, as well as
the women who participated in the trial and contributed
time and effort to make this study a success. We thank
Epigenesys who designed and maintained our database and
the NIHR CRN for their support during the set-up and
conduct of the study. &
