Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

diseases may develop (Putignani et al., 2015), such as allergy,
inﬂammatory bowel disease
and
diabetes, metabolic disorders, cardiovascular dyslipidemia,
and neuropathology (Holmes et al., 2011).

(IBD), obesity,

cancer

The advent of the omics-based systems biology era has opened
a new scenario in the comprehension of the gut ecosystem
by shedding light on its shape, modulation and interplay with
microorganisms, food functionality, and the role of nutrients in
health (Moco et al., 2013; Putignani et al., 2015).

(i)
The “omics” technologies are presently applied to:
determine speciﬁc disease markers and novel diagnostic targets;
(ii) discover functional alterations in the physiopathology of
several diseases; (iii) discover the relationship between the gut
microbiota and the host metabolisms (De Preter and Verbeke,
2013). In particular, the use of metabolomics, being a well-
established and powerful top–down systems biology approach,
is crucial to unravel the genetics–environment–health relation,
as well as the typical clinical biomarkers of the diﬀerent diseases
(Moco et al., 2013). In fact, metabolomics changed the concept
that the cellular metabolism proﬁle is complete (Dettmer et al.,
2007). Therefore, metabolomics is useful to elucidate the complex
interactions of components, to understand the whole system, and
to discover new metabolites in order to provide both a diﬀerent
perspective on cellular homeostasis (Liu et al., 2010), and new,
unexpected pathways which may have a key physiological role
(Zamboni et al., 2015). The metabolomics experiment (sampling,
sample preparation, instrumental analysis, data processing, and
data interpretation) fulﬁll the goal of improving the current
status of biological information associated to the metabolome
and, more generally, to functional genomics (Harrigan and
Goodacre, 2003). Nowadays, metabolomics is used to: (i) identify
biomarkers that could indicate the presence of a diseases, or
a response to drug intervention (Dunn and Ellis, 2005); (ii)
determine biochemical or environmental stresses (Le Gall et al.,
2003); (iii) characterize microbial metabolism (Vaidyanathan
et al., 2002); and (iv) characterize human health or disease
(Holmes et al., 2011).

Indeed, the metabolomics approach has been applied to
several studies on the gut microbiota, mostly focused on the
exploration of disease-related metabolites in order to obtain
detailed information on the gut metabolic pathways. In fact,
the gut microbiota is involved in several biochemical functions
directly associated to the perturbation of speciﬁc gut microbial
populations, which may lead to the development of diseases
(De Preter, 2015; De Preter et al., 2015). In other words, as the
gut microbiota interacts with the host metabolism and aﬀects
physiological or pathological conditions, (Figure 1; Table 1;
Del Chierico et al., 2012) the study of its composition helps
discriminate between unhealthy and healthy subjects.

Moreover, the identiﬁcation of metabolites may highlight
how lifestyle and dietary habits aﬀect speciﬁc disease conditions
(Vernocchi et al., 2012).

Finally, metabolomics represents an unprecedented approach
to collect the complex metabolic interactions between the host
and its commensal microbial partners, oﬀering the opportunity
to deﬁne individual and population phenotypes (Moco et al.,
2013). In fact, several cellular metabolites are associated with

the phenotypes of living organisms (i.e., human, mice, bacteria),
and they represent the substrates and products of diﬀerent
biochemical pathways reﬂecting genetic and environmental
factors (Kim et al., 2016).

Furthermore, these data will serve as a basis to comprehend,
at the cellular and molecular levels, the relationships between
nutritional status and disease risk predisposition, thus allowing
to formulate nutritional recommendations.

This review is focused on the application of MS- and NMR-
based metabolomic techniques to describe the gut microbiota
metabolome and human physiology in relation to nutritional
programs and therapies.

VOLATILE AND NON-VOLATILE
COMPOUNDS: DETECTION METHODS
AND DATA ANALYSIS

Metabolomics uses high throughput techniques to characterize
and quantify small molecules in several bioﬂuids (urine, serum,
plasma, feces, saliva), revealing a unique metabolic signature
(Nicholson and Lindon, 2008).

However, due to the chemical diversity,

the diﬀerent
properties of metabolites, and the large dynamic range of
metabolite concentrations in samples, it is almost impossible to
measure the complete metabolome with only one technique (De
Preter and Verbeke, 2013; Smirnov et al., 2016). Considering
that the amount of predictable metabolites and derivatives in
mammals, plants and bacteria is unknown (Weckwerth and
Morgenthal, 2005), there is the need of diﬀerent analytical
platforms and complex integrated computational pipelines,
to cover
adjusted by analytical and chemical parameters,
complete metabolome pathways
in the diﬀerent bioﬂuids
(Savorani et al., 2013). Moreover, the collection and preparation
of samples, and the selection of the appropriate analytical
platforms are fundamental requisites for reproducibility of
sample manipulation (Dunn and Ellis, 2005). Besides,
the
storage and the continuous sample freeze/thawing may alter the
composition and stability of the samples and consequently the
precision and accuracy of results (Roessner et al., 2000).

Finally,

the fundamental requirements of metabolomics
studies are: accurate study design; sample treatment and platform
set up, corroborated by data analysis; integration of results; and
biological interpretation (Smirnov et al., 2016).

Metabolomics can be divided into two diﬀerent groups:
targeted analysis and non-targeted discovery analysis (Dettmer
et al., 2007). In particular, the targeted approach is related
to the analysis of
the diﬀerent classes of molecules (i.e.,
carbohydrates, lipids, aminoacids), while non-targeted analysis
gives a rapid snapshot of the metabolic proﬁle of samples by
using technologies able to detect a wide number of metabolites
(Smirnov et al., 2016).

Detection Methods
At present, we are able to separate, detect, characterize,
and quantify metabolites
relevant metabolic
pathways thanks to the rapid development of a range of

and their

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

2

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

FIGURE 1 | Effect of gut microbiota metabolome on organs and tissues.

TABLE 1 | Role of gut microbiota metabolites on health and disease.

Beneﬁcial microbial activities

Beneﬁts

References

Drawbacks

References

SCFAs and vitamin production,
recovery of energy

Nutrients and energy
providing

Putignani et al.,
2015

Lipopolysaccharide
supply, inﬂammation

Obesity and metabolic
syndrome

Krajmalnik-Brown
et al., 2012

Cancer prevention

Louis et al., 2014

Cancer promotion

Louis et al., 2014

Butyrate production, fermentation
of non-digestible ﬁbers

Antimicrobials production(e.g.,
bacteriocins, H2O2, acids etc.),
intestinal pH regulation,
competition for ecological niche

Inhibition of pathogens

Kamada et al.,
2013

Anti-inﬂammatory vs.
pro-inﬂammatory signals
development

Normal
gastrointestinal
immune function

Belkaid and Hand,
2014

Harmful microbial
activities

Toxins production,
inﬂammation

Tissue invasion,
inﬂammation,
disruption of the gut
barrier/homeostasis

Pro-inﬂammatory vs.
anti-inﬂammatory
signals development

Infectious diseases, leaky
gut

Kamada et al., 2013;
Michielan and D’Incà,
2015

IBD, immune disorders

Putignani et al., 2015

Non-digestible carbohydrates
metabolism

Propionate production

Normal gut motility

Flint et al., 2012

Metabolism imbalance

Putignani et al., 2015

IBS, metabolic disease
aggravation

Gluconeogenesis,
cholesterol synthesis
inhibition

De Vadder et al.,
2014

Acetate production

Cholesterol synthesis,
cardiovascular diseases

Krajmalnik-Brown
et al., 2012

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

3

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

including gas chromatography (GC),
analytical platforms,
liquid chromatography (LC), high pressure LC (HPLC), ultra
pressure LC (UPLC), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
(FTIR),
capillary
electrophoresis (CE) coupled to mass spectrometry (MS), and
nuclear and proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(NMR-1H-NMR) (Zheng et al., 2011; Vernocchi et al., 2012).

resonance-FT (ICR-FT),

ion cyclotrone

MS-based metabolomics allows targeted and untargeted
metabolome analysis and it has become an indispensable tool
in metabolome analysis (Milne et al., 2013); moreover, MS
has a broader dynamic range, exhibits a high sensitivity and
selectivity (Zhao and Hartung, 2015), and allows determining
metabolite ﬁngerprints for establishing metabolome libraries,
which facilitate the identiﬁcation of metabolites (Martins-de-
Souza, 2014).

Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry
GC-MS is a combined system, with which thermally stable
and volatile compounds are separated by GC and then
eluting metabolites are detected by electron-impact (EI) mass
spectrometers. GC-MS is considered as the gold standard in
metabolomics (Harrigan and Goodacre, 2003). Even if GC has
several advantages, such as high eﬃciency, reproducibility and
sensitivity, it shows also some drawbacks. In fact, it can only be
performed for volatile compounds, or those that can be made
volatile, or made stable by derivatization (Roessner et al., 2000;
Vernocchi et al., 2012).

are

organic

Volatile

(VOCs)

compounds

important
components of the metabolome (i.e., alcohols, esters, aldehydes,
ketones, SCFAs) and are found in biological samples (Mills
and Walker, 2001). The sample preparation methods consist
of liquid or solid phase extraction (SPE) (Dettmer et al., 2007).
Another rapid and solvent-free sample preparation technique is
headspace-solid phase microextraction (HS-SPME) (Pawliszyn,
1997), for which the diﬀerent types of stationary phases (polar
and non-polar) used as ﬁber coatings are commercially available.
On the other side, to stabilize the metabolites, two stages
of derivatization with diﬀerent kinds of reagents need to be
performed (Roessner et al., 2000). During these processes,
small aliquots of samples are analyzed by split or splitless
mode on GC columns of various polarities, thus obtaining
high chromatographic compound resolution and sensitivity,
even if the resulted chromatograms are complex (i.e., multiple
derivatization products), contain many metabolite peaks, and
need a long run time (longer than 60 min) (Roessner et al., 2000).
Therefore, coupling GC with time-of-ﬂight (TOF)-MS, which
has high scan rates and produces accurate peak deconvolution of
complex samples in faster times, allows improving conventional
GC–MS techniques in the analysis of ultra-complex samples
(Dunn and Ellis, 2005; Dettmer et al., 2007).

Finally, metabolite quantiﬁcation is obtained by external
calibration or response ratio (peak area of metabolite/peak area
of internal standard), while metabolite identiﬁcation is obtained
by matching retention time and mass spectrum of the sample
peak with a pure compound previously analyzed, under identical
instrumental conditions, with the same or diﬀerent instruments

(Fiehn et al., 2000), or by matching the metabolite against
commercial databases (i.e., NIST, WILEY, EPA, NIH).

GC-MS can be used in several ﬁelds,

such as plant
metabolomics, as reported by Stashenko et al. (2004), who used
SPME-GC-MS for sampling the volatile plant metabolites, or
for example, by Akhatou et al. (2016), who combined GC-
MS with multivariate statistical techniques to characterize the
primary metabolome of diﬀerent strawberry cultivars, and to
study the inﬂuence of multiple agronomic conditions. Moreover,
as reported by Currie et al. (2016), GC-MS has proved useful
in microbial metabolomics related to pharmaceutical studies
to analyze the endogenous metabolite levels produced by
Pseudomonas putida in response to six pharmaceuticals; or in
food studies, when used to characterize the microbial metabolite
production in: cheese (Vannini et al., 2008; Pisano et al., 2016),
probiotic food (Patrignani et al., 2009; Tabanelli et al., 2015b),
sourdough (Guerzoni et al., 2007), wine (Vernocchi et al., 2011;
Patrignani et al., 2016), sausages (Tabanelli et al., 2015a), and
ready to eat products (Siroli et al., 2015). Moreover, GC-MS
is used in clinical applications, for example to analyze volatile
compounds (SPME-GC-MS) in urine, blood, feces, hair, breath
and saliva (Mills and Walker, 2001), or to evaluate biomarkers
in several diseases, such as asthma (Gahleitner et al., 2013;
Chang et al., 2015), schizophrenia (Liu et al., 2010), depressive
disorders (Ding et al., 2014), ulcerative colitis (Kohashi et al.,
2014), and neonatal sepsis (Fanos et al., 2014). In the last
years, GC-MS has become one of the most used techniques to
study the modulation of gut microbiota as a result of nutrition
(i.e., diet, nutraceutical food consumption), diseases, drug, and
probiotic administration. Garner et al. (2007) qualitatively and
quantitatively analyzed the fecal metabolome to identify potential
biomarkers in GI diseases; Di Cagno et al. (2011) characterized
the fecal metabolome of celiac children subjected to gluten-
free diet, compared to healthy children; Francavilla et al. (2012)
evaluated the gut metabolome of allergic children; Vitali et al.
analyzed the eﬀects of symbiotic or prebiotic foods and probiotic
foods on the human gut metabolome proﬁle (Vitali et al., 2010,
2012); De Filippis et al. evaluated the eﬀects of the Mediterranean
diet on the gut microbiota metabolome (De Filippis et al., 2015).
Moreover, De Preter (2015) and De Preter et al. (2015)
applied this technique to make a clinical diagnosis of IBD, and
to determine the impact of prebiotics on Chron’s disease. Del
Chierico et al. characterized the gut microbiota of non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease (NAFLD), and obese pediatric patients to
unravel disease signatures (Del Chierico et al., 2016). Finally, De
Angelis et al. analyzed the fecal metabolome of children with
autism and pervasive developmental disorders (De Angelis et al.,
2013).

Liquid Chromatography Mass
Spectrometry
HPLC separation may cover a wide range of compounds’
low. LC is
determination, even though its
probably the most ﬂexible separation method, as it allows
to separate compounds with little eﬀort in few pre-analytical
steps (compared to GC-MS) (Moco et al., 2007). Usually,

resolution is

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

4

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

the metabolite separation obtained with LC is followed by
electrospray ionization (ESI) or, to a lesser extent, by atmospheric
pressure chemical ionization (APCI) (Bakhtiar et al., 2004). The
combination of LC with MS allows to analyze polar, non-polar
and neutral compounds separately in a complex matrix (Smirnov
et al., 2016). This technique diverges from GC-MS for the lower
temperatures of analysis, and it does not require sample volatility,
thus entailing an easier sample preparation (Dunn and Ellis,
2005).

LC/MS is an excellent

technique showing sensitivity,
speciﬁcity, resolving power, and capability to extract additional
information about metabolites from their retention time (RT)
domain (Forcisi et al., 2015).

Sample derivatization is commonly not necessary, although it
can be helpful to improve the chromatographic sensitivity and
resolution (Leavens et al., 2002), or to produce ionisable groups
of metabolites otherwise not detectable by electrospray ionization
(ESI) MS. Metabolite quantiﬁcation is obtained by external
calibration or response ratio, and metabolite identiﬁcation is
more time intensive. Moreover, ESI does not produce molecular
ion fragmentation as it occurs by electron impact MS, so it does
not provide direct metabolite identiﬁcation by ESI mass spectra
libraries are not generally
comparison, as ESI mass spectral
available. Nevertheless, accurate mass measurements can be
obtained by coupling MS/MS using metabolite identiﬁcation
(Lenz et al., 2004). The advent of HPLC and UPLC allowed
to shorten the analyzing time, provided higher resolution,
sensitivity and eﬃciency, and permitted to reduce the quantity
of samples and solvent necessary for the analysis (Smirnov et al.,
2016).

The application of LC/MS allows the identiﬁcation of target
metabolites within a complex sample, not only with the
information about monoisotopic mass, but also providing advice
on the metabolite structure (Villas-Bôas et al., 2005).
LC-MS applications mainly concern the

clinical and
pharmaceutical ﬁelds (Bakhtiar et al., 2004). Nardotto et al.
(2016) used LC/MS/MS systems to investigate patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus treated with an oral dose of racemic
carvedilol, who showed accumulation in plasma. Mueller et al.
applied this technique to measure plasma concentrations of
trimethylamine-N-oxide, betaine and choline in the evaluation
of patients with suspected coronary artery disease (Mueller et al.,
2015).

An example of LC and GC technologies’ combination, is also
given by Chow et al. who studied the fecal metabolome, including
the application of non-targeted metabolomics to separate breast-
fed from formula-fed infants by using GC/MS and LC/MS/MS
analysis to identify the various metabolites undergoing change
(Chow et al., 2014).

Capillary Electrophoresis Mass
Spectrometry
CE may oﬀer high-analyte resolution and detect a wider spectrum
of (polar) compounds compared to HPLC, but it is properly
applicable only to charged analytes (Ramautar et al., 2013).
However, only a few studies on this subject have been published
to date, such as Soga et al. (2003), who separated cationic, anionic
nucleotidis, and CoA metabolites to describe the coverage of

the metabolome. These authors analyzed 1692 metabolites in
bacterial extract (Chow et al., 2014).

types.

sample

Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
FT-IR spectroscopy allows rapid, non-destructive and high-
throughput determination of diﬀerent
In
particular, it can simultaneously detect diﬀerent molecules, such
as lipids and fatty acids (FAs), proteins, peptides, carbohydrates,
polysaccharides, nucleic acids, (Harrigan and Goodacre, 2003;
Dole et al., 2011), but sensitivity and selectivity of this technique
are not high. On the contrary, ICR-FT/MS oﬀers an ultrahigh
mass resolution able to distinguish slight variations in a wide
number of mass signals (Rosselló-Mora et al., 2008), and allowing
to obtain the structural identiﬁcation of new biomarkers (Jansson
et al., 2009). In fact, Jansson et al. (2009) used ICR-FT/MS to
distinguish between the masses of fecal metabolites in Chron’s
disease patients and healthy subjects.

Furthermore, FT-IR is principally useful for the identiﬁcation
of functional groups (Vernocchi et al., 2012). In fact, FT-IR has
been used to assist infrared imaging in the diagnosis of many
diseases, such as Parkinson, cancer, Alzheimer, kidney stone,
arthritis (Dole et al., 2011), diabetes, and early stage insulin
resistance (Chen et al., 2008).

In fact,

Moreover,

they are considered as

it is possible to combine the LC and FT-IR
techniques, as performed by Walker et al. (2014), who identiﬁed
taurine and sulfate conjugated fatty acids in feces of diabetic mice
by coupling ICR-FT/MS and UPLC-MS.
Finally, MS-based metabolomic

techniques oﬀer high
identiﬁcation and
selectivity and sensitivity for metabolites’
quantiﬁcation.
the most
appropriate techniques for the detection of large numbers of
metabolites, and,
in combination with advanced and high-
throughput platforms, they may help decrease the complexity
of metabolite separation (Zheng et al., 2011; Zhao and Hartung,
2015). In particular, for the total screening of the small molecules
in a biological system, MS non-targeted metabolomics is
a powerful tool for the identiﬁcation of metabolite signals
present in spectra (Naz et al., 2014). The identiﬁcation can be
partly completed by matching against metabolite and spectral
databases, such as METLIN (Smith et al., 2005), HMDB (Wishart
et al., 2013), or ChemSpider (Pence and Williams, 2010). To
describe the metabolic pathway of biological systems, it is also
possible to refer to databases such as KEGG (Kanehisa et al.,
2007), or Meta-Cyc (Caspi et al., 2007).

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Spectroscopy
NMR spectroscopy, instead, uses the intramolecular magnetic
ﬁeld around atoms in molecules to change the resonance
frequency, thus allowing access to details of molecules’ electronic
structure and obtaining information about
their dynamics,
reaction state, and chemical environment. Moreover, a minimal
sample preparation is necessary for bioﬂuids, except for feces or
gut luminal content, which require the removal of undigested
material, dead microbes and other particles (Smirnov et al.,
2016). For feces in particular, samples are prepared using
methanol (for lipophilic compounds as lipids, cholate, small

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

5

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

phenolic acids) or water (for aminoacids, glucose, glycerol)
(Jacobs et al., 2008; Lamichhane et al., 2015).

the end-points of metabolic processes
(Nicholson et al., 2005).

in living systems

NMR spectroscopy is mainly useful to determine metabolic
ﬁngerprints leading to the identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of
compounds in a non-targeted large-scale, in a non-destructive
way, and with a high reproducibility (Lenz et al., 2004; Smolinska
et al., 2012).

However, it is a relatively insensitive technique, and can only
detect metabolites in high concentrations. The annotation is
restricted to a limited number of low molecular weight molecules,
and this is the major pitfall of this application (Jansson et al.,
2009; Zhao and Hartung, 2015). Indeed, sensitivity depends on
the natural concentration of the atoms in the matrix and, to
improve sensitivity, long times of analysis, higher magnetic ﬁelds,
and cryogenic probes are needed (Keun et al., 2002).

Another type of NMR spectroscopy is 1H (proton) NMR,
which is unbiased to particular metabolites (Dunn and Ellis,
2005), unlike the other techniques discussed above. The NMR
spectrum (chemical shift) depends on the shielding from
electrons orbiting the nucleus, whereas for 1H-NMR the chemical
shift
is arranged as the diﬀerence between the resonance
frequency of the observed proton and that of a reference proton
in a reference metabolite (tetramethylsilane in solution, set at 0
ppm) (Dunn and Ellis, 2005).

The obtained spectra are complex and contain a wide
number of signals, and frequently pure metabolites can be
added to give a more in-depth clariﬁcation. This technique is
frequently employed in clinical and pharmaceutical research and
applications, in particular in the analysis of bioﬂuids and tissues,
where 1H-NMR is used to detect the modulation of metabolites
in response to cellular stresses (Lindon et al., 2003). This has also
been reported by Bro et al. (2015), who used plasma to determine
breast cancer biomarkers, or by Villaseñor et al. (2014), who
described the global metabolic phenotyping of acute pancreatitis,
and by Dumas et al. (2016), who used this technique to study
metabolic syndrome and fatty liver disease.

Moreover, when there is the need to understand how the
diet or other external stimuli or diseases aﬀect the microbiome
composition (i.e., gut, urine, salive), metabolite detection is
technique. In fact, several
performed using this functional
research studies have been conducted using NMR and 1H-NMR,
for instance: Ndagijimana et al. (2009) described the eﬀects of
symbiotic food on human gut metabolic proﬁle; Martin et al.
(2012) studied the inﬂuence of gut metabolome on health and
diseases; Bjerrum et al. (2015) investigated the gut metabolic
biomarkers characterizing Chron’s disease, ulcerative colitis and
healthy subjects; Zhang et al. (2015) studied how the gut
microbiota metabolome could alleviate obesity in children; Laghi
et al. (2014) studied the antibiotic eﬀect on vaginal microbiome;
and Holmes et al. (2008) analyzed urine samples to discriminate
metabolites across populations in order to identify major risk
factors for coronary heart disease and stroke.

Hence, MS and 1H-NMR are by far the most frequently
applied and the most powerful techniques in metabolomics
(Collino et al., 2012). Recent advances in NMR and MS
have allowed to evaluate at
the same time thousands of
related to the “metabolome,” and to deﬁne
metabolites

In particular, 1H-NMR is currently the most used analytical
technique for metabolite proﬁling compared to MS, while the
combination of 1H-NMR and MS technologies would result in a
better coverage of the complete metabolome (Bjerrum et al., 2015;
De Preter, 2015; Wissenbach et al., 2016). In fact, by coupling
metabolite separation technologies with spectrometry and
spectroscopy, it is possible to reach a multidimensional approach
leading to the structural identiﬁcation of new metabolites (Chen
et al., 2008).

the structural

However, the challenge for metabolomics is not only to
discover unknown chemical structures, but also to generate
tissue, experimental
(i.e., sample origin,
meta-information,
conditions) in an accessible format (Weckwerth and Morgenthal,
2005). Thus,
identiﬁcation of metabolites as
potential biomarkers associated with diseases will be a major
task of biological
interpretation (Nassar and Talaat, 2004).
In fact, small molecule metabolites are able to provide new
mechanistic information on novel disease biomarkers, which
is extremely important, given the paucity of existing markers.
Moreover, metabolomics can induce signiﬁcant progress in
the identiﬁcation of metabolomic ﬁngerprints (which could
be used as crucial diagnostic biomarkers) by producing a
comprehensive map of metabolic pathway regulations, which
represent the downstream expression of genome, transcriptome,
and proteome. This comprehensive map may help deﬁne the
phenotype of an organism at a speciﬁc time (Zhang et al.,
2012). Therefore, the analysis of metabolic diﬀerences between
unperturbed and perturbed pathways could provide insights on
the underlying disease prognosis and diagnosis (Zhang et al.,
2012; Figure 2).

Data Analysis
Hence, statistic and bioinformatic techniques are used for
data mining complex metabolic proﬁles containing information
related to genetics, environmental
factors, gut microbiota
activity,
lifestyle, and eating habits. These strategies support
the complicated process of identifying new biomarkers, which
could indicate the individual response to speciﬁc physiological
factors and/or nutritional interventions, and manage the relevant
biological outcomes (Moco et al., 2013).

The application of biostatistics and mathematical approach
has a key role in the extraction of biologically meaningful
information from wide datasets. In computational analysis, the
problems derive from a small batch of samples in contrast
with the high number of detected metabolites, and in the
consequent high dimensionality of the data matrix (Weckwerth
and Morgenthal, 2005). Therefore, diﬀerent statistical tools can
be employed to discriminate among the samples and within the
sample set (Worley and Powers, 2012).

In particular, diverse univariate and multivariate methods can
be used as parametric (i.e., Student t-test, multivariate linear
regression) or non-parametric (i.e., Mann-Whitney, Kruskal-
Wallis) tests. Moreover, these methods can be divided into
unsupervised techniques (i.e., principal component analysis
(PCA), hierarchical cluster analysis), and supervised techniques

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

6

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

FIGURE 2 | Metabolomic application in human health to improve clinical and nutritional settings.

(i.e., linear discriminant analysis, k-nearest neighbor). Among
the supervised multivariate techniques, the partial least squares
discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) has proved to be a particularly
useful tool, in the presence of an irresolute sample separation
obtained from PCA as it oﬀers the possibility to use a priori
information based on replicates (Raamsdonk et al., 2001;
Gromski et al., 2015). PLS-DA is also used for its ability to identify
potential biomarkers.

Moreover, statistical analyses of multivariate datasets allow
to visualize the biological and molecular consistency. This
consistency is based on the correlated functioning of metabolites
in response to external conditions. Finally, correlation networks
represent ﬁngerprints of biochemical
like the
regulation of enzyme activity, and the interplay of anabolism and
catabolism between the host and gut microbes (Weckwerth and
Morgenthal, 2005).

interactions,

METABOLITES ASSOCIATED WITH
MICROBIAL METABOLISM OR
MICROBIAL–HOST COMETABOLISM

The gut microbiota operates in a combined way with the
host through the metabolic communication enacted by the

diﬀerent bacterial genera and species responsible for metabolite
production (Table 2).

in the large intestine,

Bacterial Metabolism
SCFAs
Several substances present
including
indigestible oligosaccharides, dietary plant polysaccharides or
ﬁbers, non-digested proteins and intestinal mucin are fermented
by the microbiota populations to produce SCFAs (Arora and
Sharma, 2011). In particular, clostridial clusters IV, XIVa (e.g.,
Eubacterium, Roseburia, Faecalibacterium, and Coprococcus spp.)
and Lactobacillus belonging to the phylum Firmicutes and the
groups of Actinobacteria (Biﬁdobacterium spp.) are the main
bacteria playing a central role in SCFAs metabolism (Nicholson
et al., 2012; van Zanten et al., 2014).

Acetate is an important SCFA present in the colon, which
could have a trophic eﬀect on the colonic epithelium not only
by local action, but also by raising the mucosal blood ﬂux.
Moreover, after transport to the portal circulation across the
colonic mucosa, acetate passes through the liver and is regained
in peripheral blood. Acetate’s eﬀect at the ileal level exceeds that
of mixed SCFA (Scheppach, 1994). However, acetate is adsorbed
by tissues involved in the rise of cholesterol synthesis (Scheppach
et al., 1991). On the other side, propionate inhibits cholesterol

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

7

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

TABLE 2 | Metabolites associated with microbial metabolism or microbial–host cometabolism.

Metabolites

Bacteria

Biological functions

References

BACTERIAL METABOLISM

SCFAs: acetate, propionate, butyrate;
branched CFAs: iso-butyrate, valerate
and iso-valerate

Clostridial clusters IV and XIVa
Lactobacillus, Eubacterium,
Roseburia, Faecalibacterium,
Coprococcus

Increasing cholesterol synthesis
(acetate); gluconeogenesis
(propionate); energy source for
colonocytes (butyrate); cholesterol
synthesis inhibition; linked to:
cardiovascular disease, ulcerative
colitis, Crohn’s disease,
antibiotic-associated diarrhea,
obesity, metabolic syndrome, bowel
disorders and cancer

Harig et al., 1989; Scheppach et al.,
1991; Scheppach, 1994; Sabatino
et al., 2005; Binder, 2010; Donohoe
et al., 2011; Fukuda et al., 2011;
Nicholson et al., 2012; Chambers
et al., 2015

Clostridium difﬁcile, Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii, Biﬁdobacterium,
Subdoligranulum, Lactobacillus

Related to hypertension and obesity,
colorectal cancer, autism in children in
humans and diabetes in a rat model

Lord and Bralley, 2008; Calvani et al.,
2010; Qiu et al., 2010; Zhao et al.,
2010; Zheng et al., 2011; Nicholson
et al., 2012

Organic acids: benzoate, hippurate,
phenylacetate, phenylpropionate,
hydroxybenzoate,
hydroxyphenylacetate,
hydroxyphenylpropionate
3,4-dihydroxyphenylpropionat and
D-lactate

Vitamins: vitamin B9, vitamin B2,
vitamin B12, niacin, pyridoxine,
vitamin K, vitamin B1, vitamin B5,
vitamin B8

BACTERIAL TRANSFORMED COMPOUNDS

Bile salts: cholate, hyocholate,
deoxycholate, chenodeoxycholate,
α-muricholate, β-muricholate,
ω-muricholate, taurocholate,
glycocholate, taurochenoxycholate,
glycochenodeoxycholate,
taurocholate, tauro–α–muricholate,
tauro–β–muricholate, lithocholate,
ursodeoxycholate, hyodeoxycholate,
glycodeoxylcholate, taurohyocholate,
taurodeoxylcholate

Polyphenol: Hydroxycinnamic acids
and ﬂavonoids

Biﬁdobacterium biﬁdum,
Biﬁdobacterium longum subsp.
infantis, Biﬁdobacterium breve, B.
longum subsp. longum
Biﬁdobacterium adolescentis,
commensal Lactobacilli, Bacillus
subtilis Escherichia coli and
anaerobes, Bacteroidetes,
Fusobacteria, Proteobacteria,
Actinobacteria

Bacteroides, Clostridium,
Lactobacillus, Biﬁdobacterium,
Enterobacter, Eubacterium,
Escherichia

Lipids: glycerol

Biﬁdobacterium, Roseburia,
Lactobacillus, Klebsiella,
Enterobacter, Citrobacter, Clostridium

Lactobacillus, Biﬁdobacterium

Secondary metabolites production

Deguchi et al., 1985; Noda et al.,
1994; Roth et al., 1996; Bacher et al.,
2000; Perkins and Pero, 2002;
Stanton et al., 2005; Pompei et al.,
2007; Smith et al., 2007; Rossi and
Amaretti, 2010; Magnúúsdóóttir,
et al., 2015

Lis et al., 1976; Russell and Setchell,
1992; Groh et al., 1993; Ridlon et al.,
2006; Dawson et al., 2009; Suhre
et al., 2010; Nicholson et al., 2012

Couteau et al., 2001; Clifford, 2004;
Manach et al., 2004; Taverniti and
Guglielmetti, 2012; Amaretti et al.,
2015; Marín et al., 2015; Raimondi
et al., 2015

Holmes et al., 2011; Nicholson et al.,
2012

Cellular metabolism

Absorption of dietary fats and
lipid-soluble vitamins, facilitate lipid
assimilation, maintain gut barrier
function, regulate triglycerides,
cholesterol and glucose by endocrine
functions and energy homeostasis.
Secondary bile salts linked to colon
cancer.

Intestinal permeability, glucose
homeostasis, promotion of chronic
systemic inﬂammation by LPS;
hyperinsulinemia improvement by
conjugated FAs, immune system
enhancement and lipoprotein proﬁles
alteration.

ammonia production by deamination,
amines production by
decarboxylation

Amino Acids

Colonic bacteria, Clostridium,
Peptostreptococcus anaerobius

Moss et al., 1970; Clinton et al., 1988;
Macfarlane and Macfarlane, 1995

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

8

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

synthesis (Scheppach, 1994; Wong et al., 2006). In fact, substrates
that can decrease the acetate/propionate ratio may diminish
serum lipids and consequently decrease the risk of cardiovascular
disease (Wong et al., 2006). Butyrate represents the major energy
source for colonocytes and has been studied for its role in
nourishing the colonic mucosa and preventing colon cancer by
promoting cell diﬀerentiation, cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis
of transformed colonocytes (Scheppach, 1994; Velázquez et al.,
1997; Walton et al., 2013).

Furthermore, butyrate improves insulin sensitivity and raises
energy consumption in obese mice submitted to dietary regimen
(Gao et al., 2009), and butyrate irrigation (enema) improves
inﬂammation in diversion colitis (Scheppach et al., 1992; Wong
et al., 2006). Butyrate and propionate, but not acetate, induce
the production of gut hormones and reduce food intake (Lin
et al., 2012). The treatment with acetate induces a marked
reduction in lipid accumulation in the adipose tissue, protects
against accumulation of fat in the liver, and improves glucose
tolerance (Yamashita et al., 2007). In obese subjects, propionate
signiﬁcantly increases the release of post-prandial plasma peptide
YY and glucagon-like peptide-1 from colonic cells, and reduces
energy intake (Chambers et al., 2015). Chambers et al. (2015)
found that inulin-propionate ester administrated to overweight
adults signiﬁcantly reduced weight gain, intra-abdominal adipose
tissue distribution, and intrahepatocellular lipid content, and
improved insulin resistance in the inulin control group.

Furthermore, other clinical studies demonstrated that the
administration of SCFAs has a positive eﬀect on the treatment
of ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, and antibiotic-associated
diarrhea and obesity, metabolic syndrome, bowel disorders, and
cancer (Harig et al., 1989; Sabatino et al., 2005; Binder, 2010;
Donohoe et al., 2011; Fukuda et al., 2011; Chambers et al.,
2015). The degradation of proteins and amino acids by gut
microbes also forms small amounts of branched chain FAs (iso-
butyrate, valerate and iso-valerate) (Macfarlane and Gibson,
2004). SCFAs can be detected by using both the GC-MS and
1H-NMR spectroscopy techniques.

Organic Acids
Several organic acids result from bacterial metabolism of dietary
polyphenols or unassimilated AAs or carbohydrates (Lord
and Bralley, 2008). High levels of organic acids in urines are
associated with microbial overgrowth (Lord and Bralley, 2008).
In particular, the hyperproduction of organic acids is associated
with the overgrowth of Clostridium diﬃcile, Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii, Biﬁdobacterium spp.,
Subdoligranulum spp.,
Lactobacillus (Lord and Bralley, 2008; Nicholson et al., 2012).

Amongst organic acids, urinary hippuric acid may be a
biomarker of hypertension and obesity in humans, while
urinary 4-hydroxyphenylacetate and phenylacetate are potential
biomarkers of colorectal cancer (Nicholson et al., 2012).

Lactic acid is the main product in the lactic acid bacteria
(LAB) fermentation process. LAB are Gram+ and constitute a
heterogeneous group of microorganisms that can also produce
proteinaceous antimicrobial molecules, known as bacteriocins,
that can help the producer microorganism to outcompete other
bacterial species (Alvarez-Sieiro et al., 2016). Moreover, lactic

acid represents a secondary metabolite that can be converted by
clostridial cluster XIVa species into butyrate, or by clostridial
cluster IX into propionate (Louis et al., 2007), thus inducing
beneﬁts by inhibiting both the propagation of harmful bacteria,
and the production of putrefactive intestinal products. Lactic acid
also participates in the intestinal peristalsis regulation (Sugawara
et al., 2016). Furthermore, lactic acid is correlated to healthy
vaginal microbiota, in fact it decreases in bacterial vaginosis, and
it’s produced by microbial species such as Lactobacillus crispatus
and Lactobacillus jensenii (Vitali et al., 2007, 2015; Cruciani
et al., 2015; Srinivasan et al., 2015). The detection of organic
acids is most commonly obtained using LC-MS and 1H-NMR
spectroscopy platforms.

are

Vitamins
Vitamins
for
indispensable micronutrients,
biochemical reactions in all organisms. Humans are unable
to synthesize most vitamins, hence, most of them need to
be obtained exogenously, and some are produced by the gut
microbiota (Stanton et al., 2005; Rossi and Amaretti, 2010).

essential

Recently, Magnúsdóttir et al. (2015), using the PubSEED
platform, assessed the genomes of 256 human gut bacteria
involved in the biosynthesis of eight B-vitamins: biotin, folate,
cobalamin, niacin, pantothenate, riboﬂavin, pyridoxine and
thiamin. In particular, the authors demonstrated that each of the
reported vitamins was produced by 40–65% of the 256 human gut
microbes (Magnúsdóttir et al., 2015). Moreover, the absorption of
some vitamins occurs in the small intestine after conjugation of
vitamins with molecules (intrinsic factors) which are produced in
the stomach. Since some vitamins are synthetized by the colonic
microbiota, they are not adsorbed by the colon but are excreted
in feces (Wilson, 2005).

Biﬁdobacteria strains have been recognized to be the strongest
vitamin producers (Deguchi et al., 1985; Noda et al., 1994;
Pompei et al., 2007), and in particular Biﬁdobacteria and
Lactobacilli have been proposed as possible folate producers
(Pompei et al., 2007; Kleerebezem and Vaughan, 2009). Folate
(vitamin B9) is involved in various essential metabolic functions,
such as DNA replication, repair and methylation, and synthesis
of nucleotides, vitamins and certain AAs (LeBlanc et al., 2013).
Folate is contained in leaf vegetables, cereals and liver.

The biosynthesis of thiamin (vitamin B1) consists of two
pathways that unite in the ﬁnal step of thiamin monophosphate
production. Although thiamin diphosphate is the functional
version of thiamin, all phyla (in particular Bacteroidetes and
Fusobacteria), except Firmicutes are producers of
thiamin
monophosphate (Magnúsdóttir et al., 2015). Vitamin B1 is
contained in pork meat, oatmeal, brown rice, vegetables,
potatoes, liver, and eggs.

Biotin (vitamin B8) can be synthesized de novo from
two pimeloyl precursors, namely malonyl-ACP and pimelate.
Fusobacteria, Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria synthetize biotin
by diﬀerent biochemical pathways, while Actinobacteria genomes
lack the essential role of biotin biosynthesis (Magnúsdóttir et al.,
2015). Vitamin B8 is contained in raw egg yolk, liver, peanuts and
green leafy vegetables.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

9

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

Riboﬂavin (vitamin B2) plays an essential role in cellular
metabolism, being the precursor of
the coenzymes ﬂavin
mononucleotide (FMN) and ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)
(Li et al., 2014). Microbial riboﬂavin biosynthesis has been
extensively described in Bacillus subtilis (Perkins and Pero, 2002)
and Escherichia coli (Bacher et al., 1996, 2000). Vitamin B2 is
contained in dairy products, bananas, popcorn, green beans and
asparagus.

Cobalamin (vitamin B12) is the only vitamin that is exclusively
produced by microorganisms, particularly by anaerobes (Roth
et al., 1996; Martens et al., 2002; Smith et al., 2007).

Besides, the production of niacin and pyridoxine appears to be
generated by Lactobacilli used in yogurt, cheese, and fermented
foods (Shahani and Chandan, 1979; Alm, 1982).

Pantothenate (vitamin B5) is a coenzyme A (CoA) precursor
and it can be synthesized de novo from 2-dihydropantoate and b-
alanine. Bacteroidetes and several species of Proteobacteria and
Actinobacteria have been demonstrated to be CoA producers
(Magnúsdóttir et al., 2015). This vitamin is also contained in
meat, broccoli, avocado. Detection of this vitamin is mostly
obtained using LC-MS and 1H-NMR spectroscopy platforms.

speciﬁc protein glutamyl

Furthermore, Vitamin K operates as a co-factor for the
to γ-
enzymatic conversion of
carboxyglutamyl residues. The daily requirement of vitamin
K is satisﬁed by dietary intake of phylloquinone and by the
production of polyisoprenyl-containing compounds synthesized
by the human gut microbiota (Suttie, 1995; Davidson et al., 1998;
Martens et al., 2002). Green leafy vegetables such as spinach, egg
yolks, and liver contain vitamin K.

Bacterial-Transformed Compounds
Bile Salts
The metabolism of bile salts is a well-known and basic skill of the
gut microbiota metabolism, particularly associated to the genera
of Bacteroides, Clostridium, Lactobacillus, Biﬁdobacterium,
Enterobacter, Eubacterium, and Escherichia (Ridlon et al., 2006;
Nicholson et al., 2012). Bacteria also contribute to the recovery
of bile salts escaping from active transport in the distal ileum
(Begley et al., 2006). The gut microbiota chemically modiﬁes
bile acids through a wide range of reactions, resulting in the
formation of secondary and tertiary bile acids (Bortolini et al.,
1997). Bile salts contribute to the absorption of dietary fats and
lipid-soluble vitamins,
facilitate lipid assimilation, maintain
gut barrier function and regulate triglycerides, cholesterol and
glucose by endocrine functions and energy homeostasis (Groh
et al., 1993; Ridlon et al., 2006; Dawson et al., 2009).

However, bacterial bile salt hydrolysis has recently been
considered as a risk factor for the development of colon cancer
because it causes the formation of harmful secondary bile salts
after an initial deconjugation step (De Boever et al., 2000). The
secondary free bile acids can diﬀuse through the lipid bilayer
of the membrane, thus being much more inhibitory for the
cells than the conjugated forms (Mayo and van Sinderen, 2010).
De Boever et al. (2000) have speculated a plausible mechanism
for the protective properties of probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri,
which could precipitate the deconjugated bile salts by a physical
binding, making the harmful bile salts less bioavailable. Bile

salts have antimicrobial activity on gut microbes with inhibitory
eﬀects on Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria microbial population
(Islam et al., 2011), but high levels of these biomarkers in serum
and urine are correlated with liver diseases (Bathena et al., 2015).
The LC-MS and 1H-NMR spectroscopy platforms are the main
techniques used to detect bile acids.

Polyphenols
Polyphenols are considerably bioactive components in the diet
(Manach et al., 2004). Hydroxycinnamic acids and ﬂavonoids are
the two major classes of polyphenols. Fruits commonly contain
caﬀeic acid, representing the most abundant hydroxycinnamic
acid (Cliﬀord, 2004). In particular,
the chemically derived
chlorogenic acid is commonly present in apples, berries and
kiwifruit, in vegetables such as potatoes (Manach et al., 2004) and,
in high concentrations, in coﬀee (Cliﬀord, 2004).

Recent studies have demonstrated that gut bacteria, including
strains of Lactobacillus and Biﬁdobacterium, can metabolize
chlorogenic acid to form caﬀeic acid and quinic acid (Couteau
et al., 2001; Taverniti and Guglielmetti, 2012; Amaretti et al.,
2015; Marín et al., 2015; Raimondi et al., 2015), while caﬀeic
acid is further metabolized to form the µ-coumaric acid
(3-hydroxycinnamic acid), 3-hydroxylphenylacetic acid and
dihydroxyphenylpropionic acid (Konishi and Kobayashi, 2004).
The 3,4- dihydroxyphenylacetic acid also derives from the
colonic catabolism of rutin (Jaganath et al., 2009). Conversely,
phenolic acid metabolites of rutin are not produced in germ-free
mice, implying that ring-ﬁssion products are generated only by
intestinal bacteria (Selma et al., 2009; Parkar et al., 2013). The
polyphenol detection is performed using LC-MS, GC-MS, and
1H-NMR spectroscopy platforms.

Lipids
Signiﬁcant amounts of glycerol derive from daily dietary
intake and/or from in situ microbial production, or from
enterocyte desquamation. Some gut bacteria may anaerobically
reduce glycerol to 1,3-propanediol, with the production of
the intermediate 3-hydroxypropanal. The accumulation of this
metabolite leads to the formation of reuterin, which is known
for its antimicrobial properties (De Weirdt et al., 2010). Lipids
are also involved in intestinal permeability, in the regulation
of glucose homeostasis via intestine-brain-liver-neural axis, in
the promotion of chronic systemic inﬂammation by LPS, in
the improvement of hyperinsulinemia by conjugated fatty acids
(FAs), in the enhancement of the immune system, and in the
alteration of lipoprotein proﬁles. Biﬁdobacterium, Roseburia,
Lactobacillus, Klebsiella, Enterobacter, Citrobacter, Clostridium
genera have been recognized as the main actors in lipid
metabolism (Nicholson et al., 2012). The platform constituted of
LC-MS, GC-MS, and 1H-NMR spectroscopy is mainly used to
perform lipid detection.

Amino Acids
The bacterial fermentation of proteins, occurring in the distal
colon, leads to AAs fermentation products having some relevance
for health (Macfarlane and Macfarlane, 1995). For instance,
AAs deamination produces ammonia, whereas decarboxylation

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

10

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

produces amines, which may have toxicological eﬀects (Silla
Santos, 1996). High ammonia concentrations have been found
to act as tumor promoters (Clinton et al., 1988). Bacterial
degradation of AAs cysteine and methionine leads to the
formation of H2S, which is toxic and has also been reported to
be responsible for inhibition of butyrate oxidation in colonocytes
(Roediger et al., 1993). Furthermore, the anaerobic fermentation
of
the aromatic AAs tyrosine and tryptophan by colonic
bacteria produces phenols and indoles respectively, which are
eventually excreted in the urine (Macfarlane and Macfarlane,
1997). Phenols, such as p-cresol, have been proposed to act as
procarcinogens in colon cancer (Bone et al., 1976). Interestingly,
gut bacterial production of p-cresol is signiﬁcantly related to
autism (Clayton, 2012; De Angelis et al., 2013), and C. diﬃcile
appears to be a signiﬁcant p-cresol producer (Sivsammye and
Sims, 1990).

Finally, certain species of Clostridium (Moss et al., 1970) and
Peptostreptococcus anaerobius (Lambert and Moss, 1980) can
convert phenylalanine to benzoic acid in a multistep process
with phenylpropionic acid (toxic metabolic product) acting
as intermediate (Macfarlane and Macfarlane, 1997; Smith and
Macfarlane, 1997). The AAs are mainly detected using LC-
MS and 1H-NMR spectroscopy techniques, and also using
FT-ICR-MS.

BIOLOGICAL ACTION OF THE GUT
MICROBIOTA IN HEALTHY AND DISEASED
SUBJECTS

In recent years, growing attention has been targeted to the role
of the gut microbiota in the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal
(GI) diseases (Lozupone et al., 2012). The alteration of the
interplay between host and microbes at the gut level stimulates
perturbation of the homeostasis and leads to the development of
disorders.

The microbial ecosystem undergoes changes when the
equilibrium is broken, which leads to the modiﬁcation of the
bacterial metabolic activity, and/or to transfers in the distribution
of local bacterial communities. In fact, the phylotype complexity
regulates the equilibrium between pathogenic and commensal
taxa at the GI interface (Prakash et al., 2011).

(i.e.,

[CF]),

inﬂammatory

The intestinal gut dysbiosis is associated with a plethora
of children and adult diseases, including genetic (i.e., cystic
bowel
ﬁbrosis
diseases and syndrome [IBDs, IBS], Chron’s [CD], ulcerative
colitis [UC], and celiac disease), metabolic (i.e., diabetes,
obesity and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease [NAFLD]), and
allergic (i.e., atopic dermatitis, food allergies) disorders (Del
Chierico et al., 2012), and neuropathologies (i.e., autism)
(Figure 2).

inﬂammatory

Indeed, metabolomics is an approach allowing to perform a
careful diagnosis of diseases, since metabolite proﬁles have a high
resolution power, which enable to separate the groups based on
microbial community proﬁles (Dicksved et al., 2008). Moreover,
metabolites represent the terminal enzymatic process signature
occurring in the gut, and the molecules within the pathways

range allow to distinguish healthy from diseased subjects, as well
as among disease phenotypes (Jansson et al., 2009; Table 3).

Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease/Inﬂammatory
Bowel Syndrome (IBD/IBS)
As concerns inﬂammatory diseases at GI tract, it is well known
that the microbiota results to be abnormal both in IBD and
IBS, showing decreased levels of Actinobacteria and Firmicutes,
and high levels of Proteobacteria compared to healthy subjects
(Kinross et al., 2011; Carroll et al., 2012; Mukhopadhya et al.,
2012; De Preter et al., 2013).

Irregular microbial fermentation leads to a high production
of hydrogen (in IBS), indole, phenols and others (Kumar et al.,
2010). In fact, bacteria release volatile organic compounds
(VOCs), determined by SPME-GC-MS, as by-products of
metabolism. Hence, the rising acceptance of the gut microbiota
involvement in the pathogenesis of IBD has led to the use of fecal
matrix as a sample to determine metabolite proﬁling (Walton
et al., 2013). Indeed, speciﬁc microbial VOCs proﬁles can provide
speciﬁc biomarker candidates for diagnostic purposes (Schöller
et al., 1997; Lechner and Rieder, 2007; Bunge et al., 2008).

Walton et al. (2013) observed diﬀerences among patient
categories (IBD, UC, and CD) based on compounds detected in
fecal samples, such as SCFAs and their corresponding alcohols,
esters, and molecules, such as indoles and phenols, acetone and
sulfur compounds.

The concentrations of propanoic and butanoic acids, revealed
by using GC-MS, represent a source of energy aﬀecting colonic
mucosal growth, and these concentrations were found to be
higher in CD subjects, compared to healthy controls (Best and
Laposata, 2003), while acids such as oleic, stearic, palmitic,
linoleic and arachidonic were higher in the ileum of CD patients
(Jansson et al., 2009). Ahmed et al. observed an increase of
esters in diarrhea predominant IBS patients using the SPME-GC-
MS technique (Ahmed et al., 2013). On the other side, Walton
et al. (2013) detected high levels of indole, phenol and p-cresol,
generally considered to be toxic for the gut, in CD and UC groups
compared to controls.

Moreover, Jansson et al. (2009), using FT-ICR-MS, detected
several masses related to metabolites within the tyrosine
metabolic pathway, which diﬀerentiated CD from healthy
controls. In particular, dopaquinone (a dopa oxidation product
and intermediate in the melanin formation from tyrosine)
was signiﬁcantly elevated in CD patients compared to healthy
subjects. The authors also indicated that
tryptophan and
phenyalanine were related to the ileum CD phenotype. It was
also observed, using 1H-NMR spectroscopy, that AAs in CD
patients with active disease showed a diﬀerent proﬁle (i.e.,
alanine, isoleucine, leucine, and lysine) compared to CD patients
in remission (Marchesi et al., 2007). Furthermore, metabolites
related to bile acids pathways (i.e., glycocholate) were found in
CD patients in remission (Jansson et al., 2009).

Other studies (Marchesi et al., 2007; Bjerrum et al., 2015;
De Preter, 2015; De Preter et al., 2015) using 1H-NMR and
GC-MS showed a depletion of bacterial products, such as
SCFAs, branched chain FAs, dimethylamine and trimethylamine,

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

11

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

Angelisetal.,2013;Hsiaoetal.,2013
Kidd,2002;Oresicetal.,2008;De

SPME-GC-MS
LC-MS;GC-MS;

ethylsulfate
pathways,indolepyruvate,p-cresoland
tryptophan–nicotinicacid,sulfurmetabolic

Biﬁdobacterium
Sutterellaceae,Enterobacteriaceae,
Bacteroidetes,Alistipes,Akkermansia,
Lachnospiraceae,Eubacteriaceae,
Faecalibacterium,Ruminococcus,Clostridium,

FecesSerum

Neuropathology

Francavillaetal.,2012

GC-MS;NMR

acidandthreonine
SCFAs(i.e.,butyricandaceticacid),lactic

Bacteroides,Clostridia
Biﬁdobacteria,LacticAcidBacteria(LAB),

Feces

Foodallergies

pyruvate
4-Methyl-2-hexanone,ethylacetateand
choline,lactate,methylamine,non-anal,
isoleucine,asparagine,valine,creatinine),
methionine,histidine,andtryptophan,
and1-propanol,AAs(i.e.,proline,
phenylacetylglycine,1-octen-3-ol,ethanol
meta-[hydroxyphenyl]propionicacid,and
3-hydroxybutyricacid,indoxylsulfate,
acetoacetate,glucoseand

2-butanoate
4-Methyl-2-pentanone,1-butanoland
methylpentanoate,methylacetate),
ethanol,esters(i.e.,ethylpropionate,

2014
Calabròetal.,2014;Francavillaetal.,
Canietal.,2008;DiCagnoetal.,2011;

GC-TOF-MS;NMR
Breathgasanalyzer;

Shighella,Klebsiella
Bacteroides,Staphylococcus,Salmonella,
Lactobacillus,Enterococcus,Biﬁdobacteria,

Urine
FecesSerum

CeliacDisease

2016
Ramanetal.,2013;DelChiericoetal.,

SPME-GC-MS

Lachanospiraceae
Bacteroidesfragilis,Sutterella,
Oscillospira,Rickenellaceae,Parabacteroides,

(NAFLD)
FattyLiverDisease
Non-alcoholic

Feces

etal.,2012;Schippaetal.,2013
2010;Montuschietal.,2012;Scalan
Wangetal.,2006;Robroeksetal.,

1H-NMR;GC-TOF-MS

dimethylsulﬁdeandacetone
methanol,acetate,2-propanol,lactate,
N-methyl-2-methylpropylamineethanol,
C5–C16hydrocarbonsand

spp.
Eubacteriumbiforme,Ecoli,Bifodobacterium
prausnitzii,Eubacteriumlimnosum,
XIVaandIV,Clostridiumacetobutylicum,F.
Pseudomonasaeruginosa,Clostridiumclusters

condensate
Breath

Cysticﬁbrosis(CF)

2016
2013;Zhangetal.,2015;Pauletal.,
Veselkovetal.,2009;Respondeketal.,

1H-NMR;LC-ESI-Q-TOF

2015;DePreteretal.,2015
2013;Bjerrumetal.,2015;DePreter,
Stephensetal.,2013;Waltonetal.,
Kumaretal.,2010;Ahmedetal.,2013;
etal.,2007;Janssonetal.,2009;
BestandLaposata,2003;Marchesi

FT-ICR-MS
analyzer;1H-NMR;
SPME-GC-MS;Breathgas

acid)
acid),secondarybileacids(i.e.,lithocholic
bileacids(i.e.,cholic,chenodeoxycholic
phenylacetylglycine,FFA,BCAA,primary
hippurate,4-hydroxylphenylaceticacid,

cadaverineandtaurine
bileacid(i.e.,glycocholate);UC:
phenylalanine,isoleucine,leucine,lysisne,
tyrosine,dopamine,tryptophan,
acids,phenolandp-cresol,hippurate;CD:
compounds,propanoicandbutanoic
esters,indoles,phenols,acetone,sulfur
IBS:hydrogenandesters;IBD:alcohols,

References

Platforms

Correlatedmetabolites

Correlatedmicrobes

Bioﬂuids

Disease

TABLE3|Correlatedmicrobesandmetabolitestodiseasesandtherelativemetabolomicplatforms.

Proteobacteria(Escherichiacoli)
prausnitzii,ClostridiumclustersXIVaandIV),
Actinobacteria,Firmicutes(Faecalibacterium

FecesUrine

IBD/IBS

Bacteroidetes,Biﬁdobacteriumspp.
Firmicutes(Clostridiumspp),Proteobacteria,

UrineSerum

Obesity

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

12

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

the
and high levels of AAs, suggesting a breakdown of
normal bacterial ecology that induces dysbiosis, as a cause
or a consequence of
the disease in IBD. Le Gall et al.
(2011), using Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE),
discriminated UC patients from controls, and also found a
correlation between the gut microbiota composition and the
metabolite composition (high levels of cadaverine and taurine).
Besides, UC patients with high levels of AAs showed low fecal
concentrations of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and therefore a
small amount of butyric acid, since this bacteria is an SCFA
producer (De Preter et al., 2015).

The correction of some microbial fermentations by antibiotics
or diet could improve symptoms and abnormal fermentation,
which, in some IBS cases, is believed to underlie food intolerances
(Nanda et al., 1989). Furthermore, using NMR spectroscopy
analysis of urine, it is possible to discriminate IBD patients from
controls based on metabolite content of hippurate (Stephens
et al., 2013). The levels of hippurate were found to be
lower in IBD patients compared to controls, suggesting that
hippurate is a biomarker of IBD. In particular, hippurate or N-
benzoylglycine is a mammalian-microbial co-metabolite deriving
from the microbial fermentation of dietary aromatic compounds
(polyphenols, purines, or aromatic AAs) to benzoic acid, further
conjugated to glycine in the liver (Williams et al., 2010).

Obesity
There is evidence that obese and healthy children (HC) show
a diﬀerent gut microbiota proﬁle. Several mechanisms are
involved in the energy metabolism regulation and represent
the link between the gut microbiota and the metabolic disease
pathophysiology, such as energy harvesting from the diet, fat
storage regulation, and energy homeostasis of peptide synthesis
(Cani and Delzenne, 2009; Krajmalnik-Brown et al., 2012).

In a study on mouse models, Zhang et al. (2011), using
LC-ESI-Q-TOF/NMR, found in urine increased excretion of
hippurate, 4-hydroxylphenylacetic acid and phenylacetylglycine,
and decreased excretion of acetate and lactate, related to body
weight gain and to an alteration of gut microbial changes
(Veselkov et al., 2009). Moreover, Paul et al. (2016) identiﬁed,
1H-NMR metabolomics, a maternal
with the support of
metabolic signature that may be related to programming
oﬀspring obesity risk in rats. In particular, pregnant rats showed
high levels of circulating ketone bodies and free FA (FFA),
especially associated with gestational diabetes (Catalano, 2010).
The branched chains AA (BCAA) have also found to be related to
increased insulin resistance (Scholtens et al., 2014). In humans,
FFA are transferred through the placenta from mother to child
and are used for lipogenesis. FFA, together with the circulating
ketons, may play an important role in the early deposition
of excess of body fats in oﬀspring. The production of these
molecules in serum metabolome is normalized when it
is
associated to diet enriched with oligrofructosaccharides (FOS)
and to gut microbiota modulation (Paul et al., 2016). Respondek
et al. (2013) studied the eﬀects of FOS on the composition of
the fecal microbiota and the metabolic parameters in animal
models of diet-induced obesity (Respondek et al., 2013). The
authors ﬁrstly found that the strains particularly stimulated

by FOS were Clostridium coccoides, Ruminococcus torques, and
Dorea longicatena, and the fecal metabolites modulated by
the supplementation, analyzed by using LC-ESI-TOF-MS, were
primary bile acids (i.e., cholic and chenodeoxycholic acid) and
secondary bile acids (i.e., lithocholic acid).

Cystic Fibrosis (CF)
Regarding CF disease, the majority of studies on the microbiota
metabolome concern lung and the upper airways. It was observed
that in CF the production of isoprene is associated to either
Gram+ and Gram- species (Kuzma et al., 1995), while the
production of hydrogen cyanide is prevalently associated to
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, (Carterson et al., 2004; Cody et al.,
2009). Robroeks et al. (2010) analyzed exhaled breath samples
by GC-TOF-MS, and they managed to discriminate between
CF and healthy controls, mainly based on the presence of C5–
C16 hydrocarbons and N-methyl-2-methylpropylamine. Barker
et al. (2006) reported a signiﬁcantly lower level of dimethyl
sulﬁde (probably associated to microbial metabolism), detected
by GC-MS in CF patients compared to controls. On the other
side, Montuschi et al. (2012), using 1H-NMR forexhaled breath
condensate (EBC) analysis, detected signiﬁcantly higher values
of ethanol, acetate, 2-propanol and acetone in CF patients, which
diﬀerentiated them from controls, whereas acetate, ethanol, 2-
propanol and methanol were found to be relevant metabolites
for distinguishing between patients with stable CF and patients
with unstable CF. Moreover, 2-Propanol, which represents an
enzyme-mediated product of acetone reduction, was detected in
a breath sample of CF colonized by P. aeruginosa (Wang et al.,
2006). The high level of ethanol in EBC samples of CF, detected
by MS based metabolomics, could also be related to the decreased
capacity of P. aeruginosa to oxidize ethanol to acetate (Wang
et al., 2006). On the contrary, elevated acetate concentrations in
healthy subjects may reﬂect resident bacteria in the oral cavity,
such as Streptococcus mutans, debasing pyruvate into metabolic
end products, such as acetate and lactate (Korithoski et al., 2008).

Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD)
Several VOCs, including ethanol, seem to be produced by colonic
bacteria and may have toxic eﬀects on the host after intestinal
absorption and delivery to the liver via the portal vein (Raman
et al., 2013). Moreover, Raman et al. (2013), using SPME-GC-MS,
identiﬁed esters (i.e., ethyl propanoate, butyl butanoate, methyl
pentanoate, methyl acetate) in fecal samples of obese NAFLD
patients more frequently than in healthy controls.

The bacterial production of SCFAs and ethanol by several
gut microbes is well known, but very little is known about
bacteria and biochemical pathways that may be involved in
ester production in the intestinal microbiota, even though most
of the esters linked to NAFLD are derivatives of short chain
aliphatic alcohols and carboxylic acids (Raman et al., 2013).
Also Del Chierico et al. (2016) evaluated the gut microbiota
proﬁling of NAFLD and obese patients. The authors evidenced,
with the support of multivariate analysis, that OTUs such as
Oscillospira, Ricknellaceae, Parabacteroides, Bacteroides fragilis,
Sutterella, and Lachnospiraceae, and metabolites such as 4-
Methyl-2-pentanone, 1-butanol and 2-butanone (detected with

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

13

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

SPME-GC-MS), discriminated NAFLD from healthy subjects
(Del Chierico et al., 2016).

Celiac Disease
As regards studies on celiac disease, it was clearly shown that
metabolic diﬀerences between controls and celiac patients exist
(Calabrò et al., 2014).

lactate,

choline, methyl glutarate,

The main diﬀerences detected coupling MS-and NMR- based
metabolomics approaches in celiac patients compared to controls
isoleucine,
were lower levels of several AAs, as asparagine,
methionine, proline, and valine, and also methylamine, pyruvate,
creatinine,
lipids, and
glycoproteins, and higher levels of glucose and 3-hydroxybutyric
acid in serum and acetoacetate in the urine of celiac patients
(Calabrò et al., 2014). The same authors also found higher levels
of some metabolites related to the gut microbiota in the urine,
such as: indoxyl sulfate, meta-[hydroxyphenyl] propionic acid
(m-HPPA), and phenylacetylglycine. In fact, M-HPPA in urine
mostly originates from the gut microbiota, being one of the
many products of the microbial mediated breakdown of plant
phenolic compounds, such as caﬀeic acid and its conjugate
chlorogenic acids (Phipps et al., 1998). Besides, Di Cagno et al.
(2011) analyzed, using SPME-GC-MS and 1H-NMR, VOCs,
and AAs of fecal and urine samples of treated (gluten free diet)
celiac children. The samples showed higher levels of free AAs
(proline, methionine, histidine, and tryptophan) and lower levels
of SCFAs, as butyric, isocaproic, and propanoic acids compared
to controls. In this study, it was also found that the levels of some
alcohols, such as 1-octen-3-ol, ethanol and 1-propanol were
higher in treated celiac children compared to controls and it was
hypothesized that when alcohol production is correlated with
intestinal bacteria synthesis this may also induce endotoxemia
(Cani et al., 2008).

In another study, saliva samples have been analyzed, using
SPME-GC-MS, revealing high levels of non-anal, 4-methyl-2-
hexanone, and ethyl-acetate in treated celiac children (Francavilla
et al., 2014). These ﬁndings suggest the presence of microbial
metabolic activities at the oral cavity level (by Firmicutes,
Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes) that may also aﬀect
the
synthesis of VOCs (Kusano et al., 2013).

Food Allergies
Finally, the gut microbiota is believed to be associated with
food allergies. In particular, the prevalence of atopic diseases,
including eczema and asthma, suggests that the modulation of
the immune response mechanisms in the gut can directly aﬀect
the development of allergic diseases and the development of
tolerance (Watanabe et al., 2003; Penders et al., 2007). Moreover,
the advent of dysbiosis during the early post-natal period may
further pre-dispose individuals to later inﬂammatory, immune,
and allergic disorders (Francavilla et al., 2012).

However, there is still little scientiﬁc evidence on the relation
between the gut microbiota metabolome and food allergy. A
study by Francavilla et al. (2012) describing the metabolome
of infants with cow’s milk allergy, was conducted using the
combinate of SPME-GC-MS and 1H-NMR techniques on a
group of children fed with hydrolyzed formula with no lactose

(CMA-NL), and a group of children fed with lactose-containing
(CMA-L) formula compared with controls. The authors found
that the addition of lactose to the formula resulted in a signiﬁcant
increase of Biﬁdobacteria and LAB counts, and a decrease
of Bacteroides/Clostridia. Consequently, the levels of SCFAs
increased, especially for acetic and butyric acids, in controls and
CMA-L compared to CMA-NL infants. The same trend was
found for lactic acid and threonine.

Neuropathology
The composition of the intestinal microbiota plays a key role
in neuro-gastroenterology, which deals with the interactions
between the central nervous system and the gut (gut–brain axis).
Numerous neuropathological diseases, such as autism spectrum
disorder (ASD), are probably associated with the gut microbiota
and thus the possibility to inﬂuence this connection is alluring
(Holmes et al., 2011), even if to date there are still few studies
investigating this ﬁeld. De Angelis et al. (2013) used SPME-
GC-MS and 1H-NMR to study the fecal microbiota and the
metabolome of children with Pervasive Developmental Disorder
Not Otherwise Speciﬁed (PDD-NOS), and children with ASD
compared to healthy controls. The authors found an altered
composition of the microbiota and VOCs, which were partially
diﬀerent between children with PDD-NOS and ASD. The main
biological signiﬁcance of this work was related to the increased
levels of Clostridum in PDD-NOS and ASD and the decreased
levels of some health promoting bacteria (i.e., Biﬁdobacterium)
and metabolites, such as free AA and SCFAs in PDD-NOS,
in ASD children compared to controls (De Angelis et al.,
2013). Furthermore, Kidd (2002) found that subjects with ASD
together with their non-ASD siblings, presented with a deep
alteration in the tryptophan–nicotinic acid and sulfur metabolic
pathways (Kidd, 2002; Oresic et al., 2008). Important metabolic
phenotype diﬀerences were observed between ASD and controls
with perturbations in the relative patterns of urinary metabolites
related to the gut microbiota (Kidd, 2002).

Hsiao et al. (2013) used GC- and LC-MS platforms to
study the oral treatment with human commensal Bacteroides
fragilis (that corrects gut permeability) to modulate the microbial
composition and the related defects in communicative behaviors
immune activation (MIA),
in mouse models with maternal
showing GI barrier defects and microbiota alterations in
displaying features of ASD. The authors detected the presence of
indolepyruvate 4-ethylphenylsulfate and p-cresol in mice serum
metabolome, presumably deriving from microbial metabolism.
Furthermore, since B.
it
could also have a role in regulating intestinal permeability and
metabolic homeostasis (Nicholson et al., 2012).

fragilis improves intestinal health,

CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVE

The challenge of systems medicine is to interpret the body
structure as a whole system and not as a sum of single
the wide
parts (Moco et al., 2013). To pursue this aim,
range of top-down systems biology analyses should be used to
interpret the metabolic interactions between the host and its gut
microbiota, and to comprehend how these interactions aﬀect

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

14

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

the physiological and pathological conditions. Furthermore, the
combination of these techniques with genome analysis may lead
to a holistic view of the metabolic pathways, which can also be
backed up using mathematical models and statistical assessment
of data. In fact, by managing data it is possible to achieve a higher
level of biological understanding. Therefore, novel algorithms
and statistical analysis need to be improved to integrate the
“omics” data, and a stochastic model of metabolic networks needs
to be introduced to lead to a novel knowledge of co-regulation in
biochemical networks.

The metabolomics approach may identify physiological and
clinical biomarkers that are not obtainable using targeted
methods (Weckwerth and Morgenthal, 2005).

In conclusion,

the generation of new gut microbiota
biomarkers will oﬀer the chance to associate complex metabolic
pathways with the etiology of diﬀerent diseases,
in order
to evaluate the causal relationship between metabolites and
pathogenesis. Moreover, these novel biomarkers could lead to the

development of mechanistic hypotheses that could be targeted to
the development of nutritional and personalized therapy tools in
early disease prediction in asymptomatic conditions, and enable
a more accurate prognosis of the disease progress.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

PV, conceived and wrote the manuscript. FD, participated in
the writing and produced tables and ﬁgures. LP, supervised and
reviewed the manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Ministry of Health, Ricerca
Corrente RC201402G003251 and 201502P003534 assigned to LP,
Children’s Hospital Bambino Gesù, IRCCS. The authors thank
Paola Giovanna Volpi for her careful English revision of the
manuscript.

REFERENCES

Ahmed, I., Greenwood, R., Costello Bde, L., Ratcliﬀe, N. M., and Probert,
C. S. (2013). An investigation of
fecal volatile organic metabolites in
irritable bowel syndrome. PLoS ONE 8:e58204. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.00
58204

Akhatou, I., González-Domínguez, R., and Fernández-Recamales, Á. (2016).
the eﬀect of genotype and agronomic conditions on
Investigation of
metabolomic proﬁles of
selected strawberry cultivars with diﬀerent
sensitivity to environmental stress. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 101, 14–22.
doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2016.01.016

Alm, L. (1982). Eﬀect of fermentation on B-vitamin content of milk in Sweden. J.

Dairy Sci. 65, 353–359. doi: 10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(82)82199-1

Alvarez-Sieiro, P., Montalbán-López, M., Mu, D., and Kuipers, O. P. (2016).
Bacteriocins of lactic acid bacteria: extending the family. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 100, 2939–2951. doi: 10.1007/s00253-016-7343-9

Amaretti, A., Raimondi, S., Leonardi, A., Quartieri, A., and Rossi, M. (2015).
rutin and hesperidin
Hydrolysis of
by the gut microbiota and biﬁdobacteria. Nutrients 7, 2788–2800. doi:
10.3390/nu7042788

the rutinose-conjugates ﬂavonoids

Arora, T., and Sharma, R. (2011). Fermentation potential of the gut microbiome:
implications for energy homeostasis and weight management. Nutr. Rev. 69,
99–106. doi: 10.1111/j.1753-4887.2010.00365.x

Bacher, A., Eberhardt, S., Fischer, M., Kis, K., and Richter, G.

(2000).
Biosynthesis of vitamin b2 (riboﬂavin). Annu. Rev. Nutr. 20, 153–167. doi:
10.1146/annurev.nutr.20.1.153

Bacher, A., Eberhardt, S., and Richter, G. (1996). “Biosynthesis of riboﬂavin,” in
Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium: Cellular and Molecular Biology,
ed F. C. Neidhardt (Washington, DC: ASM Press), 657–664.

Bakhtiar, R., Ramos, L., and Tse, F. L. S. (2004). Toxicokinetic assessment of
methylphenidate (Ritalin) in a 13-week oral toxicity study in dogs. Biomed.
Chromatogr. 18, 45–50. doi: 10.1002/bmc.290

Barker, M., Hengst, M., Schmid, J., Buers, H.-J., Mittermaier, B., Klemp,
(2006). Volatile organic compounds in the exhaled breath
D., et al.
of young patients with cystic ﬁbrosis. Eur. Respir. J. 27, 929–936. doi:
10.1183/09031936.06.00085105

Bathena, S. P., Thakare, R., Gautam, N., Mukherjee, S., Olivera, M., Meza, J.,
et al. (2015). Urinary bile acids as biomarkers for liver diseases I. Stability
of the baseline proﬁle in healthy subjects. Toxicol. Sci. 143, 296–307. doi:
10.1093/toxsci/kfu227

Begley, M., Hill, C., and Gahan, C. G. M.

(2006). Bile salt hydrolase
activity in probiotics. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72, 1729–1738. doi:
10.1128/AEM.72.3.1729-1738.2006

Belkaid, Y., and Hand, T. W. (2014). Role of the microbiota in immunity and

inﬂammation. Cell 157, 121–141. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.011

Best, C. A., and Laposata, M. (2003). Fatty acid ethyl esters: toxic non-oxidative
intake. Front. Biosci. 8,

metabolites of ethanol and markers of ethanol
e202–e217. doi: 10.2741/931

Binder, H. J. (2010). Role of colonic short-chain fatty acid transport in diarrhea.
Annu. Rev. Physiol. 72, 297–313. doi: 10.1146/annurev-physiol-021909-135817
Bjerrum, J. T., Wang, Y., Hao, F., Coskun, M., Ludwig, C., Günther, U., et al.
(2015). Metabonomics of human fecal extracts characterize ulcerative colitis,
Crohn’s disease and healthy individuals. Metabolomics 11, 122–133. doi:
10.1007/s11306-014-0677-3

Bone, E., Tamm, A., and Hill, M. (1976). The production of urinary phenols by gut
bacteria and their possible role in the causation of large bowel cancer. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 29, 1448–1454.

Bortolini, O., Medici, A., and Poli, S. (1997). Biotransformations on steroid nucleus

of bile acids. Steroids 62, 564–577. doi: 10.1016/S0039-128X(97)00043-3

Bro, R., Kamstrup-Nielsen, M. H., Engelsen, S. B., Savorani, F., Rasmussen, M. A.,
Hansen, L., et al. (2015). Forecasting individual breast cancer risk using plasma
metabolomics and biocontours. Metabolomics 11, 1376–1380. doi: 10.1007/
s11306-015-0793-8

Bunge, M., Araghipour, N., Mikoviny, T., Dunkl, J., Schnitzhofer, R., Hansel, A.,
et al. (2008). On-line monitoring of microbial volatile metabolites by proton
transfer reaction-mass spectrometry. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74, 2179–2186.
doi: 10.1128/AEM.02069-07

Calabrò, A., Gralka, E., Luchinat, C., Saccenti, E., and Tenori, L. (2014). A
metabolomic perspective on coeliac disease. Autoimmune Dis. 2014:756138.
doi: 10.1155/2014/756138

Calvani, R., Miccheli, A., Capuani, G., Tomassini Miccheli, A., Puccetti, C., Delﬁni,
M., et al. (2010). Gut microbiome-derived metabolites characterize a peculiar
obese urinary metabotype. Int. J. Obes. 34, 1095–1098. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2010.44
Cani, P. D., Bibiloni, R., Knauf, C., Waget, A., Neyrinck, A. M., Delzenne, N.
M., et al. (2008). Changes in gut microbiota control metabolic endotoxemia-
induced inﬂammation in high-fat diet-induced obesity and diabetes in mice.
Diabetes 57, 1470–1481. doi: 10.2337/db07-1403

Cani, P. D., and Delzenne, N. M. (2009). The role of the gut microbiota in
energy metabolism and metabolic disease. Curr. Pharm. Des. 15, 1546–1558.
doi: 10.2174/138161209788168164

Carroll, I. M., Ringel-Kulka, T., Siddle, J. P., and Ringel, Y. (2012). Alterations
in composition and diversity of the intestinal microbiota in patients with
diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 24,
521–530, e248. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2982.2012.01891.x

Carterson, A. J., Morici, L. A., Jackson, D. W., Frisk, A., Lizewski, S. E.,
Jupiter, R., et al. (2004). The transcriptional regulator AlgR controls cyanide

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

15

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

production in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Bacteriol. 186, 6837–6844. doi:
10.1128/JB.186.20.6837-6844.2004

Caspi, R., Foerster, H., Fulcher, C. A., Kaipa, P., Krummenacker, M., Latendresse,
M., et al. (2007). The MetaCyc database of metabolic pathways and enzymes
and the BioCyc collection of pathway/genome databases. Nucleic Acids Res. 36,
D623–D631. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm900

Catalano, P. M. (2010). Obesity, insulin resistance, and pregnancy outcome.

Reproduction 140, 365–371. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0088

Chambers, E. S., Viardot, A., Psichas, A., Morrison, D. J., Murphy, K. G., Zac-
Varghese, S. E., et al. (2015). Eﬀects of targeted delivery of propionate to the
human colon on appetite regulation, body weight maintenance and adiposity
in overweight adults. Gut 64, 1744–1754. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-307913
Chang, C., Guo, Z., He, B., and Yao, W. (2015). Metabolic alterations in the sera of
Chinese patients with mild persistent asthma: a GC-MS-based metabolomics
analysis. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 36, 1356–1366. doi: 10.1038/aps.2015.102

Chen, J., Zhao, X., Fritsche, J., Yin, P., Schmitt-Kopplin, P., Wang, W., et al.
(2008). Practical approach for the identiﬁcation and isomer elucidation of
biomarkers detected in a metabonomic study for the discovery of individuals
at risk for diabetes by integrating the chromatographic and mass spectrometric
information. Anal. Chem. 80, 1280–1289. doi: 10.1021/ac702089h

Chow, J., Panasevich, M. R., Alexander, D., Vester Boler, B. M., Rossoni Serao, M.
C., Faber, T. A., et al. (2014). Fecal metabolomics of healthy breast-fed versus
formula-fed infants before and during in vitro batch culture fermentation. J.
Proteome Res. 13, 2534–2542. doi: 10.1021/pr500011w

Clayton, T. A. (2012). Metabolic diﬀerences underlying two distinct rat urinary
phenotypes, a suggested role for gut microbial metabolism of phenylalanine
and a possible connection to autism. FEBS Lett. 586, 956–961. doi:
10.1016/j.febslet.2012.01.049

Cliﬀord, M. N. (2004). Diet-derived phenols in plasma and tissues and their
implications for health. Planta Med. 70, 1103–1114. doi: 10.1055/s-2004-
835835

Clinton, S. K., Bostwick, D. G., Olson, L. M., Mangian, H. J., and Visek, W. J.
(1988). Eﬀects of ammonium acetate and sodium cholate on N-methyl-N’-
nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine-induced colon carcinogenesis of rats. Cancer Res. 48,
3035–3039.

Cody, W. L., Pritchett, C. L., Jones, A. K., Carterson, A. J., Jackson, D., Frisk,
A., et al. (2009). Pseudomonas aeruginosa AlgR controls cyanide production
in an AlgZ-dependent manner. J. Bacteriol. 191, 2993–3002. doi: 10.1128/
JB.01156-08

Collino, S., Martin, F. P. J., and Rezzi, S. (2012). Clinical Metabolomics paves the
way towards future healthcare strategies. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 75, 619–629.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2012.04216.x

Couteau, D., McCartney, A. L., Gibson, G. R., Williamson, G., and Faulds, C.
B. (2001). Isolation and characterization of human colonic bacteria able to
hydrolyse chlorogenic acid. J. Appl. Microbiol. 90, 873–881. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-
2672.2001.01316.x

Cruciani, F., Biagi, E., Severgnini, M., Consolandi, C., Calanni, F., Donders,
G., et al. (2015). Development of a microarray-based tool to characterize
vaginal bacterial ﬂuctuations and application to a novel antibiotic treatment
for bacterial vaginosis. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 59, 2825–2834. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00225-15

Currie, F., Broadhurst, D. I., Dunn, W. B., Sellick, C. A., and Goodacre, R.
(2016). Metabolomics reveals the physiological response of Pseudomonas
putida KT2440 (UWC1) after pharmaceutical exposure. Mol. BioSyst. 12,
1367–1377. doi: 10.1039/C5MB00889A

Davidson, R. T., Foley, A. L., Engelke, J. A., and Suttie, J. W. (1998). Conversion of
dietary phylloquinone to tissue menaquinone-4 in rats is not dependent on gut
bacteria. J. Nutr. 128, 220–223.

Dawson, P. A., Lan, T., and Rao, A. (2009). Bile acid transporters. J. Lipid Res. 50,

2340–2357. doi: 10.1194/jlr.R900012-JLR200

De Angelis, M., Piccolo, M., Vannini, L., Siragusa, S., De Giacomo, A.,
Serrazzanetti, D. I., et al. (2013). Fecal microbiota and metabolome of children
with autism and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise speciﬁed.
PLoS ONE 8:e76993. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076993

De Boever, P., Wouters, R., Verschaeve, L., Berckmans, P., Schoeters, G., and
Verstraete, W. (2000). Protective eﬀect of the bile salt hydrolase-active
Lactobacillus reuteri against bile salt cytotoxicity. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
53, 709–714. doi: 10.1007/s002530000330

De Filippis, F., Pellegrini, N., Vannini, L., Jeﬀery, I. B., La Storia, A., Laghi, L.,
et al. (2015). High-level adherence to a Mediterranean diet beneﬁcially impacts
the gut microbiota and associated metabolome. Gut. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-
309957. [Epub ahead of print].

Deguchi, Y., Morishita, T., and Mutai, M. (1985). comparative studies on synthesis
of water-soluble vitamins among human species of biﬁdobacteria. Agric. Biol.
Chem. 49, 13–19.

Del Chierico, F., Nobili, V., Vernocchi, P., Russo, A., De Stefanis, C., Gnani,
D., et al. (2016). Gut microbiota proﬁling of pediatric NAFLD and obese
patients unveiled by an integrated meta-omics based approach. Hepatology. doi:
10.1002/hep.28572. [Epub ahead of print].

Del Chierico, F., Vernocchi, P., Bonizzi, L., Carsetti, R., Castellazzi, A. M.,
Dallapiccola, B., et al. (2012). Early-life gut microbiota under physiological
and pathological conditions:
the central role of combined meta-omics-
based approaches. J. Proteomics 75, 4580–4587. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.
02.018

De Preter, V. (2015). Metabolomics in the clinical diagnosis of inﬂammatory bowel

disease. Dig. Dis. Basel Switz. 33(Suppl. 1), 2–10. doi: 10.1159/000437033

De Preter, V., Joossens, M., Ballet, V., Shkedy, Z., Rutgeerts, P., Vermeire, S., et al.
(2013). Metabolic proﬁling of the impact of oligofructose-enriched inulin in
Crohn’s disease patients: a double-blinded randomized controlled trial. Clin.
Transl. Gastroenterol. 4, e30. doi: 10.1038/ctg.2012.24

De Preter, V., Machiels, K., Joossens, M., Arijs, I., Matthys, C., Vermeire, S.,
et al. (2015). Faecal metabolite proﬁling identiﬁes medium-chain fatty acids as
discriminating compounds in IBD. Gut 64, 447–458. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2013-
306423

De Preter, V., and Verbeke, K. (2013). Metabolomics as a diagnostic tool in
gastroenterology. World J. Gastrointest. Pharmacol. Ther. 4, 97–107. doi:
10.4292/wjgpt.v4.i4.97

Dettmer, K., Aronov, P. A., and Hammock, B. D. (2007). Mass spectrometry-based

metabolomics. Mass Spectrom. Rev. 26, 51–78. doi: 10.1002/mas.20108

De Vadder, F., Kovatcheva-Datchary, P., Goncalves, D., Vinera, J., Zitoun,
C., Duchampt, A., et al. (2014). Microbiota-generated metabolites promote
metabolic beneﬁts via gut-brain neural circuits. Cell 156, 84–96. doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2013.12.016

De Weirdt, R., Possemiers, S., Vermeulen, G., Moerdijk-Poortvliet, T. C. W.,
Boschker, H. T. S., Verstraete, W., et al. (2010). Human faecal microbiota
display variable patterns of glycerol metabolism. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 74,
601–611. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2010.00974.x

Di Cagno, R., De Angelis, M., De Pasquale, I., Ndagijimana, M., Vernocchi, P.,
Ricciuti, P., et al. (2011). Duodenal and faecal microbiota of celiac children:
molecular, phenotype and metabolome characterization. BMC Microbiol.
11:219. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-11-219

Dicksved, J., Halfvarson, J., Rosenquist, M., Järnerot, G., Tysk, C., Apajalahti, J.,
et al. (2008). Molecular analysis of the gut microbiota of identical twins with
Crohn’s disease. ISME J. 2, 716–727. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2008.37

Ding, X., Yang, S., Li, W., Liu, Y., Li, Z., Zhang, Y., et al. (2014). The potential
biomarker panels for identiﬁcation of major depressive disorder (MDD)
patients with and without early life stress (ELS) by metabonomic analysis. PLoS
ONE 9:e97479. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097479

Dole, M. N., Patel, P. A., Sawant, S. D., and Shedpure, P. S. (2011). Advance
applications of fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Rev.
Res. 7, 159–166.

Donohoe, D. R., Garge, N., Zhang, X., Sun, W., O’Connell, T. M., Bunger, M.
K., et al. (2011). The Microbiome and Butyrate Regulate Energy Metabolism
and Autophagy in the Mammalian Colon. Cell Metab. 13, 517–526. doi:
10.1016/j.cmet.2011.02.018

Dumas, M. E., Kinross, J., and Nicholson, J. K. (2016). Metabolic phenotyping
and systems biology approaches to understanding metabolic syndrome and
fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 146, 46–62. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.
11.001

Dunn, W. B., and Ellis, D.

(2005). Metabolomics: current analytical
platforms and methodologies. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 24, 285–294. doi:
10.1016/j.trac.2004.11.021

I.

Fanos, V., Caboni, P., Corsello, G., Stronati, M., Gazzolo, D., Noto, A., et al.
(2014). Urinary 1H-NMR and GC-MS metabolomics predicts early and late
onset neonatal sepsis. Early Hum. Dev. 90, S78–S83. doi: 10.1016/S0378-
3782(14)70024-6

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

16

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

Fiehn, O., Kopka, J., Dörmann, P., Altmann, T., Trethewey, R. N., and Willmitzer,
L. (2000). Metabolite proﬁling for plant functional genomics. Nat. Biotechnol.
18, 1157–1161. doi: 10.1038/81137

Flint, H. J., Scott, K. P., Duncan, S. H., Louis, P., and Forano, E. (2012). Microbial
degradation of complex carbohydrates in the gut. Gut Microbes 3, 289–306. doi:
10.4161/gmic.19897

Forcisi, S., Moritz, F., Lucio, M., Lehmann, R., Stefan, N., and Schmitt-Kopplin, P.
(2015). Solutions for low and high accuracy mass spectrometric data matching:
a data-driven annotation strategy in nontargeted metabolomics. Anal. Chem.
87, 8917–8924. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b02049

Francavilla, R., Calasso, M., Calace, L., Siragusa, S., Ndagijimana, M., Vernocchi,
P., et al. (2012). Eﬀect of lactose on gut microbiota and metabolome of
infants with cow’s milk allergy. Pediatr. Allergy Immunol. 23, 420–427. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3038.2012.01286.x

Francavilla, R., Ercolini, D., Piccolo, M., Vannini, L., Siragusa, S., De Filippis, F.,
et al. (2014). Salivary microbiota and metabolome associated with celiac disease.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80, 3416–3425. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00362-14

Fukuda, S., Toh, H., Hase, K., Oshima, K., Nakanishi, Y., Yoshimura, K., et al.
(2011). Biﬁdobacteria can protect from enteropathogenic infection through
production of acetate. Nature 469, 543–547. doi: 10.1038/nature09646

Gahleitner, F., Guallar-Hoyas, C., Beardsmore, C. S., Pandya, H. C., and Thomas,
C. P. (2013). Metabolomics pilot study to identify volatile organic compound
markers of childhood asthma in exhaled breath. Bioanalysis 5, 2239–2247. doi:
10.4155/bio.13.184

Gao, Z., Yin, J., Zhang, J., Ward, R. E., Martin, R. J., Lefevre, M., et al. (2009).
Butyrate improves insulin sensitivity and increases energy expenditure in mice.
Diabetes 58, 1509–1517. doi: 10.2337/db08-1637

Garner, C. E., Smith, S., de Lacy Costello, B., White, P., Spencer, R., Probert, C. S.
J., et al. (2007). Volatile organic compounds from feces and their potential for
diagnosis of gastrointestinal disease. FASEB J. 21, 1675–1688. doi: 10.1096/fj.06-
6927com

Groh, H., Schade, K., and Hörhold-Schubert, C. (1993). Steroid metabolism
J. Basic Microbiol. 33, 59–72. doi:

with intestinal microorganisms.
10.1002/jobm.3620330115

Gromski, P. S., Muhamadali, H., Ellis, D. I., Xu, Y., Correa, E., Turner, M. L., et al.
(2015). A tutorial review: metabolomics and partial least squares-discriminant
analysis – a marriage of convenience or a shotgun wedding. Anal. Chim. Acta
879, 10–23. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2015.02.012

Guerzoni, M. E., Vernocchi, P., Ndagijimana, M., Gianotti, A., and Lanciotti,
R. (2007). Generation of aroma compounds in sourdough: eﬀects of stress
exposure and lactobacilli–yeasts interactions. Food Microbiol. 24, 139–148. doi:
10.1016/j.fm.2006.07.007

antioxidant capacity of its catabolites. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 47, 1180–1189.
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.07.031

Jansson, J., Willing, B., Lucio, M., Fekete, A., Dicksved, J., Halfvarson, J., et al.
(2009). Metabolomics reveals metabolic biomarkers of Crohn’s disease. PLoS
ONE 4:e6386. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006386

Kamada, N., Chen, G. Y., Inohara, N., and Núñez, G. (2013). Control of pathogens
and pathobionts by the gut microbiota. Nat. Immunol. 14, 685–690. doi:
10.1038/ni.2608

Kanehisa, M., Araki, M., Goto, S., Hattori, M., Hirakawa, M., Itoh, M., et al. (2007).
KEGG for linking genomes to life and the environment. Nucleic Acids Res. 36,
D480–D484. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm882

Keun, H. C., Beckonert, O., Griﬃn, J. L., Richter, C., Moskau, D., Lindon, J. C., et al.
(2002). Cryogenic probe 13C NMR spectroscopy of urine for metabonomic
studies. Anal. Chem. 74, 4588–4593. doi: 10.1021/ac025691r

Kidd, P. (2002). Autism, an extreme challenge to integrative medicine. Part: 1: The

knowledge base. Altern. Med. Rev. 7, 292–316.

Kim, S. J., Kim, S. H., Kim, J. H., Hwang, S., and Yoo, H. J. (2016). Understanding
metabolomics in biomedical research. Endocrinol. Metab. Seoul Korea 31, 7–16.
doi: 10.3803/EnM.2016.31.1.7

Kinross, J. M., Darzi, A. W., and Nicholson, J. K. (2011). Gut microbiome-host
interactions in health and disease. Genome Med. 3, 14. doi: 10.1186/gm228
Kleerebezem, M., and Vaughan, E. E. (2009). Probiotic and gut lactobacilli
and biﬁdobacteria: molecular approaches to study diversity and activity.
Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 63, 269–290. doi: 10.1146/annurev.micro.091208.
073341

Kohashi, M., Nishiumi, S., Ooi, M., Yoshie, T., Matsubara, A., Suzuki, M.,
et al. (2014). A novel gas chromatography mass spectrometry-based serum
diagnostic and assessment approach to ulcerative colitis. J. Crohns Colitis 8,
1010–1021. doi: 10.1016/j.crohns.2014.01.024

Konishi, Y., and Kobayashi, S. (2004). Transepithelial transport of chlorogenic
acid, caﬀeic acid, and their colonic metabolites in intestinal caco-2 cell
monolayers. J. Agric. Food Chem. 52, 2518–2526. doi: 10.1021/jf035407c

Korithoski, B., Lévesque, C. M., and Cvitkovitch, D. G. (2008). The involvement
of the pyruvate dehydrogenase E1alpha subunit, in Streptococcus mutans
acid tolerance. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 289, 13–19. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-
6968.2008.01351.x

Krajmalnik-Brown, R., Ilhan, Z.-E., Kang, D.-W., and DiBaise, J. K. (2012). Eﬀects
of gut microbes on nutrient absorption and energy regulation. Nutr. Clin. Pract.
27, 201–214. doi: 10.1177/0884533611436116

Kumar, S., Misra, A., and Ghoshal, U. C. (2010). Patients with irritable bowel
syndrome exhale more hydrogen than healthy subjects in fasting state. J.
Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 16, 299–305. doi: 10.5056/jnm.2010.16.3.299

Harig, J. M., Soergel, K. H., Komorowski, R. A., and Wood, C. M. (1989).
Treatment of diversion colitis with short-chain-fatty acid irrigation. N. Engl.
J. Med. 320, 23–28. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198901053200105

Kusano, M., Mendez, E., and Furton, K. G. (2013). Comparison of the volatile
organic compounds from diﬀerent biological specimens for proﬁling potential.
J. Forensic Sci. 58, 29–39. doi: 10.1111/j.1556-4029.2012.02215.x

Harrigan, G. G., and Goodacre, R. (2003). Metabolic Proﬁling: Its Role in Biomarker
Discovery and Gene Function Analysis. Boston, MA: Springer US; Imprint;
Springer.

Kuzma, J., Nemecek-Marshall, M., Pollock, W. H., and Fall, R. (1995). Bacteria
produce the volatile hydrocarbon isoprene. Curr. Microbiol. 30, 97–103. doi:
10.1007/BF00294190

Holmes, E., Li, J. V., Athanasiou, T., Ashraﬁan, H., and Nicholson, J. K.
(2011). Understanding the role of gut microbiome-host metabolic signal
disruption in health and disease. Trends Microbiol. 19, 349–359. doi:
10.1016/j.tim.2011.05.006

Laghi, L., Picone, G., Cruciani, F., Brigidi, P., Calanni, F., Donders, G., et al. (2014).
Rifaximin modulates the vaginal microbiome and metabolome in women
aﬀected by bacterial vaginosis. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 58, 3411–3420.
doi: 10.1128/AAC.02469-14

Holmes, E., Loo, R. L., Stamler, J., Bictash, M., Yap, I. K. S., Chan, Q., et al. (2008).
Human metabolic phenotype diversity and its association with diet and blood
pressure. Nature 453, 396–400. doi: 10.1038/nature06882

Lambert, M. A., and Moss, C. W. (1980). Production of p-hydroxyhydrocinnamic
acid from tyrosine by Peptostreptococcus anaerobius. J. Clin. Microbiol. 12,
291–293.

Hsiao, E. Y., McBride, S. W., Hsien, S., Sharon, G., Hyde, E. R., McCue, T.,
et al. (2013). Microbiota modulate behavioral and physiological abnormalities
associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. Cell 155, 1451–1463. doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2013.11.024

Islam, K. B., Fukiya, S., Hagio, M., Fujii, N., Ishizuka, S., Ooka, T., et al. (2011). Bile
acid is a host factor that regulates the composition of the cecal microbiota in
rats. Gastroenterology 141, 1773–1781. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.07.046

Jacobs, D. M., Deltimple, N., van Velzen, E., van Dorsten, F. A., Bingham, M.,
Vaughan, E. E., et al. (2008). (1)H NMR metabolite proﬁling of feces as a tool
to assess the impact of nutrition on the human microbiome. NMR Biomed. 21,
615–626. doi: 10.1002/nbm.1233

Jaganath, I. B., Mullen, W., Lean, M. E. J., Edwards, C. A., and Crozier,
A. (2009). In vitro catabolism of rutin by human fecal bacteria and the

Lamichhane, S., Yde, C. C., Schmedes, M. S., Jensen, H. M., Meier, S., and Bertram,
H. C. (2015). Strategy for nuclear-magnetic-resonance-based metabolomics
of human feces. Anal. Chem. 87, 5930–5937. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.
5b00977

Leavens, W. J., Lane, S. J., Carr, R. M., Lockie, A. M., and Waterhouse, I. (2002).
Derivatization for liquid chromatography/electrospray mass spectrometry:
synthesis of
tris(trimethoxyphenyl)phosphonium compounds and their
derivatives of amine and carboxylic acids. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 16,
433–441. doi: 10.1002/rcm.559

LeBlanc, J. G., Milani, C., de Giori, G. S., Sesma, F., van Sinderen, D.,
and Ventura, M.
(2013). Bacteria as vitamin suppliers to their host:
a gut microbiota perspective. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 24, 160–168. doi:
10.1016/j.copbio.2012.08.005

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

17

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

Lechner, M., and Rieder, J. (2007). Mass spectrometric proﬁling of low-molecular-
weight volatile compounds–diagnostic potential and latest applications. Curr.
Med. Chem. 14, 987–995. doi: 10.2174/092986707780362916

Martens, J. H., Barg, H., Warren, M. J., and Jahn, D. (2002). Microbial production
of vitamin B12. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 58, 275–285. doi: 10.1007/s00253-
001-0902-7

Le Gall, G., Colquhoun, I. J., Davis, A. L., Collins, G. J., and Verhoeyen, M.
E. (2003). Metabolite proﬁling of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) using
1H NMR spectroscopy as a tool to detect potential unintended eﬀects
following a genetic modiﬁcation. J. Agric. Food Chem. 51, 2447–2456. doi:
10.1021/jf0259967

Le Gall, G., Noor, S. O., Ridgway, K., Scovell, L., Jamieson, C., Johnson, I. T., et al.
(2011). Metabolomics of fecal extracts detects altered metabolic activity of gut
microbiota in ulcerative colitis and irritable bowel syndrome. J. Proteome Res.
10, 4208–4218. doi: 10.1021/pr2003598

Lenz, E. M., Bright, J., Knight, R., Wilson, I. D., and Major, H. (2004).
Cyclosporin A-induced changes in endogenous metabolites in rat urine: a
metabonomic investigation using high ﬁeld 1H NMR spectroscopy, HPLC-
TOF/MS and chemometrics. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 35, 599–608. doi:
10.1016/j.jpba.2004.02.013

Li, L., Hu, L., Han, L.-P., Ji, H., Zhu, Y., Wang, X., et al. (2014). Expression of turtle
riboﬂavin-binding protein represses mitochondrial electron transport gene
expression and promotes ﬂowering in Arabidopsis. BMC Plant Biol. 14:381. doi:
10.1186/s12870-014-0381-5

Lin, H. V., Frassetto, A., Kowalik, E. J. Jr., Nawrocki, A. R., Lu, M. M., Kosinski,
J. R., et al. (2012). Butyrate and propionate protect against diet-induced
obesity and regulate gut hormones via free fatty acid receptor 3-independent
mechanisms. PLoS ONE 7:e35240. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035240

Lindon, J. C., Holmes, E., and Nicholson, J. K. (2003). So what’s the deal with

metabonomics? Anal. Chem. 75, 384A–391A. doi: 10.1021/ac031386+

Lis, A. W., McLaughlin, I., Mpclaughlin, R. K., Lis, E. W., and Stubbs, E. G. (1976).
Proﬁles of ultraviolet-absorbing components of urine from autistic children,
as obtained by high-resolution ion-exchange chromatography. Clin. Chem. 22,
1528–1532.

Liu, J.-Y., Li, N., Yang, J., Li, N., Qiu, H., Ai, D., et al. (2010). Metabolic proﬁling
of murine plasma reveals an unexpected biomarker in rofecoxib-mediated
cardiovascular events. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 17017–17022. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1011278107

Lord, R. S., and Bralley, J. A. (2008). Clinical applications of urinary organic acids.

Part 2. Dysbiosis markers. Altern. Med. Rev. J. Clin. Ther. 13, 292–306.

Martin, F.-P. J., Collino, S., Rezzi, S., and Kochhar, S. (2012). Metabolomic
applications to decipher gut microbial metabolic inﬂuence in health and
disease. Front. Physiol. 3:113. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00113

Martins-de-Souza, D.

protein
interactomics in the characterization of the molecular features of major
depressive disorder. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci. 16, 63–73.

(2014). Proteomics, metabolomics,

and

Mayo, B., and van Sinderen, D. (eds.). (2010). Biﬁdobacteria: Genomics and

Molecular Aspects. Norfolk: Caister Academic.

Michielan, A., and D’Incà, R. (2015). Intestinal permeability in inﬂammatory
bowel disease: pathogenesis, clinical evaluation, and therapy of leaky gut. Med.
Inﬂamm. 2015:628157. doi: 10.1155/2015/628157

Mills, G. A., and Walker, V. (2001). Headspace solid-phase microextraction
application to metabolic
J. Chromatogr. B. Biomed. Sci. App. 753, 259–268. doi:

compounds

proﬁling of volatile
investigations.
10.1016/S0378-4347(00)00554-5

in urine:

Milne, S. B., Mathews, T. P., Myers, D. S., Ivanova, P. T., and Brown, H. A. (2013).
Sum of the parts: mass spectrometry-based metabolomics. Biochemistry (Mosc.)
52, 3829–3840. doi: 10.1021/bi400060e

Moco, S., Collino, S., Rezzi, S., and Martin, F.-P. J. (2013). Metabolomics
research. Pediatr. Res. 73, 570–576. doi:

in pediatric

perspectives
10.1038/pr.2013.1

Moco, S., Vervoort, J., Moco, S., Bino, R. J., De Vos, R. C. H., and Bino, R. (2007).
Metabolomics technologies and metabolite identiﬁcation. TrAC Trends Anal.
Chem. 26, 855–866. doi: 10.1016/j.trac.2007.08.003

Montuschi, P., Paris, D., Melck, D., Lucidi, V., Ciabattoni, G., Raia, V., et al.
(2012). NMR spectroscopy metabolomic proﬁling of exhaled breath condensate
in patients with stable and unstable cystic ﬁbrosis. Thorax 67, 222–228. doi:
10.1136/thoraxjnl-2011-200072

Moss, C. W., Lambert, M. A., and Goldsmith, D. J. (1970). Production of

hydrocinnamic acid by clostridia. Appl. Microbiol. 19, 375–378.

Mueller, D. M., Allenspach, M., Othman, A., Saely, C. H., Muendlein, A., Vonbank,
A., et al. (2015). Plasma levels of trimethylamine-N-oxide are confounded
by impaired kidney function and poor metabolic control. Atherosclerosis 243,
638–644. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.10.091

Louis, P., Hold, G. L., and Flint, H. J. (2014). The gut microbiota, bacterial
metabolites and colorectal cancer. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 661–672. doi:
10.1038/nrmicro3344

Mukhopadhya, I., Hansen, R., El-Omar, E. M., and Hold, G. L. (2012). IBD-what
role do Proteobacteria play? Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 9, 219–230. doi:
10.1038/nrgastro.2012.14

Louis, P., Scott, K. P., Duncan, S. H., and Flint, H. J. (2007). Understanding the
eﬀects of diet on bacterial metabolism in the large intestine. J. Appl. Microbiol.
102, 1197–1208. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2007.03322.x

Nanda, R., James, R., Smith, H., Dudley, C. R., and Jewell, D. P. (1989).
Food intolerance and the irritable bowel syndrome. Gut 30, 1099–1104. doi:
10.1136/gut.30.8.1099

Lozupone, C. A., Stombaugh, J. I., Gordon, J. I., Jansson, J. K., and Knight, R.
(2012). Diversity, stability and resilience of the human gut microbiota. Nature
489, 220–230. doi: 10.1038/nature11550

Macfarlane, G. T., and Gibson, G. R. (2004). “Microbiological aspects of SCFA
production in the large bowel,” in Physiological and Clinical Aspects of Short-
Chain Fatty Acids, eds J. H. Cummings, J. L. Rombeau, and T. Sakata
(Cambridge; New York, NY: Cambridge University Press), 87–105.

Macfarlane, G. T., and Macfarlane, S. (1997). Human colonic microbiota:
ecology, physiology and metabolic potential of intestinal bacteria. Scand. J.
Gastroenterol. Suppl. 222, 3–9. doi: 10.1080/00365521.1997.11720708

Macfarlane, S., and Macfarlane, G. T. (1995). “Proteolysis and amino acid
fermentation.,” in Human Colonic Bacteria: Role in Nutrition, Physiology, and
Pathology, eds G. R. Gibson and G. T. Macfarlane (Boca Raton, FL: CRC press),
75–100.

Magnúsdóttir, S., Ravcheev, D., de Crécy-Lagard, V., and Thiele, I. (2015).
Systematic genome assessment of B vitamin biosynthesis suggests co-operation
among gut microbes. Front Genet. 20:148. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2015.00148

Manach, C., Scalbert, A., Morand, C., Rémésy, C., and Jiménez, L. (2004).
Polyphenols: food sources and bioavailability. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 79, 727–747.
Marchesi, J. R., Holmes, E., Khan, F., Kochhar, S., Scanlan, P., Shanahan, F., et al.
(2007). Rapid and noninvasive metabonomic characterization of inﬂammatory
bowel disease. J. Proteome Res. 6, 546–551. doi: 10.1021/pr060470d

Marín, L., Miguélez, E. M., Villar, C. J., and Lombó, F. (2015). Bioavailability of
dietary polyphenols and gut microbiota metabolism: antimicrobial properties.
Biomed Res. Int. 2015:905215. doi: 10.1155/2015/905215

Nardotto, G. H. B., Coelho, E. B., Marques, M. P., and Lanchote, V. L. (2016).
Chiral analysis of carvedilol and its metabolites hydroxyphenyl carvedilol
and O-desmethyl carvedilol in human plasma by liquid chromatography-
tandem mass spectrometry: application to a clinical pharmacokinetic study. J.
Chromatogr. B 1015–1016, 173–180. doi: 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.02.028

Nassar, A.-E. F., and Talaat, R. E. (2004). Strategies for dealing with metabolite
elucidation in drug discovery and development. Drug Discov. Today 9, 317–327.
doi: 10.1016/S1359-6446(03)03018-6

Naz, S., Vallejo, M., García, A., and Barbas, C. (2014). Method validation strategies
involved in non-targeted metabolomics. J. Chromatogr. A 1353, 99–105. doi:
10.1016/j.chroma.2014.04.071

Ndagijimana, M., Laghi, L., Vitali, B., Placucci, G., Brigidi, P., and Guerzoni, M.
E. (2009). Eﬀect of a synbiotic food consumption on human gut metabolic
proﬁles evaluated by (1)H Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy. Int. J.
Food Microbiol. 134, 147–153. doi: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2009.04.016

Nicholson, J. K., Holmes, E., Kinross, J., Burcelin, R., Gibson, G., Jia, W., et al.
(2012). Host-gut microbiota metabolic interactions. Science 336, 1262–1267.
doi: 10.1126/science.1223813

Nicholson,

J. K., Holmes, E., and Wilson,

(2005). Opinion: gut
microorganisms, mammalian metabolism and personalized health care. Nat.
Rev. Microbiol. 3, 431–438. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro1152

I. D.

Nicholson, J. K., and Lindon, J. C. (2008). Systems biology: metabonomics. Nature

455, 1054–1056. doi: 10.1038/4551054a

Noda, H., Akasaka, N., and Ohsugi, M. (1994). Biotin production by biﬁdobacteria.

J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol. (Tokyo) 40, 181–188. doi: 10.3177/jnsv.40.181

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

18

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

Oresic, M., Simell, S., Sysi-Aho, M., Näntö-Salonen, K., Seppänen-Laakso, T.,
Parikka, V., et al. (2008). Dysregulation of lipid and amino acid metabolism
precedes islet autoimmunity in children who later progress to type 1 diabetes.
J. Exp. Med. 205, 2975–2984. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081800

Parkar, S. G., Trower, T. M., and Stevenson, D. E. (2013). Fecal microbial
metabolism of polyphenols and its eﬀects on human gut microbiota. Anaerobe
23, 12–19. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2013.07.009

Patrignani, F., Burns, P., Serrazanetti, D., Vinderola, G., Reinheimer, J., Lanciotti,
R., et al. (2009). Suitability of high pressure-homogenized milk for the
production of probiotic fermented milk containing Lactobacillus paracasei and
Lactobacillus acidophilus. J. Dairy Res. 76, 74. doi: 10.1017/S0022029908003828
Patrignani, F., Chinnici, F., Serrazanetti, D. I., Vernocchi, P., Ndagijimana, M.,
Riponi, C., et al. (2016). Production of volatile and sulfur compounds by
10 saccharomyces cerevisiae strains inoculated in trebbiano must. Front.
Microbiol. 7:243. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00243

Paul, H. A., Bomhof, M. R., Vogel, H. J., and Reimer, R. A. (2016). Diet-
induced changes in maternal gut microbiota and metabolomic proﬁles
inﬂuence programming of oﬀspring obesity risk in rats. Sci. Rep. 6:20683. doi:
10.1038/srep20683

Pawliszyn, J. (1997). Solid Phase Microextraction: Theory and Practice. New York,

NY: Wiley-VCH.

Pence, H. E., and Williams, A. (2010). ChemSpider: an online chemical
information resource. J. Chem. Educ. 87, 1123–1124. doi: 10.1021/ed100697w
Penders, J., Thijs, C., van den Brandt, P. A., Kummeling, I., Snijders, B., Stelma,
F., et al. (2007). Gut microbiota composition and development of atopic
manifestations in infancy: the KOALA Birth Cohort Study. Gut 56, 661–667.
doi: 10.1136/gut.2006.100164

Perkins, N. J., and Pero, J. (2002). “Vitamin biosynthesis,” in Bacillus subtilis and
Its Closest Relatives from Genes to Cells, eds A. L. Sonenshein, R. Losick, and J.
A. Hoch (Washington, DC: ASM Press), 271–286.

Phipps, A. N., Stewart, J., Wright, B., and Wilson, I. D. (1998). Eﬀect of diet on
the urinary excretion of hippuric acid and other dietary-derived aromatics
in rat. A complex interaction between diet, gut microﬂora and substrate
speciﬁcity. Xenobiotica Fate Foreign Compd. Biol. Syst. 28, 527–537. doi:
10.1080/004982598239443

Pisano, M. B., Scano, P., Murgia, A., Cosentino, S., and Caboni, P. (2016).
Metabolomics and microbiological proﬁle of
Italian mozzarella cheese
produced with buﬀalo and cow milk. Food Chem. 192, 618–624. doi:
10.1016/j.foodchem.2015.07.061

Pompei, A., Cordisco, L., Amaretti, A., Zanoni, S., Matteuzzi, D., and Rossi, M.
(2007). Folate production by biﬁdobacteria as a potential probiotic property.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73, 179–185. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01763-06

Prakash, S., Rodes, L., Coussa-Charley, M., and Tomaro-Duchesneau, C. (2011).
Gut microbiota: next frontier in understanding human health and development
of biotherapeutics. Biol. Targets Ther. 5, 71–86. doi: 10.2147/BTT.S19099

Putignani, L., Del Chierico, F., Vernocchi, P., Cicala, M., Cucchiara, S.,
Dallapiccola, B., et al. (2015). Gut microbiota dysbiosis as risk and premorbid
factors of IBD and IBS along the childhood-adulthood transition. Inﬂamm.
Bowel Dis. 22, 487–504. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000602

Qiu, Y., Cai, G., Su, M., Chen, T., Liu, Y., Xu, Y., et al. (2010). Urinary
metabonomic study on colorectal cancer. J. Proteome Res. 9, 1627–1634. doi:
10.1021/pr901081y

Raamsdonk, L. M., Teusink, B., Broadhurst, D., Zhang, N., Hayes, A., Walsh, M.
C., et al. (2001). A functional genomics strategy that uses metabolome data
to reveal the phenotype of silent mutations. Nat. Biotechnol. 19, 45–50. doi:
10.1038/83496

Raimondi, S., Anighoro, A., Quartieri, A., Amaretti, A., Tomás-Barberán, F. A.,
Rastelli, G., et al. (2015). Role of biﬁdobacteria in the hydrolysis of chlorogenic
acid. Microbiologyopen 4, 41–52. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.219

Raman, M., Ahmed, I., Gillevet, P. M., Probert, C. S., Ratcliﬀe, N. M., Smith, S.,
et al. (2013). Fecal microbiome and volatile organic compound metabolome
in obese humans with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Clin. Gastroenterol.
Hepatol. 11, 868–875.e1–3. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2013.02.015

Ramautar, R., Somsen, G. W., and de Jong, G. J. (2013). CE-MS for metabolomics:
developments and applications in the period 2010-2012. Electrophoresis 34,
86–98. doi: 10.1002/elps.201200390

Ridlon,

metabolic parameters of humanized gnotobiotic diet induced obesity mice.
PLoS ONE 8:e71026. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071026
and Hylemon, P. B.

salt
biotransformations by human intestinal bacteria. J. Lipid Res. 47, 241–259. doi:
10.1194/jlr.R500013-JLR200

J. M., Kang, D.-J.,

(2006). Bile

Robroeks, C. M. H. H. T., van Berkel, J. J. B. N., Dallinga, J. W., Jöbsis, Q.,
Zimmermann, L. J. I., Hendriks, H. J. E., et al. (2010). Metabolomics of volatile
organic compounds in cystic ﬁbrosis patients and controls. Pediatr. Res. 68,
75–80. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181df4ea0

Roediger, W. E., Duncan, A., Kapaniris, O., and Millard, S. (1993). Reducing
sulfur compounds of the colon impair colonocyte nutrition: implications
for ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 104, 802–809. doi: 10.1016/0016-
5085(93)91016-B

Roessner, U., Wagner, C., Kopka, J., Trethewey, R. N., and Willmitzer, L. (2000).
Technical advance: simultaneous analysis of metabolites in potato tuber by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry. Plant J. Cell Mol. Biol. 23, 131–142. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00774.x

Rosselló-Mora, R., Lucio, M., Peña, A., Brito-Echeverría, J., López-López, A.,
Valens-Vadell, M., et al. (2008). Metabolic evidence for biogeographic isolation
of the extremophilic bacterium Salinibacter ruber. ISME J. 2, 242–253. doi:
10.1038/ismej.2007.93

Rossi, M., and Amaretti, A. (2010). “Probiotic properties of Biﬁdobacteria,” in
Biﬁdobacteria: Genomics and Molecular Aspects, eds M. Baltasar and D. van
Sinderen (Norfolk: Caister Academic), 97–123.

Roth, J. R., Lawrence, J. G., and Bobik, T. A. (1996). Cobalamin (coenzyme B12):
synthesis and biological signiﬁcance. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 50, 137–181. doi:
10.1146/annurev.micro.50.1.137

Russell, D. W., and Setchell, K. D. (1992). Bile acid biosynthesis. Biochemistry

(Mosc.) 31, 4737–4749. doi: 10.1021/bi00135a001

Sabatino, A. D., Morera, R., Ciccocioppo, R., Cazzola, P., Gotti, S., Tinozzi,
F. P., et al. (2005). Oral butyrate for mildly to moderately active Crohn’s
disease. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 22, 789–794. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2036.2005.
02639.x

Savorani, F., Rasmussen, M. A., Mikkelsen, M. S., and Engelsen, S. B. (2013). A
primer to nutritional metabolomics by NMR spectroscopy and chemometrics.
Food Res. Int. 54, 1131–1145. doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2012.12.025

Scalan, P. D., Buckling, A., Kong, W., Wild, Y., Lynch, S. W., and Harrison,
F. (2012). Gut dysbiosis in cystic ﬁbrosis. J. Cyst. Fibros. 11, 454–455. doi:
10.1016/j.jcf.2012.03.007

Scheppach, W. (1994). Eﬀects of short chain fatty acids on gut morphology and

function. Gut 35, S35–S38. doi: 10.1136/gut.35.1_suppl.s35

Scheppach, W., Pomare, E. W., Elia, M., and Cummings, J. H. (1991). The
contribution of the large intestine to blood acetate in man. Clin. Sci. 80,
177–182. doi: 10.1042/cs0800177

Scheppach, W., Sommer, H., Kirchner, T., Paganelli, G. M., Bartram, P., Christl, S.,
et al. (1992). Eﬀect of butyrate enemas on the colonic mucosa in distal ulcerative
colitis. Gastroenterology 103, 51–56. doi: 10.1016/0016-5085(92)91094-K

Schippa, S., Iebba, V., Santangelo, F., Gagliardi, A., De Biase, R. V., Stamato, A.,
et al. (2013). Cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)
allelic variants relate to shifts in faecal microbiota of cystic ﬁbrosis patients.
PLoS ONE 8:e61176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061176

Schöller, C., Molin, S., and Wilkins, K. (1997). Volatile metabolites from some
gram-negative bacteria. Chemosphere 35, 1487–1495. doi: 10.1016/S0045-
6535(97)00209-9

Scholtens, D. M., Muehlbauer, M. J., Daya, N. R., Stevens, R. D., Dyer, A. R., Lowe,
L. P., et al. (2014). Metabolomics reveals broad-scale metabolic perturbations
in hyperglycemic mothers during pregnancy. Diabetes Care 37, 158–166. doi:
10.2337/dc13-0989

Selma, M. V., Espín, J. C., and Tomás-Barberán, F. A. (2009). Interaction between
phenolics and gut microbiota: role in human health. J. Agric. Food Chem. 57,
6485–6501. doi: 10.1021/jf902107d

Shahani, K. M., and Chandan, R. C. (1979). Nutritional and healthful aspects of
cultured and culture-containing dairy foods. J. Dairy Sci. 62, 1685–1694. doi:
10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(79)83481-5

Silla Santos, M. H. (1996). Biogenic amines: their importance in foods. Int. J. Food

Microbiol. 29, 213–231. doi: 10.1016/0168-1605(95)00032-1

Respondek, F., Gerard, P., Bossis, M., Boschat, L., Bruneau, A., Rabot, S., et al.
(2013). Short-chain fructo-oligosaccharides modulate intestinal microbiota and

Siroli, L., Patrignani, F., Serrazanetti, D. I., Tabanelli, G., Montanari, C., Gardini,
F., et al. (2015). Lactic acid bacteria and natural antimicrobials to improve the

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

19

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

safety and shelf-life of minimally processed sliced apples and lamb’s lettuce.
Food Microbiol. 47, 74–84. doi: 10.1016/j.fm.2014.11.008

Sivsammye, G., and Sims, H. V. (1990). Presumptive identiﬁcation of Clostridium
diﬃcile by detection of p-cresol in prepared peptone yeast glucose broth
supplemented with p-hydroxyphenylacetic acid.
J. Clin. Microbiol. 28,
1851–1853.

Smirnov, K. S., Maier, T. V., Walker, A., Heinzmann, S. S., Forcisi, S., Martinez, I.,
et al. (2016). Challenges of metabolomics in human gut microbiota research.
Int. J. Med. Microbiol. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2016.03.006. [Epub ahead of print].
Smith, A. G., Croft, M. T., Moulin, M., and Webb, M. E. (2007). Plants need their
vitamins too. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 10, 266–275. doi: 10.1016/j.pbi.2007.04.009
Smith, C. A., O’Maille, G., Want, E. J., Qin, C., Trauger, S. A., Brandon, T. R.,
et al. (2005). METLIN: a metabolite mass spectral database. Ther. Drug Monit.
27,747–751. doi: 10.1097/01.ftd.0000179845.53213.39

Smith, E. A., and Macfarlane, G. T. (1997). Dissimilatory amino Acid metabolism
in human colonic bacteria. Anaerobe 3, 327–337. doi: 10.1006/anae.1997.0121
Smolinska, A., Blanchet, L., Buydens, L. M. C., and Wijmenga, S. S. (2012).
NMR and pattern recognition methods in metabolomics: from data acquisition
to biomarker discovery: a review. Anal. Chim. Acta 750, 82–97. doi:
10.1016/j.aca.2012.05.049

Soga, T., Ohashi, Y., Ueno, Y., Naraoka, H., Tomita, M., and Nishioka, T.
(2003). Quantitative metabolome analysis using capillary electrophoresis mass
spectrometry. J. Proteome Res. 2, 488–494. doi: 10.1021/pr034020m

Srinivasan, S., Morgan, M. T., Fiedler, T. L., Djukovic, D., Hoﬀman, N. G.,
Raftery, D., et al. (2015). Metabolic signatures of bacterial vaginosis. MBio 6,
e00204–e00215. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00204-15

Stanton, C., Ross, R. P., Fitzgerald, G. F., and Van Sinderen, D. (2005). Fermented
functional foods based on probiotics and their biogenic metabolites. Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 16, 198–203. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2005.02.008

Stashenko, E. E.,

Jaramillo, B. E., and Martínez,

(2004). Analysis
from Colombian Xylopia aromatica
of volatile secondary metabolites
(Lamarck) by diﬀerent
extraction and headspace methods and gas
chromatography. J. Chromatogr. A 1025, 105–113. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2003.
10.059

J. R.

Stephens, N. S., Siﬄedeen, J., Su, X., Murdoch, T. B., Fedorak, R. N., and
Slupsky, C. M. (2013). Urinary NMR metabolomic proﬁles discriminate
inﬂammatory bowel disease from healthy. J. Crohns Colitis 7, e42–e48. doi:
10.1016/j.crohns.2012.04.019

Sugawara, T., Sawada, D., Ishida, Y., Aihara, K., Aoki, Y., Takehara, I., et al.
(2016). Regulatory eﬀect of paraprobiotic Lactobacillus gasseri CP2305 on gut
environment and function. Microb. Ecol. Health Dis. 27:30259. doi: 10.3402/
mehd.v27.30259

et al.

Suhre, K., Meisinger, C., Döring, A., Altmaier, E., Belcredi, P., Gieger,
footprint of diabetes: a multiplatform
C.,
metabolomics study in an epidemiological setting. PLoS ONE 5:e13953.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013953

(2010). Metabolic

Suttie, J. W. (1995). The importance of menaquinones in human nutrition. Annu.

Rev. Nutr. 15, 399–417. doi: 10.1146/annurev.nu.15.070195.002151

Tabanelli, G., Bargossi, E., Gardini, A., Lanciotti, R., Magnani, R., Gardini,
F., et al. (2015a). Physico-chemical and microbiological characterisation of
Italian fermented sausages in relation to their size: Italian fermented sausages
characterisation. J. Sci. Food Agric. 96, 2773–2781. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.7442

Tabanelli, G., Vernocchi, P., Patrignani, F., Del Chierico, F., Putignani, L.,
Vinderola, G., et al. (2015b). Eﬀects of sub-lethal high-pressure homogenization
treatment on the outermost cellular structures and the volatile-molecule
proﬁles of two strains of probiotic lactobacilli. Front. Microbiol. 6:1006. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2015.01006

Taverniti, V., and Guglielmetti, S. (2012). Health-promoting properties of
Lactobacillus helveticus. Front. Microbiol. 3:392. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00392
Vaidyanathan, S., Kell, D. B., and Goodacre, R. (2002). Flow-injection electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry of crude cell extracts for high-throughput
bacterial
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 13, 118–128. doi:
identiﬁcation.
10.1016/S1044-0305(01)00339-7

Vannini, L., Patrignani, F., Iucci, L., Ndagijimana, M., Vallicelli, M., Lanciotti,
R., et al. (2008). Eﬀect of a pre-treatment of milk with high pressure
homogenization on yield as well as on microbiological, lipolytic and proteolytic
patterns of “Pecorino” cheese. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 128, 329–335. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2008.09.018

van Zanten, G. C., Krych, L., Röytiö, H., Forssten, S., Lahtinen, S. J., Al-
Soud, W. A., et al. (2014). Synbiotic Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM and
cellobiose does not aﬀect human gut bacterial diversity but increases abundance
of lactobacilli, biﬁdobacteria and branched-chain fatty acids: a randomized,
double-blinded cross-over trial. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 90, 225–236. doi:
10.1111/1574-6941.12397

Velázquez, O. C., Lederer, H. M., and Rombeau, J. L. (1997). Butyrate and the
colonocyte. Production, absorption, metabolism, and therapeutic implications.
Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 427, 123–134. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4615-5967-2_14

Vernocchi, P., Ndagijimana, M., Serrazanetti, D. I., López, C. C., Fabiani, A.,
Gardini, F., et al. (2011). Use of Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains endowed
with β-glucosidase activity for the production of Sangiovese wine. World J.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 27, 1423–1433. doi: 10.1007/s11274-010-0594-1

Vernocchi, P., Vannini, L., Gottardi, D., Del Chierico, F., Serrazanetti, D. I.,
Ndagijimana, M., et al. (2012). Integration of datasets from diﬀerent analytical
techniques to assess the impact of nutrition on human metabolome. Front. Cell.
Infect. Microbiol. 2:156. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2012.00156

Veselkov, K. A., Lindon, J. C., Ebbels, T. M. D., Crockford, D., Volynkin, V. V.,
Holmes, E., et al. (2009). Recursive segment-wise peak alignment of biological
(1)h NMR spectra for improved metabolic biomarker recovery. Anal. Chem.
81, 56–66. doi: 10.1021/ac8011544

Villas-Bôas, S. G., Mas, S., Akesson, M., Smedsgaard, J., and Nielsen, J. (2005). Mass
spectrometry in metabolome analysis. Mass Spectrom. Rev. 24, 613–646. doi:
10.1002/mas.20032

Villaseñor, A., Kinross, J. M., Li, J. V., Penney, N., Barton, R. H., Nicholson, J.
K., et al. (2014). 1H NMR global metabolic phenotyping of acute pancreatitis
in the emergency unit.
J. Proteome Res. 5, 362–375. doi: 10.1021/pr5
00161w

Vitali, B., Cruciani, F., Picone, G., Parolin, C., Donders, G., and Laghi, L.
(2015). Vaginal microbiome and metabolome highlight speciﬁc signatures of
bacterial vaginosis. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 34, 2367–2376. doi:
10.1007/s10096-015-2490-y

Vitali, B., Ndagijimana, M., Cruciani, F., Carnevali, P., Candela, M., Guerzoni,
M. E., et al. (2010). Impact of a synbiotic food on the gut microbial
ecology and metabolic proﬁles. BMC Microbiol. 10:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-
2180-10-4

Vitali, B., Ndagijimana, M., Maccaferri, S., Biagi, E., Guerzoni, M. E., and Brigidi,
P. (2012). An in vitro evaluation of the eﬀect of probiotics and prebiotics
on the metabolic proﬁle of human microbiota. Anaerobe 18, 386–391. doi:
10.1016/j.anaerobe.2012.04.014

Vitali, B., Pugliese, C., Biagi, E., Candela, M., Turroni, S., Bellen, G., et al.
(2007).Dynamics of vaginal bacterial communities in women developing
bacterial vaginosis, candidiasis, or no infection, analyzed by PCR-denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis and real-time PCR. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73,
5731–5741. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01251-07

Walker, A., Lucio, M., Pﬁtzner, B., Scheerer, M. F., Neschen, S., de Angelis, M.
H., et al. (2014). Importance of sulfur-containing metabolites in discriminating
fecal extracts between normal and type-2 diabetic mice. J. Proteome Res. 13,
4220–4231. doi: 10.1021/pr500046b

Walton, C., Fowler, D. P., Turner, C., Jia, W., Whitehead, R. N., Griﬃths, L.,
et al. (2013). Analysis of volatile organic compounds of bacterial origin in
chronic gastrointestinal diseases. Inﬂamm. Bowel Dis. 19, 2069–2078. doi:
10.1097/MIB.0b013e31829a91f6

Wang, T., Carroll, W., Lenny, W., Boit, P., and Smith, D. (2006). The analysis
of 1-propanol and 2-propanol in humid air samples using selected ion ﬂow
tube mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 20, 125–130. doi:
10.1002/rcm.2285

Watanabe, S., Narisawa, Y., Arase, S., Okamatsu, H., Ikenaga, T., Tajiri, Y., et al.
(2003). Diﬀerences in fecal microﬂora between patients with atopic dermatitis
and healthy control subjects. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 111, 587–591. doi:
10.1067/mai.2003.105

Weckwerth, W., and Morgenthal, K. (2005). Metabolomics:

from pattern
recognition to biological interpretation. Drug Discov. Today 10, 1551–1558. doi:
10.1016/S1359-6446(05)03609-3

Williams, H. R. T., Cox, I. J., Walker, D. G., Cobbold, J. F. L., Taylor-Robinson,
S. D., Marshall, S. E., et al. (2010). Diﬀerences in gut microbial metabolism
are responsible for reduced hippurate synthesis in Crohn’s disease. BMC
Gastroenterol. 10:108. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-10-108

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

20

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

Vernocchi et al.

Gut Microbiota Metabolome

Wilson, M. (2005). Microbial Inhabitants of Human. Cambridge; New York, NY:

Cambridge University Press.

Wishart, D. S., Jewison, T., Guo, A. C., Wilson, M., Knox, C., Liu, Y., et al. (2013).
HMDB 3.0–the human metabolome database in 2013. Nucleic Acids Res. 41,
D801–D807. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1065

Wissenbach, D. K., Oliphant, K., Rolle-Kampczyk, U., Yen, S., Höke, H., Baumann,
S., et al. (2016). Optimization of metabolomics of deﬁned in vitro gut microbial
ecosystems. Int. J. Med. Microbiol. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2016.03.007. [Epub
ahead of print].

J. A.

Wong, J. M. W., de Souza, R., Kendall, C. W. C., Emam, A., and Jenkins,
D.
fermentation and short chain fatty
acids. J. Clin. Gastroenterol. 40, 235–243. doi: 10.1097/00004836-200603000-
00015

(2006). Colonic health:

Worley, B., and Powers, R. (2012). Multivariate analysis in metabolomics. Curr.

Metabolomics 1, 92–107. doi: 10.2174/2213235x11301010092

Yamashita, H., Fujisawa, K., Ito, E., Idei, S., Kawaguchi, N., Kimoto, M., et al.
(2007). Improvement of obesity and glucose tolerance by acetate in type 2
diabetic otsuka long-evans tokushima fatty (OLETF) rats. Biosci. Biotechnol.
Biochem. 71, 1236–1243. doi: 10.1271/bbb.60668
and Patti, G.

(2015). Deﬁning the
size, ﬂux, and regulation. Mol. Cell 58, 699–706. doi:

Zamboni, N., Saghatelian, A.,

J.

metabolome:
10.1016/j.molcel.2015.04.021

Zhang, G., Bai, H., Zhang, H., Dean, C., Wu, Q., Li, J., et al. (2011). Neuropeptide
exocytosis
involving synaptotagmin-4 and oxytocin in hypothalamic
programming of body weight and energy balance. Neuron 69, 523–535.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.12.036

Zhang, A., Sun, H., and Wang, X. (2012). Saliva metabolomics opens door
to biomarker discovery, disease diagnosis, and treatment. Appl. Biochem.
Biotechnol. 168, 1718–1727. doi: 10.1007/s12010-012-9891-5

Zhang, C., Yin, A., Li, H., Wang, R., Wu, G., Shen,

(2015).
Dietary modulation of gut microbiota contributes to alleviation of both
genetic and simple obesity in children. EBioMedicine 2, 966–982. doi:
10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.07.007

J., et al.

Zhao, L., and Hartung, T. (2015). Metabonomics and toxicology. Methods Mol.

Biol. Clifton NJ 1277, 209–231. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2377-9_15

Zhao, L., Liu, X., Xie, L., Gao, H., and Lin, D. (2010). 1H NMR-based metabonomic
analysis of metabolic changes in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Anal. Sci.
Int. J. Jpn. Soc. Anal. Chem. 26, 1277–1282. doi: 10.2116/analsci.26.1277

Zheng, X., Xie, G., Zhao, A., Zhao, L., Yao, C., Chiu, N. H. L., et al. (2011). The
footprints of gut microbial-mammalian co-metabolism. J. Proteome Res. 10,
5512–5522. doi: 10.1021/pr2007945

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.

Copyright © 2016 Vernocchi, Del Chierico and Putignani. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

21

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1144

