Hullar and Fu

Page 2

Here, we present below examples of the role of the microbiome in dietary metabolism, an 
overview of eukaryotic epigenetic mechanisms, and microbially-derived metabolites that are 
relevant to eukaryotic epigenetic changes in gene expression that may be linked to colon 
cancer. In particular, we focus on the following microbial metabolites: the short chain fatty 
acids (SCFA), isothiocyanates, lipids, and select polyphenols.

Diet shapes the microbiome

Diet helps shape the composition of the intestinal microbiota. Differences in the distribution 
of bacteria are associated with dietary patterns and this influences host exposure to microbial 
metabolites. De Filippo et al. showed that the gut microbiome of children living in Burkina 
Faso was significantly different than European children of the same age.5 The microbiome 
of the children from Burkina Faso was more varied, produced more butyrate, and had more 
Prevotella than Bacteroides. The children in Burkina Faso consumed a diet high in fiber and 
non-animal protein whereas the European children consumed a diet higher in refined 
carbohydrates and animal protein. Similar trends were seen in other studies that compared 
residents in non-industrialized and industrialized societies.6, 7 Although these observational 
studies lay the ground work for the connection between diet and the microbiome in human 
populations, factors other than diet may influence the composition and function of the 
microbiome in these different habitats.8

Dietary intervention studies provide a controlled setting in which to study how the 
composition and function of the microbiome changes in response to diet. These studies show 
that the gut microbiome often responds quickly to changes in diet.9-13 Of particular interest, 
dietary interventions also alter the exposure of the host to microbial metabolites although 
these changes are often transient.14-18 For example, in a randomized, controlled cross-over 
designed dietary intervention, Costabile et al found that bacterial groups and plasma levels 
of bacterial phenolic metabolites were altered depending upon the type of fiber ingested in 
two, three week periods.18 However, the microbial metabolites only increased in one of the 
treatments suggesting that diet is a complex human exposure that is further complicated by 
microbial metabolism and the composition of the microbiome.

Epigenetics refers to heritable changes in gene activity that are not caused by changes in the 
DNA sequence.19 Regulation of gene expression can occur through post translation 
modification of the amino acids in histone proteins, by methylation of DNA, and at the post-
transcriptional level by miRNAs.20

Histone proteins are involved in tightly packing chromosomes into chromatin in the nucleus. 
Modification of histone proteins loosens the chromatin, making it more available for 
transcription. Post-translational modifications of the N-termini of histone 3 or histone 4, 
occur by acetylation, methylation, ubiquitination, phosphorylation, or sumoylation. The 
enzymes involved in these reactions include: histone acetyltransferases (HATs) which adds 
acetyl groups; histone deacetylases (HDAC), which removes them; histone 
methyltransferases (MHTs), which add methyl groups to lysine and/or arginine groups; and 
histone demethyltransferases (DMHTs), which removes them. HATs catalyze the addition 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.

Epigenetics

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 3

of acetyl groups to the lysine residues of histones that activates normally repressed genes. 
HDACs are responsible for the removal of these groups and results in gene repression.21, 22 
Methylation of lysines results in either activation or deactivation of transcription whereas 
methylation of arginine residues activates transcription. In cancer cells, patterns of histone 
modifications and methylation differ from normal cells. Hypermethylation of genes involved 
in pathways identified as the hallmarks of cancer: cell cycle regulation, DNA repair, 
apoptosis, hormone response, carcinogen metabolism, angiogenesis and metastases are 
found in several human cancers 2, 23-26

Methylation of DNA in the coding region of a gene, especially the conversion of cytosine to 
5-methylcytosine, leads to CpG dinucleotides that affect expression of target genes. DNA 
methylation patterns change in response to environmental factors through DNA 
methyltransferases (DNMT1, DNMT2 DNMT3A, and DNMT3B) in the presence of S-
adenoysl-L-methionine.27, 28 Hypermethylation of these CpG dinucleotides or CpG islands, 
if they are in the promoter regions of a gene, result in transcriptional gene silencing and gene 
inactivation.20 Methylation has been linked to many diseases, including cancer.29-32

MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small, non-coding RNAs, which inhibit gene expression at the 
posttranscriptional level. miRNAs are generated by a complex protein system involving 
transcription of miRNA genes by RNA polymerase II and processing of the pre-miRNA by 
Drosha and Dicer ribonucleases.33 Mature miRNA are part of an active RNA-induced 
silencing complex (RISC). miRNAs regulate post-transcriptional expression by either 
imperfect base-pairing to mRNA or by affecting mRNA stability. Each miRNA controls 
several genes in related pathways. Aberrant miRNA expression affects signaling pathways 
associated with the initiation and progression of carcinogenesis.34

The impact of bacterial metabolism of dietary fiber on epigenetics

Meta-analysis of prospective cohort and nested case-control studies have shown an inverse 
relationship between dietary fiber intake and risk of colon cancer, although these trends tend 
to be more variable in prospective cohort studies due to confounding variables.35 Increased 
fiber intake reduces the exposure of gut epithelial cells to toxicants by increasing stool bulk 
which dilutes fecal carcinogens and decreases transit time. High-fiber foods contain an array 
of complex phytochemicals that are metabolized by the gut microbiome to short chain fatty 
acids, isothiocyanates, and polyphenolic derivatives that interact with human gut epithelial 
cells and may modify epigenetic control of gene expression.

Microbial metabolism of dietary fiber to SCFA

The main types of dietary carbohydrate that escape digestion in the small intestine are 
resistant starches, non-starch polysaccharides, and oligosaccharides primarily from plants. In 
westernized populations, approximately 40 g/day of carbohydrates enter the large intestine 
and undergo microbial metabolism.36 There is a gradient in SCFA production from the 
proximal largely based on availability of 
substrate and SCFAs are inversely associated with increased pH in the distal colon. 36 The 
predominant short chain fatty acids from fermentation are acetate, butyrate, and propionate 
in a ratio of 3:1:1, although formate, caproate, and lactate are also formed.37

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 4

The fluxes through these pools vary by fiber source and microbial pathways dictated by 
microbial community composition of the lumen. While acetate is a dominant end product of 
glycolysis, cross-feeding between groups of bacteria occurs and can influence SCFA 
pools.38 Butyrate forming bacteria condense acetate from butyrl CoA and external pools of 
acetate.39, 40 Use of external pools of acetate varies among bacterial species and may alter 
the amount of acetate and butyrate available to the host. For example, Duncan et al. showed 
that while F. prausnitizii and Roseburia spp derived about 85% of butyrate carbon from 
external pools of acetate, Coporcoccus spp. only derived 28%.41 In addition, different 
sources of carbohydrates produce different amounts of butyrate ranging from 56% with 
pectin to 90% for xylan. Propionate is also formed via microbial fermentation of 
carbohydrates. After formation of pyruvate, depending upon the microbial composition, 
propionate is formed via the succinate or the more minor acrylate pathways from 
carbohydrates that reach the colon.42 While butyrate supplies the majority of energy to 
colonic epithelial cells primarily through beta-oxidation, concentrations of SCFA in the 
colon are also high enough to influence regulation of colon epithelial gene expression.43-45

The role of butyrate in cancer prevention is the result of differences in the underlying 
physiology of normal or tumor cells.46 Butyrate has differential effects on normal colon 
epithelial cells depending upon its concentration and the metabolic state of the cell. Butyrate 
is present in high concentrations in the lumen and is transported into eukaryotic gut 
epithelial cells.47 In the colon crypts, there is a decreasing concentration gradient of butyrate 
from the lumen to the bottom of the crypt. In the cells at the bottom of the crypt, normal cell 
growth is supported by beta-oxidation of butyrate in the mitochondria and little butyrate 
accumulates in the nucleus.48 There is increased cell proliferation via increased energetics. 
Normal cells near the lumen experience higher levels of butyrate which accumulates in the 
nucleus and inhibits HDAC. Cell proliferation is inhibited, apoptosis is induced, and the 
cells are exfoliated into the lumen. In normal homeostasis, butyrate plays a role in 
promoting cell turnover of the colonic epithelium. In contrast, metabolism in cancer cells is 
dominated by aerobic glycolysis which uses glucose over butyrate as the growth substrate. 
Butyrate can then accumulate in the nucleus where it functions as an HDAC inhibitor and 
inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis.

While inhibition of HDACs is a common mechanism to inhibit cancer growth, the effect of 
SCFA on the prevention of colorectal cancer has been inconsistent. This may be due to 
differences in response among eukaryotic cell lines or effects of other SCFA. For example, 
acetate, propionate, and caproate have been shown to be inactive as HDAC inhibitors in 
HT-29 cells,49-51 although the effect on gene expression is not clear in Caco-2 cells.52

Microbial metabolism of glucosinolates to isothiocyanates

Glucosinolates are converted into isothiocyanates (ITC) by either the plant myrosinases, or 
bacterially produced thioglucosidases. Cooking cruciferous vegetables deactivates the plant 
myrosinases, and given that most cruciferous vegetables consumed by humans are cooked, 
gut bacteria play a critical role in converting glucosinolates to ITC. Previous studies have 
shown that certain species of bacteria, such as Escherichia coli, Bacteroides 
thetaiotaomicron, Enterococcus faecalis, Enterococcus faecium, Peptostreptococcus sp. and 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 5

Bifidobacterium sp., isolated from the human gut or feces can convert glucosinolates into 
ITCs and other derivatives.53-55 Controlled feeding studies in humans have shown 
significant inter-individual differences in urinary ITC excretion after participants consumed 
the same amount of cruciferous vegetables that had been either heated or microwaved prior 
to consumption to remove the plant myrosinase activity.56-58 Similar effects have been 
found in studies with rats.59, 60 This suggests inter-individual differences exist in the activity 
or composition of the intestinal bacteria involved in ITC formation. In support of this 
hypothesis, we showed recently that the fecal bacteria from individuals who excrete higher 
amounts of ITC in their urine after a standard meal of cooked broccoli metabolize more 
glucoraphanin in-vitro.61

Studies suggest that the exposure to ITCs in-vivo may well translate to prevention or 
reduction in tumor growth through the effects on DNA methylation, histone modification, 
and miRNA. Sulforaphane (SFN), an ITC, prevents carcinogen or genetically induced colon 
cancer in rodent models. Recent studies have shown that sulforaphane is an HDAC inhibitor 
and leads to an increase in global and local histone acetylation.62, 63 Similar to butyrate, 
SFN causes p21 upregulation and cell cycle arrest. Further studies in wild-type and APC 
Min/+ mice showed that a single dose of SFN reduced HDAC activity and increase histone 
acetylation in colonic mucosa.63 Additionally, SFN has been identified as a DNA 
demethylating agent in breast cancer cell lines although this has not been verified in colon 
tissue.64

Polyphenols represent a wide variety of phytochemicals that are divided into several classes 
according to their chemical structures. They include phenolic acids (hydroxybenzoic acids 
and hydroxycinnamic acids), anthocyanins, flavonoids (flavanols, flavonols, flavones, 
flavonones, and isoflavones), stilbenes, lignans, and curcuminoids. These compounds 
undergo extensive microbial transformations in the colon and also undergo enterohepatic 
circulation which alters influence host exposure to these compounds and their metabolites. 
While the dietary polyphenolic compounds have been associated with inducing epigenetic 
mechanisms, many of the microbial metabolites of polyphenols have yet to be tested even 
though metabolomics studies identify these compounds in systemic circulation. We present 
below evidence of the role metabolites of epigallocatechin-3-gallate in green tea and 
ellagitannins in relation to epigenetic modifications exists.65

Dietary polyphenols

EGCG

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is a polyphenol found in green tea that has been reported 
to impact human health including anti-oxidative, blood cholesterol and sugar level lowering, 
and cancer preventive activities. However, epidemiologic studies show inconsistent results 
when evaluating green tea consumption in relation to colon cancer risk.66-70 This is in part 
due to differences in tea consumption habits and failure to account for other factors, such as 
alcohol consumption or tobacco smoke, which may modify the effect of green tea 
consumption on health.71, 72 A recent study found that green tea consumed at least three 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 6

times per week for more than 6 months was associated with reduced risk of colorectal cancer 
by 23% in non-smokers.67

Pharmacokinetic studies show that tea catechins do not appear to accumulate in systemic 
circulation but do undergo rapid absorption and elimination in humans.73 During this period, 
they undergo extensive biotransformation by both Phase II enzymes and gut microbial 
metabolism. The metabolites/catabolites identified include glucuronides and sulfated 
conjugates of EGCG indicative of Phase II metabolisms, as well as, methylated catechins, 
ring fission products (like valerolactone), and phenolic products that are indicative of gut 
microbial transformations. Chow et al showed, in pharmacokinetic studies, that while green 
tea catechins (EGCG) were present in plasma after a single-dose, the concentration is lower 
than the amounts of biological activity shown in in vitro studies.73 In contrast, the 
biotransformed compounds were present in higher amounts than the parent compound, 
suggesting that metabolites/catabolites should be considered in the biological effects of these 
polyphenols.

Polyphenols have exhibited differential selection for different species in the microbial 
community by either acting as an antibiotic or a prebiotic which may influence human 
exposure to microbial metabolites of polyphenols. Recently, van Dorsten et al showed, in a 
simulated gut bioreactor, that the type and distribution of microbial metabolites of 
polyphenols changed as a function of dosing strategy.74 For example, valerolactones, one of 
the initial fission products of microbial metabolism of catechins, disappeared with 
continuous dosing. In parallel, Kemperman et al found that there were dramatic shifts in the 
composition of the microbiome with continual polyphenol dosing, although it is difficult to 
directly link the disappearance of valerolactones to specific bacteria.75 These studies suggest 
that diet may alter the microbiome, which in turn alters dietary exposure and down-stream 
host response.

Green tea polyphenols, specifically EGCG, alter gene expression by influencing DNA 
methylation patterns and/or histone modification. Several studies have shown that EGCG 
inhibits both bacterial and eukaryotic DNMT and alters DNA methylation patterns.76, 77 
This mechanism is mediated by altering the availability of methyl groups that are used to 
methylate catechol groups on polyphenols by catecohol-O-methyltransferase (EC 2.1.16). 
Additionally, the microbial metabolites of EGCG, gallic acid (GA) and epigallocatechin 
(EGC) influence epigenetic gene expression by acting as HAT inhibitors78-82 although not 
as strongly as EGCG.82

Ellagitannins are polyphenols that are found in fruits, such as pomegranate, raspberries, 
strawberries, blackberries, and nuts, such as walnuts and almonds. Ingested ellagitannins are 
hydrolyzed in the stomach and small intestine to ellagic acid. The gut microbiome 
metabolizes ellagitannins to urolithins by removal of one of the lactone rings and subsequent 
dehydroxylation in the colon. Enterohepatic circulation of urolithins and ellagic acids alters 
host exposure to these compounds, and there is large between person variation in urolithin 
production.83 Recent studies suggest that bacteria from the C. coccoides group and 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.

Ellagitannins

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 7

Dietary fats

Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids

Actinobacteria are involved in the production of urolithins.83, 84 Specifically, urolithin D 
was produced followed by urolithin C and urolithin B, and was associated with an increase 
in Bifidobacteria spp and Lactobacillus spp.

Ellagitannins have strong antioxidant, radical scavenging, anti-viral, anti-microbial, anti-
mutagenic, anti-inflammatory, anti-tumor promoting, and immunomodulatory properties.85 
Ellagitannins inhibit proliferation and induce apoptosis of cancer cells through modulation 
of transcription factors and signaling pathways.85 Ellagitannin treatment of a liver cancer 
cell line showed increased expression of miRNAs associated with cell differentiation and 
proliferation in a dose and time dependent manner.86 Metabolites of ellagitannins, ellagic 
acid and the bacterial metabolites, urolithin B and C, also act as epigenetic modulators. At 
physiologic concentrations, ellagic acid and urolithins reduced HAT activity in a tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF) stimulated monocyte cell line82 suggesting a plausible epigenetic 
mechanism mediated through gut microbial metabolites that is consistent with the 
observations that ellagitannins are an anti-inflammatory component of diet.

The majority of dietary fats, such as triacylglycerol, saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, 
and sterols, are absorbed in the small intestine. However, recent studies suggest that 7% of 
ingested fat is excreted in stool and is likely metabolized by the gut microbiota.87 In 
addition, bile acids are synthesized in the liver from cholesterol, conjugated with methionine 
or glycine. Bile is secreted from the gall bladder into the small intestine to help emulsify fats 
during digestion. Most of the bile acids are absorbed in the ileum and delivered back 
to the liver. A small amount is delivered to the colon and undergoes anaerobic microbial 
metabolism to secondary bile acids deoxycholate (DCA), lithocholate (LCA), and 
ursodeoxycholate (UDCA). Listed below are two examples of microbial metabolism of fats 
that may influence epigenetics.

Fish oil from cold water fish and plants provides dietary sources of ω 3 long chain 
polyunsaturated fatty acids  Epidemiologic studies have shown that these 
fats are protective against colon and prostate cancer although there are conflicting results. 88 
Prospective studies showed either no effect, increased risk, or reduced risk.89-93 Differences 
in these outcomes have been attributed to sex differences, cancer stage, site of the disease, 
and other confounding factors. Case-control studies and experimental studies which focused 
on a defined dietary intake support the hypothesis of CRC risk reduction by 3ω LC-PUFA. 
A reduction in histone lysine methylation by 3ω LC-PUFA has been shown to down-
regulate genes in cancer cell lines .94 Other studies have shown that the type of 3ω LC-
PUFA is important in miRNA mediated gene expression. Azoxymethane (AOM) tumor 
induction in rats fed either fish showed that the 
fish oil intervention produced fewer tumors and the lowest number of differentially express 
miRNAs.95 The anaerobic bacteria, Roseburia, Bifidobacteria, and Lactobacillus, found in 
the distal gut, metabolize 3ω LC-PUFA from dietary intake to conjugated linolenic (CLnA) 
acids.96, 97 Although 3ω LC-PUFA are not produced by bacteria, the availability of 3ω LC-

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 8

PUFA may be influenced by microbial metabolism and may, in part, explain some of the 
inter-individual variation in the effects of 3ω LC-PUFA on cancer.

Ursodeoxycholate (UDCA)

Colon cancer is associated with a high-fat diet in western populations and rates in non-
western populations are increasing as a more western, non-traditional diet is adopted.98, 99 
Recent studies in mice suggest that the gut microbiome influences the size and composition 
of the bile acid pool throughout the enterohepatic system and exposure may influence cancer 
risk.100 For example, R. gnavus can convert 7-oxo-lithocholic acid to UDCA.101 A study of 
the microbiome in colorectal and healthy subjects found a 63% increase in the amount of 
UDCA in stools of healthy individuals correlated with Ruminococcus sp.102 Secondary bile 
acids, deoxychloate (DCA), lithodeoxycholate (LDA), and ursodeoxycholate (UDCA) 
increase in response to high fat diets and are increased in populations with higher incidence 
of colorectal cancers. In particular, there was a positive association with DCA and colorectal 
adenomas, a precursor to colorectal cancer.103-109 In contrast, UDCA has been shown in 
animal and in vitro studies to reduce the risk of cancer dysplasia and cancer 
development110, 111 and, in a phase III clinical trial, UDCAs reduced the degree of dysplasia 
in colonic polyps.,112 Recent mechanistic studies suggest that, in contrast to butyrate, 
UDCA induced cell differentiation and senescence in colon cancer cells via histone 
hypoacetylation.113

Transformation of dietary compounds by the gut microbiome results in additional 
environmental exposures that may influence epigenetic mechanisms of gene expression. We 
presented examples of anaerobic metabolism by gut bacteria that is dynamic and responsive 
to ingested substrates from myriad dietary sources. Functional genes measured in the gut 
microbiome suggest that there are basic metabolic pathways that are conserved across all 
healthy individuals114, 115 which have the core capacity to generate compounds that 
influence epigenetic pathways of gene expression.109, 110 While colonic epithelium may 
have immediate exposure to microbial metabolites, many microbial products are absorbed 
into systemic circulation and may alter gene expression in regions distal to the gut. 
Integration of dietary intake, measurements of the gut microbiome, and epigenome markers 
in multi-generational human population studies are needed to understand the influence of 
these environmental factors on human health.

Summary and Future Directions

Acknowledgments
