Cho and Blaser

Page 2

Characterizing the microbiome

Tools for studying the metagenome

individuals, and possibly, their disease risks. Substantial progress has been made in
developing the tools for inquiry, and defining the overarching concepts that advance the
field. However, the subject is vast, and the implications for human health and disease are
wide-ranging. The study of humans and model animal systems with strong phenotypes is
essential for making progress in this field of applied genetics. Although a focus on bacteria
is important, inquiries aimed at archaea, viruses, and retroviruses, is also needed.

The purpose of this review is to develop the theoretical basis for investigating how
microbiome composition and function affect human health. We provide examples of
applying this knowledge to better understand human health, and discuss how microbiome
changes could alter host–microbiome interactions to mitigate disease. We also consider the
next steps in the development of this field, particularly on the need to focus on the
inheritance of the microbiome, and on its involvement in modulating complex traits.

Animals have had residential microbes performing metabolic functions for at least 500
million years, at a conservative estimate6,7. Extensive congruent phylogenies of animal hosts
and their microbiota, involving both individual organisms and whole microbial
populations1,8,9, suggest the existence of specific selection based on co-adaptation.
Cooperative interactions between microbes and their hosts typically involve microbial
participation in host functions such as defence, metabolism, and reproduction10. For
example, comparing germ-free and conventional mice indicates that microbiota are
responsible for most of the metabolites that are detected in plasma11.

Functional variation of host microbiota can be mediated by the introduction or EXTINCTION of
particular microbial groups or by a change in population structure12–14. Such alterations can
in turn be induced by selection by environmental factors10,15 such as dietary changes or
exposure to antibiotics10,15. Below we describe the efforts to categorize the composition and
complex dynamics of the microbiota.

The taxonomic diversity inherent in complex environmental communities and the task of
identifying specific associations with host traits create unique challenges. One approach to
metagenome analysis involves assigning unassembled sequences generated by shotgun high-
throughput sequencing (HTS)16 to the NCBI non-redundant Clusters of Orthologous Groups
(COG) or the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases17. This
method facilitates the assessment of interactions that occur within the microbiome, and
potentially between microbiome and host18. However, because a substantial fraction of the
metagenome (~ 33%) is not well-represented by reference genomes, this strategy provides
only a limited understanding of the functional potential of the microbiota. An alternative
approach is to use catalogues of known genes to identify functional clusters within a sample;
5. A catalogue of the
such clusters could correspond to the proposed taxonomic ENTEROTYPES
microbial genes present in the human gut, for example, is being generated using several
approaches including sequencing, assembling and characterizing non-redundant microbial
genes from fecal samples19, and whole genome sequencing of reference microbial species20.

As sequencing and bioinformatics technologies continue to evolve (see ref 21 for a review of
the state-of-the-art technologies), scientific priorities will include elucidating the ‘core’
metagenome that occupies a specific human niche, and discerning the differences between
normal and diseased hosts.. As an example of the latter, Greenblum et al. applied new tools
to understand interhost metagenomic variation in relation to phenotypes such as obesity and
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)22. By categorizing metagenomic sequences based on

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 3

Taxonomic and functional variation

gene function, they constructed community-level metabolic networks varying in gene
abundance, and examined the topological features of these networks in relation to host
phenotype. Their analysis identified specific network topologies related to obesity and IBD;
skewed topologies chiefly differ in genes related to host interactivity, particularly in
relationship to metabolism. Such topological tools can be applied to explore differences in
other host disease states.

The composition of the microbiome varies by anatomical site (Figure 1). The primary
determinant of community composition is anatomical location: interpersonal variation is
substantial23,24 and is higher than the temporal variability seen at most sites in a single
individual25. Such relative temporal stability suggests that individuals can be grouped
according to the major enterotypes present in the colon5 or the vagina4. However, dietary
changes can rapidly cause substantial intestinal metagenomic changes, and enterotypes are
known to cluster based on dietary abundance of animal protein vs carbohydrate26. Similarly,
nasopharyngeal microbiota in young children varies seasonally24, and vaginal microbiota
varies with menses4. In the absence of marked perturbations, the aggregate microbiota of an
individual appears to vary relatively narrowly within host-specific boundaries; the basis of
13. Because minor
such boundaries have not been established, but may REPRESENT NASH EQUILIBRIA
microbial populations have the potential to bloom, the temporal variation observed in a host
may be mirrored by the interindividual variation at a single time27; that the system is
dynamic suggests that there are greater interpersonal similarities than a snap-shot view
indicates. However, large perturbations such as antibiotic exposure28 or enteric infections
(LA David, personal communication), can lead to transient disequilibrium29, or to the
development of a new stable state.

Among all mammals, the microbiota is extensively conserved at high taxonomic levels7, but
variation increases at progressively lower taxonomic levels30. Consequently, 85% of the
sequences obtained from the distal mouse gut represent genera that are not detected in
humans31. Furthermore, intra-species variability of the microbiota within the human
population is also substantial5, This degree of variation was unanticipated a priori. However,
in retrospect, extensive taxonomic variation is unsurprising: a human harbours a climax
population of about 1014bacterial cells, can host 105 – 106 bacterial generations per human
generation, is omniverous, and has accumulated genetic and epigenetic diversity as a host
species for >1 million years. Indicator organisms such as Helicobacter pylori32 and
reptococcus mutans33 highlight some differences across the microbiota34 and
S
t
metagenome35 among human ethnic groups; however, the extent of ethnic variation in
overall metagenomic composition is unknown. The microbiomes of monozygotic twins are
more closely related to one another than those of unrelated individuals36,37 but not strikingly
so, indicating important post-natal influences on composition.

The extensive lower-level taxonomic variation and large compositional differences observed
even among highly related host organisms (e.g. mice and humans) is counterbalanced by the
substantial conservation of metagenomic core functions (Figure 2). This reflects the
conservation of core bacterial properties involved in nucleic acid and protein synthesis, and
in metabolic and structural requirements. Of the >50 known phyla, most of the human
microbiota is composed of <10 (and mostly 6) phyla. Bacteria from other phyla, usually of
plant origin, that may be present in skin, nasopharyngeal, or gut samples24,25,38; are
generally infrequent (<0.01% of the sequences) and probably represent transient carriage
from food- and air-borne exposures. Why did the particular restriction of diversity within a
few phyla evolve, not only in humans, but in perhaps all other vertebrates? One possibility is
that within the relatively conserved boundaries for the microbiome permitted by the human
genome, there exists a large array of contingency organisms and contingency genes.

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 4

Resilience and community disturbance

According to this hypothesis, the genes may only be active at some moment in the host’s
lifespan, or perhaps at a frequency of less than once per lifespan.

The parallel needs of individual bacteria lead to both competition for key substrates and to
functional redundancy in the microbiota. Nevertheless, the enormous bacterial biomass also
provides many unique or minimally redundant bacterial genes19.

RESILIENCE, the ability to withstand disturbance, is a central concept in ecology. The resilience
of the human colonic microbiome is beautifully illustrated by recent studies of twins
examined before, during, and after 7-weeks of ingesting a fermented milk product
containing a sample composed of ~108 Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Lactococcus, and
Streptococccus species36. Despite the daily oral inoculations, the composition of the
microbiota at the 16S rDNA level and the metagenome were essentially unaffected. While
the microbiome of human adults appears highly resilient, no comparable studies have been
performed in children, but because population structures appear more dynamic and
developmental39, resilience may be lower. An important natural experiment has been
occurring over the past 70 years in which most of the world’s population has been exposed
to pharmacological doses of antimicrobial agents. Such usage has been based on the implicit
belief that the human microbiome is completely resilient, and returns to the status quo ante
after antibiotic-induced perturbation. However, study of indicator organisms such as H.
pylori, indicates that EXTIRPATIONS of a bacterial species can occur in individual hosts40. There
also may be medium- and long-term selection of resistant organisms, and destabilization of
the microbiome with new species compositions, in the absence of further antibiotic
exposure28,41. Thus, despite the extensive resilience inherent in a complex eco-system, there
may be loss of recovery from continued perturbations29, with important implications for
human health42.

Medical scientists are familiar with Koch’s postulates, which are used as criteria to
determine whether a microbe causes disease43. However, pathogenetic considerations about
the microbiome may better focus on community characteristics, which are largely governed
by richness, composition, and interactions among the constituent members7,16,44. Substantial
perturbation (community disturbance45) tests the resilience of the community, e.g., it ability
to resist invasion by exogenous microbes; stable diverse communities resist pathogens46. At
present, 16S rRNA analyses focus on taxonomic differences at or above the species level.
However, examinations below the subspecies level, relating to strain, or even allele,
ultimately may be more significant, although the technology, importantly the informatics
tools, are not yet developed enough.

The human microbiome represents one or more complete ecosystems. The trophic
organization of species-rich communities is similar to other complex network topologies, in
that it shows extreme heterogeneity, with a relatively small number of highly connected
nodes dominating47. Such communities may resist random perturbations, but if keystone
species48 are lost, effects may cascade, with secondary extinctions; high biodiversity
diminishes this risk12. The substantial non-linear interactions in complex co-evolved
systems ensure that ecological networks are robust against random removals49. However,
with repeated perturbations, the effects of gene loss can be amplified by downstream effects
on co-colonizing microbes (secondary extinctions) and on the host. Because of ALLELOPATHY, the
effects of extinctions may magnify50. In the short-term, functional redundancy may mask
extinction effects, but in the longer-run, extinctions lead to loss of contingency responses
that can cause ecological crashes49. Considering the importance of guilds of bacteria

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01.

Extinctions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 5

exploiting parallel and sequential metabolic pathways, these concepts are germane to the
human metagenome. With modernity, horizontal microbial transmission has been
diminishing, and there has been unprecedented selection against existing, long-present
microbes40. As has occurred in the human stomach with the loss of a dominant species51,52,
body sites then can harbor alternative stable states.

In summary, as with other complex ecosystems, the microbiomes that populate specific
human anatomical niches are species-rich, but possess particular overall community
characteristics at higher organizational levels. All are subject to perturbation in the course of
normal development and aging, and especially with disease. As our knowledge of the
fundamental characteristics and biology of the human microbiome grows, so will our ability
to understand disease-related variation.

Influences on the microbiota during the life cycle

As described in the previous section, differences in microbiota composition exist across
body sites and between individuals. However, changes are also evident across the human
lifespan. Important questions in this field involve determining if such temporal changes are
life-stage specific, and whether they are predetermined by host genetic characteristics, or by
environmental factor.

Inheritance of microbiota

The congruent phylogenies of mammals and their microbiota8 provide strong evidence for
the inheritance of the microbiota7 Although inheritance of the microbiota from the father is
presently little studied, increasing evidence supports inheritance from the mother34,53. Until
the amniotic sac ruptures, a fetus is considered to be sterile, or essentially sterile.
Immediately after vaginal delivery, founding microbial populations in the baby closely
resemble that of their mother’s vagina54, with lactobacilli predominating. Since lactic acid-
producing bacteria dominate in both vagina and in mother’s milk, the initial gastro-intestinal
tract bloom of lactobacilli in the baby cannot be considered accidental. Lactobacilli
represent the pioneer community in mice55 as well as humans39, preparing the
gastrointestinal tract for subsequent microbial successions, until microbial maturity is
reached.

The multiple opportunities for the microbiota to be transferred from a mother to her baby
may be disrupted by modern lifestyles. Caesarian section instead of vaginal delivery is an
obvious example of the potential impact of medical practice on microbiota composition,
with substantial differences in founding population54, that may persist for months56 (Figure
3). In many host species, paternal contributions to offspring traits have been well
documented57,58; these observations have been extended to the microbiome, where paternal
contributions to offspring H. pylori allele composition have been shown59, In any event,
there is evidence for extensive horizontal gene transfer (HGT) within human populations,
functional classes, and ecological niches60, indicating the site-specificity and dynamism of
selection on the human microbiome. Even so, microbial inheritance can provide important
confirmation of human ancestry61.

In Drosophila melanogaster, microbial influences have an effect on MATING PREFERENCE for >30
generations62; can microbiome composition affect mating in humans? Odor is one means to
affect mating preference, since human axillary and oral odors are largely influenced by
microbial products, especially mercaptans63. In general, the greater the force of mating
preference, the more likely those populations become sexually isolated64,65; this could affect
tribal differentiation and other ethnic differences in humans. We speculate that metagenome

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 6

composition may have affected mating preference in humans, representing another
phenotype under strong selective pressure.

Postnatal influences on the microbiota

Microbiome dynamics in adults

Over a lifetime, each human develops a densely populated microbiome that is recapitulated
in every individual and in every generation. The eruption of teeth is responsible for major
successions in the oral microbiota66,67, suggesting that succession may be a general property
of microbiome dynamics in humans. In mice, this clearly occurs in the GI tract68. Exposure
(or not) to environmental microbes is another important but highly variable reservoir for the
resident microbiota. Early life antibiotic use produces major shifts in both microbiota
characteristics and in host developmental phenotypes, both on the farm69 and in
experimental animals70,71. Whether such precedents are applicable to human children is
unknown, but seems likely. If so, then both the timing of microbiome succession and the
specific organisms present may affect development. The concept of time-dependent
compositional variation affecting host immunological, metabolic, cognitive, and
reproductive development is a potentially important and testable hypothesis. We further
speculate that nature orchestrates microbiome development so to optimize fecundity,
reaching a climax state at or near parturition to maximize success for the next generation.
The noted heterozygote advantage for fecundity72 may be an analogue to a genetically
diverse microbiota.

Our knowledge of microbiome dynamics, especially age-related changes, during human
adulthood is limited. The older literature (predating the use of HTS), clearly shows that the
post-menopause vaginal microbiota differs substantially from that during the reproductive
period73,74. Similarly, in the stomach,, the age-related progressive development of gastric
atrophy (enhanced by H. pylori presence75,76) selects for gastric microbiota that are
substantially different from the norm 77. Analogous changes may be occurring in other body
sites as senescence advances. In the gut, the ratio of Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes changes
with age78.

These concepts are particularly relevant to oncogenesis, which is generally age-related. In
the multi-step Nordling hypothesis of oncogenesis79, 4–6 somatic cell mutations are needed
for cancer development. We propose that age-related microbiota shifts contribute to this
multi-step process. Residential microbes can contribute to somatic mutagenesis by causing
genotoxicity secondary to inflammation, increased cell proliferation, and production of pro-
mutagenic metabolites (e.g. butyrate)80. Genes may have alternative effects at different life
stages, illustrating the idea of antagonistic pleiotropy81. We hypothesize that specific human
microbiota and their genes that are beneficial early in life may be harmful later in life. The
dominant gastric bacterium, H. pylori provides an example:early in life, inflammatory
responses to the organism improve control of infection82,83 and allergy84, but later in life
promote atrophy and oncogenesis85. A related hypothesis is that co-evolved microbiota are
adaptive for the human species both by supporting early-in-life host functions and by
leading to later-in-life host demise 86.

Disease links and health implications

How, then, does the microbiome affect human health? Current studies focus on describing
the variant microbe populations that appear in specific disease states or the temporal
microbial changes over the course of a disease. For many conditions, the challenge is to
discover whether there is a causal link between microbiome variation and significant
pathology. Limitations in the definitions and stratification of clinical syndromes, including

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 7

irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and non-ulcer dyspepsia (NUD), unfortunately reduce the
potential of microbiome studies. The diseases listed below review some current recent
investigations (Table 1). Investigations are preliminary, but some observations are
promising.

Cutaneous microbiome

The cutaneous microbiome is an obvious target in specific diseases, such as psoriasis, a
chronic, idiopathic inflammatory dermatologic condition87. In studies predating HTS, the
use of PCR and cloning led to observations that Firmicutes were significantly over-
represented and Actinobacteria were significantly under-represented in psoriatic lesions
compared to both unaffected skin in psoriasis patients and in normal controls88. Studies to
explore these findings using HTS are currently underway89. Atopic dermatitis, another
chronic inflammatory condition, has increased in incidence approximately three-fold over
the last 30 years in industrialized countries, suggesting a potential role for microbiome
alterations. Classic atopic dermatitis occurs in areas, such as the ANTECUBITAL and POPLITEAL FOSSAE,
with similar microbial populations89, suggesting a microbiome role. Similarly,
Propionibacterium acnes has been implicated in the common dermatologic condition, acne.
Although P. acnes thrives in the cutaneous PILOSEBACEOUS UNITS and secretes enzymes that cause
local injury and inflammation, and is widely accepted to have a function in acne
development90, continuing investigations also are examining other microbes in the
development of acne. Chronic skin ulcers, often secondary to venous stasis or diabetes, lead
to substantial morbidity. Cutaneous microbiome shifts, such as an increased abundance of
Pseudomonadaceae in patients with chronic ulcers treated with antibiotics and an increased
abundance of Streptococcaceae in diabetic ulcers have been noted91. Such shifts may
interact with aberrantly expressed host cutaneous defense response genes92, thereby
increasing disease risk.

The discovery that H. pylori was adapted to survive in the acidic gastric environment
overturned the dogma that the stomach is sterile. In H. pylori-negative individuals, gastric
microbiota diversity is high; most of the prominent gastric phylotypes (Streptococcus,
Actinomyces, Prevotella, Gemella) also are abundant in the oropharynx of these
individuals93; indicating that either many constituents are swallowed from more proximal
sites, or that close relatives of the oral microbiota colonize more distally. In contrast, among
pylori-positive persons, H. pylori usually accounts for >90% of sequence reads from the
 
H
.
gastric microbiota93, dramatically reducing the overall diversity of this microbiota. The
ability of H. pylori to dominate indicates an evolved fitness for that specialized niche. H.
pylori is a classical AMPHIBIONT; the presence (or absence) of an H. pylori dominated gastric
microbiota is strongly associated with particular diseases with important age-related
differences85. Its presence increases risk for developing peptic ulcer disease, gastric mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) tumors, and gastric adenocarcinoma94 but also is
associated with decreased reflux esophagitis95 and childhood-onset asthma96; demonstrating
the complex biological interactions with our microbiota.

Gastric microbiome

The colonic microbiota and colorectal cancer

The colonic microbiota has been suspected for a long time to be involved in the
development of colorectal cancers97, possibly by synthesizing short-chain fatty acids
(SCFAs) and other metabolites. SCFAs, in particular butyrate, may induce apoptosis, cell
cycle arrest, and differentiation, via Wnt signaling98. Microbes may also be genotoxic to
colonic epithelial cells, as demonstrated by the induction of aneuploidy and tetraploidy by
Enterococcus faecalis99. The colonic microbiota also might promote colorectal cancer by

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 8

The colon microbiota and inflammatory bowel disease

eliciting host responses, for example, by stimulating exaggerated immune responses,
potentially via Th17 cells99.

Further evidence of a link between colonic microbiota and colorectal cancer is suggested by
the ability of antibiotic administration to alter the composition of the colonic microbiota and
to affect the expression of host genes involved in cell cycle regulation, reducing epithelial
proliferation100. Early studies evaluating specific microbes were limited to identifying
culture-dependent species, such as Streptococcus bovis, but could not adequately assess
anaerobic constituents. However, members of the anaerobic genus Fusobacterium have
recently been associated with colorectal cancer; whole genome sequences of Fusobacterium
species were compared between cases and matched controls using both quantitative PCR
analysis and HTS101,102. Fusobacterium nucleatum is a mucosally adherent, pro-
inflammatory microbe that was first identified in the mouth103. In colorectal cancer samples,
F
nucleatum sequences were significantly enriched compared to samples obtained from
 
.
control subjects, while both Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes were relatively depleted in those
with Fusobacterium-rich malignancies102. The enrichment of Fusobacterium species (not
limited to F. nucleatum) was confirmed when evaluating the mucosal microbiome of
colorectal cancers compared to adjacent normal tissues from 99 subjects101. However, the
causal direction of the association has not yet been ascertained.

The microbiome is essential for the activation of host immune responses 104. For example,
Th17 cell differentiation in the mouse LAMINA PROPRIA requires the presence of segmented
filamentous bacteria (SFB)105, and polysaccharide A produced by Bacteroides fragilis
mediates conversion of CD4+ T cells into regulatory T cells106. The inflammatory bowel
diseases have long been considered to reflect interactions between microbes and the host.
IBD susceptibility is associated with host polymorphisms in bacterial sensor genes such as
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 2 (NOD2) also known as
caspase recruitment domain-containing protein 15 (CARD15)107,108 and toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4)109, and IBD patients sometimes improve following antibiotic treatment110. Early
childhood antibiotic exposure has been associated with significantly increased risk for
Crohn’s disease111, suggesting that gut microbiome perturbations may be critical for disease
risk. Microbial diversity is significantly diminished in Crohn’s disease112, suggesting
decreased gut microbiome resilience that could affect immune interactions. Gut microbiome
population structures of patients with ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease19 depart from
normality, but remain clustered by disease within their characteristic deviated patterns.
Specific bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae genus may act together with a disordered
microbiome to increase the risk of ulcerative colitis113. Among twins discordant for
ulcerative colitis, those affected had significantly reduced bacterial diversity, but increased
proportions of Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria114. Patients with Crohn’s disease have
over-representation of E. faecium and of several Proteobacteria compared to controls115.
The microbial patterns observed for the conditions described above are preliminary and their
specificity and causal direction have not been established.

The gut microbiota and diseases of the liver

The gut microbiota may be involved in hepatologic conditions, including non-alcoholic fatty
liver disease (NAFLD)116, alcoholic STEATOSIS, and hepatocellular carcinoma. The liver is the
first solid organ exposed to the metabolic products generated by the gut microbiome,
including acetaldehyde, ammonia, and phenols. Compared to germ-free mice, the presence
of a microbiome in conventional mice leads to suppression of intestinal epithelium
angiopoietin-related protein 4, which inhibits lipoprotein lipase, increasing downstream
triglyceride accumulation in the hepatic parenchyma and adipocytes117. Chronic ethanol

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 9

The gut microbiota and pbesity

exposure disturbs the gut microbiome118,119, but roles for the microbiome in steatosis are
unresolved. Particular murine colonic COMMENSALS (e.g. H. hepaticus) promote the development
of hepatocellular carcinoma120. Patients with cirrhosis have a substantially altered
microbiome, including community-wide changes at multiple taxonomic levels, with
enrichment of Proteobacteria and Fusobacteria (phyla), and Enterobacteriaceae,
Veillonellaceae, and Streptococacceae (family) 121. Although many observations suggest
links between microbiome composition and liver disease, definitive associations in humans
are lacking.

Genetically obese (ob/ob) mice have decreased Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratios compared
with lean (ob/+ and +/+ wild-type) siblings31. Transplantation of gut microbiota from the
obese (ob/ob) to germ-free mice conferred an obese phenotype, demonstrating
transmissibility of metabolic phenotypes17; the transferred microbiomes had increased
capacity for energy harvest. In humans, relative Bacteroidetes proportions increase with
weight loss122. In mono- and dizygotic twins, obesity was associated with decreased
Bacteroidetes and diminished bacterial diversity, with enrichment of genes related to lipid
and carbohydrate metabolism. Despite substantial taxonomic variation, functional
metagenomic differences were minor37. Changing exposures/selection pressures on the
early-life microbiome may contribute to development of obesity. Antibiotic use in human
infancy, before age 6 months, was significantly associated with obesity development123. In
contrast, perinatal administration of a Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG-based PROBIOTIC decreased
excessive weight gain during childhood124. These early studies provide support for the
concept that microbiota alterations could lead to childhood-onset obesity, which could be
modifiable. Alterations in the gut microbiome also occur with interventions used to treat
obesity. ROUX-EN-Y SURGERY significantly increases levels of Proteobacteria, while altering
specific metabolic markers, such as the production of urinary amines and cresols125.

The gut microbiota and rheumatoid arthritis

Disregulation of host responses secondary to DYSBIOSIS within the gut lumen could affect
distant anatomical sites through activation of host immune responses. This may be a
mechanism in rheumatoid arthritis, another chronic idiopathic inflammatory condition. In
mice, the presence of SFBs in the gut microbiome causes local expansion of Th17 cells126
that then migrate to peripheral immune compartments and activate B cells into antibody-
producing plasma cells. Antibody production leads to immune-mediated destruction of the
joints that mirrors rheumatoid arthritis127.

Cause or effect?

Microbiome analysis in humans has been largely based on observation, with associations of
disease phenotypes with particular microbiota constituents. But which is causal: does factor
A cause factor B, does factor B cause factor A, or does factor C cause both A and B? Hill
developed criteria to address the questions: “In what circumstances can we pass from this
observed association to a verdict of causation? Upon what basis should we proceed to do
so?”128 The criteria include the strength of association, its consistency, specificity,
temporality, and biological plausibility, and whether biological gradients are present,
experimental support exists, and support can be extrapolated from known causal
relationships. Although these criteria were advanced largely to unravel epidemiological
relationships, they are applicable to genetics as well and to metagenomics, in particular.
Sometimes successful treatment trials with amelioration or cure of a particular condition
provide the critical evidence for a causal relationship. The changed natural history of peptic
ulcer disease following elimination of H. pylori129 demonstrated its pathogenic role.

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 10

Perspectives

For understanding causation and pathogenesis, model organisms provide an important
approach. Animal models approximate some human diseases (e.g. asthma, atherosclerosis),
but many diseases are not well reproduced (e.g. psoriasis). For diseases that can be studied
in model organisms, microbiota roles can be explored within the constraints of particular
model systems (Table 2). Standard models of inbred mice are limited by their uncontrolled
microbiome diversity. Certain disease states are well-studied in these models, such as the
effects of SFBs on Th17 development or the susceptibility to type I diabetes in non-obese
diabetic (NOD) mice. The use of GNOTOBIOTIC mice eliminates the above-mentioned microbiome
variability, but the animals are expensive and require specialized facilities and expertise
limiting their widespread use. The recent availability of GNOTOBIOTIC animals from commercial
sources permits conventionalization of animals with experimental or control microbiota
without needing xenobiotic facilities; such approaches allow for the direct observation of
microbiota effects on the host. The extension of this concept to humanized model
organisms130 allows better approximation of the effects of the human microbiome on
disease processes in tractable animal models.

Inherent complexities in the composition of the microbiome may preclude investigations of
microbe-associated diseases using classical approaches such as Koch’s postulates. Instead of
single organisms associated with disease, community characteristics (composition and
metagenomic functionality) may be more relevant. The principles of host interaction with
pathogens and commensals contain many parallel features, which can help tutor the new
field, but the nature of the selection for commensalism is more complex and highly
dynamic. The scale of the interface suggests that microbiome–host interactions have
important bearings on disease susceptibility, and the microbial effects on the balance of host
metabolism and immunity131 provides an excellent model for the broader phenomenon of
disease susceptibility. Modifying disease risk by altering metabolic, immunological, or
developmental pathways are obvious strategies.

Given the ongoing extinction of our ancient commensal organisms, the future of a healthy
human microbiome may include restoration of our ancestral microbial ecology. There are
two types of restoration. The first involves restoring ancient organisms (or pathways) in
healthy hosts lacking them, as prophylaxis against future imbalances. The second type of
restoration could be therapeutic, when the etiologic extinctions and imbalances are
recognized. This scientific frontier will require understanding the biology of re-
introductions, as well as developing microbial breeding programs. In addition to the
technical problems associated with restoring particular organisms to specific hard-to-reach
niches, such as the distal ileum, there also will be substantial biological problems related to
understanding how reintroductions affect the population structure of the extant organisms,
and host interactions.

To better understand the implications of microbiota and metagenome variation in human
health and disease, the field needs improved informatics tools, including new approaches for
understanding the complexity of the metadata132. The multidimensionality of the human and
microbial phenotypes and the dynamic, non-linear interactions challenge deterministic
solutions. For example, in analyses of 16S-defined OPERATIONAL TAXONOMIC UNITS (OTU) populations
in mice receiving traditional or Western-type diets, Reshef et al., examined top-scoring non-
linear abundance relationships133. These often involved “NONCOEXISTENCE”, sometimes related to
known factors (e.g. diet, host gender), but were often unexplained. Although incomplete,
such work leads to new approaches to understand the underlying complexity.

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 11

We also will need new tools to implement the health implications presented by metagenomic
analyses. Although the known principles of evolution and genetics apply, study of the
microbiome provides new applications, and will lead to new understandings of complex
traits. Important questions to pursue are listed in Box 2. As such, this is a frontier for human
preventive medicine, and for medical management of chronic diseases.

Acknowledgments

Biographies

This work was supported by R01GM63270, R01DK090989, UH2 AR057506, 5 P30 CA016087, and
1UL1RR029893 from the National Institutes of Health, the Diane Belfer Program for Human Microecology, the
Michael Saperstein Medical Scholars Fund, and the Levin Fellowship in Gastroenterology.

Ilseung Cho received his MD and MS from New York University and completed his post-
graduate training in Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology at New York University
(NYU), USA. He is an Assistant Professor of Medicine at the NYU Langone Medical
Center, USA. His current research focuses on the role of the gut microbiome in drug
metabolism and availability.

Martin J. Blaser received his MD from New York University (NYU), USA. He received
post-graduate training at the University of Colorado at Boulder (CO, USA), Centers for
Disease Control in Atlanta (Georgia, USA), Rockefeller University (NY, USA), and at the
Institut Pasteur in Paris (France). He is a Professor of Medicine and Microbiology at the
NYU Langone Medical Center, USA. His current research focuses on antibiotic-induced
changes in the human and mouse microbiome and their effects on disease development.

Glossary

Microbiota

16S rRNA

Metagenome

Microbiome

Extinction

Enterotype

The microbial organisms that constitute the microbiome. The
composition of the microbiota within a community can vary
substantially between environmental sites and host niches in health
and disease

A component of the 30S small subunit of prokaryotic ribosomes.
Sequencing of the 16S rRNA has been used to identify prokaryotic
taxonomy in complete environmental samples such as the
microbiome

The genetic information of a complex population, typically from
microbes in an environmental or host niche sample, that is
constituted by the genomes of many individual organisms. The
metagenome provides information about the functional genetic
potential of the aggregate population

The totality of microbes, their genetic information, and the milieu in
which they interact. Microbiomes typically consist of environmental
or biological niches containing complex communities of microbes

The loss, usually of a species, within an ecosystem

A recently proposed classification unit of animals based on the
bacteriological composition of their gut microbiome. There are
reported to be at least three distinct enterotypes independent of
ethnic background and diet

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 12

Antecubital fossa

The triangular area on the anterior (or flexor) aspect of the elbow
joint

Popliteal fossae

The shallow depression found on the flexor aspect of the knee joint

Nash equilibrium

Resilience

Extirpation

Allelopathy

Mating
preference

Pilosebaceous
units

Amphibiont

Lamina propria

Steatosis

Commensal

Probiotics

Roux-en-Y
surgery

Dysbiosis

Gnotobiotic

A concept from game theory in which players know the strategies of
the others, and in which any change from their strategy puts them in
a less favourable position.

A term in ecology indicating the capacity of a system to absorb
disturbance and reorganize itself while undergoing change, so as to
retain essentially the same function, structure, and identity.

The loss of species in a locality (e.g. an individual host)

A phenomenon in which a microbe uses chemical means to aid in its
competition with a group of microbe(s). Allelopathy may involve
manipulation of third parties (e.g. host) to favor competition

The selection or choice of sexual partners that is often based on
traits of a potential mate. Genetic differences between selected and
non-selected hosts are a source of selectable variation

The anatomic structure around each hair shaft that consists of the
hair shaft and follicle, the sebaceous gland, and the erector pili
muscle

An organism (e.g. microbe) that may have a pathogenic or symbiotic
relationship with another organism (e.g. its host), depending on
context. A more accurate term than commensal

A thin layer of loose connective tissue that lies underneath the
epithelium and with it constitutes the mucosa that lines various
lumens within the body; it is a dense locus of immunological and
inflammatory cells

The pathological accumulation and retention of lipids within liver
parenchymal cells. Substantial steatosis can compromise the
function of the cell and is associated with disease processes,
including alcoholism, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia

An organism (e.g. microbe) that is involved in a form of symbiosis
in which one organism derives a benefit while the other is
unaffected

Living microorganisms that are thought to confer a benefit to the
host.

A type of gastric bypass surgery primarily used for the treatment of
morbid obesity. In Roux-en-Y surgeries, a portion of the small
bowel is bypassed to decrease the absorption of nutrients

A condition in which the normal microbiome population structure is
disturbed, often through external pressures such as disease states or
medications

Describes an animal that is colonized solely with known strains of
bacteria or other microorganisms. The term also describes germ-free
animals, as the status of their microbial communities is known

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 13

Operational
taxonomic unit
(OTU)

Noncoexistence

Prebiotics

The smallest phylogenetic unit described by variations in 16S rRNA
sequencing. Dissimilarity of <1% in 16S rRNA sequences has
commonly been used to define an OTU but <3% and <5% have also
been used

An exclusivity scenario in which the abundance of one species leads
to another species being less abundant than would be expected by
chance

Food ingredients that confer specific changes in the gut microbiome
and lead to beneficial effects in the host
