Human 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

SPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

Table 1. Similarities and differences in the anatomy of the mouse and human gastrointestinal tract  

Features 

Overall anatomy: gastrointestinal tract is composed of mouth, 

esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine and anus 

Composition of sectional tissue of small intestine: mucosa, lamina 
propria, muscularis mucosae, submucosa, muscular tunics, 
nervous plexi, serosa    

Presence of cells in small intestine: absorptive enterocytes, goblet 
cells, enteroendocrine cells, Paneth cells, microfold (M) cells, 
caveolated (chief) cells 

Composition of sectional tissue of large intestine: mucosa, lamina 
propria, muscularis mucosae, submucosa, muscular tunics, 
serosa 

Mouse 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Presence of cells in the colon: absorptive colonocytes, goblet cells, 

Yes 

enteroendocrine cells, microfold (M) cells 

Stomach 

Cecum 

Appendix 

Colon 

Small intestine 

Taller vili with no mucosal folds 

Shorter than mouse villi, presence of 

Divided into non-glandular/fore-stomach 
and glandular stomach, the two parts 
separated by limiting ridge 

Lack fore-stomach, no limiting ridge 

Large, fermentation happens here 

Small, no fermentation 

mucosal folds 

No 

Rather smooth and no division 

Clearly divided into different sections: 

ascending, transverse and descending 
colon 

Bowel of colon 

Thin muscularis mucosae 

Variable thickness 

Presence of haustrum and taenia coli in the colon 

No 

Distribution of Paneth cells  

Distribution of goblet cells 

Present only in the small intestine 

In the cecum and proximal colon 

Abundant in proximal colon, number 

Abundant from cecum to rectum 

Distribution of transverse folds 

Restricted to the cecum and proximal 

Along the length of the colonic mucosa 

decrease at the base of the crypt in 
distal colon and rectum 

colon 

Adapted from Treuting and Dintzis, 2012. 
 

intestine:colon  length  ratio  is  2.5  in  mice  versus  7  in  humans
(Treuting  and  Dintzis,  2012),  and  the  surface  ratio  of  small
intestine:colon  is  only  18  in  mice  compared  to  400  in  humans
(Casteleyn et al., 2010). The mouse cecum is also large relative to
its total gastrointestinal (GI) tract and is an important site for the
fermentation  of  plant  materials  as  well  as  for  the  production  of
vitamin K and B, which mice reabsorb through coprophagy .
By  contrast,  the  human  cecum  is  relatively  small,  with  an
anatomical structure similar to that of the colon and does not hold a
clear function (Treuting and Dintzis, 2012). These morphological
differences reflect murine adaptation toward an expanded colon and
cecum  capacity,  allowing  them  to  extract  nutrients  from  the
relatively larger proportion of indigestible food components in their
diet, as compared with humans. Humans also have an appendix,
which  is  absent  in  mice.  The  appendix  is  a  vermiform  organ
attached to the cecum  and was hypothesized to be a remnant
of the cecum under selective pressure of diet. However, the organ
has  recently  been  shown  to  have  evolved  under  multiple
environmental  factors  beyond  diet  (Smith  et  al.,  2013b).  The
appendix has also been suggested to act as a repository for beneficial
bacteria to replenish the gut microbiota after disturbances (Smith et
al., 2013b).

Mouse intestinal villi are taller than those of human . This
morphological difference increases the surface area of the mouse

2

small  intestine  and  has  been  suggested  as  a  compensation
mechanism for the lack of mucosal folds in the mouse intestine. The
mouse colon is rather smooth with no division, whereas the human
large  intestine  is  sub-compartmentalized  into  pouches  (called
haustra; see Box 1 for a glossary of terms, and see Fig. 1), which are
absent  in  the  mouse  colon.  In  humans,  fermentation  of  dietary
carbohydrates is bound to the large intestine, and is not observed in
either  the  vestigial  cecum  or  appendix.  These  major  anatomical
differences  in  the  gut  compartmentalization  between  mice  and
humans, especially with regards to the greater fermentation capacity
of  mice  (in  the  cecum),  probably  impact  the  diversity  and
composition of the gut microbial communities in the colon. These
communities  are  not  only  responsible  for  the  fermentation  of
indigestible  food  components,  but  also  for  the  production  of
essential  complements  to  the  host  such  as  vitamin  K  and  B  and
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs).

In  addition  to  the  macroscopic  differences,  the  microscopic
structure  of  the  intestinal  tract  of  mice  and  humans  also  differ
(Treuting and Dintzis, 2012). The mouse colon is composed of thin
muscularis mucosae (see Box 1 and Table 1) with no discernible
sub-mucosa,  whereas  the  human  colon  is  covered  by  a  thicker
mucosal wall. Another difference is the presence of transverse folds
along the length of the colonic mucosa in humans, whereas these
folds are restricted to the cecum and proximal colon in mice. These

Disease Models & MechanismsDisease Models & Mechanisms 

Human

A

B

G

V

V

C

L

P

M

M

SM

L

MM

C

Fig. 2. Anatomical structures of the intestinal wall in mice and in
humans. A and B are taken at the same magnification and show a
section of the small intestinal wall in mice (A) and humans (B), illustrating that
mouse intestinal villi (A) are taller than those in humans (B). C, intestinal
crypts; G, goblet cells; L, lamina propria; MM, muscularis mucosae; P,
Paneth cells; SM, submucosa; V, villi. The images are reproduced from
“Comparative anatomy and histology: A mouse and human atlas” by Piper M.
Treuting and Suzy Dintzis, 2012, with permission from Elsevier. 

(Cunliffe et al., 2001; Ghosh et al., 2002; Ouellette and Selsted,
1996).  These  differences  in  distribution  of  both  goblet  cells  and
Paneth cells between the two organisms suggest differences in local
immune responses, which might shape the composition of the gut
microbiota.

Overall, the mammalian digestive tract is strongly conserved, with
major differences between species being likely driven by diet. Given
their shared omnivorous nature, humans and mice thus share strong
similarities.  However,  humans  have  evolved  towards  a  smaller
cecum and colon and relatively longer small intestine as compared
to the murine system. In mice, fermentation of indigestible food
components  is  compartmentalized  in  the  cecum,  whereas,  in
humans, fermentation takes place in the colon, and the cecum is
vestigial . The morphology of mouse and human colons also
differs: the human colon is divided into haustra, whereas the mouse
colon is rather smooth. Cells that are essential to intestinal integrity
and host-microbiota equilibrium, such as goblet and Paneth cells,
are  also  conserved  between  the  two  species,  although  there  are
differences in distribution. Although these differences do not mean
that  the  murine  model  is  not  valuable  to  study  host-microbiota
interactions, care must be taken in making direct parallels between
murine  and  human  gut  with  regard  to  microbiota  composition,
because host-microbiota co-evolution could have been influenced
by these anatomical divergences.

Human and mouse gut microbiota composition in health and
disease
Given the considerations mentioned above, in this section we further
analyze the similarities and discrepancies between the murine and
human  gut  microbiota  composition,  as  well  as  their  respective
responses upon dietary interventions. Finally, we compare disease-
associated microbiome shifts between the two organisms.

Composition of the gut microbiota in healthy humans and mice
Overall, the gut microbiota of human and mice are dominated by
two  major  phyla,  Bacteroidetes  and  Firmicutes  (Eckburg  et  al.,
2005; Ley et al., 2005; Ley et al., 2006). However, when exploring

3

SPECIAL ARTICLE

A

Mouse

Cecum

Colon

Stomach

Ascending
colon

Small
intestine

Cecum
Appendix

Anus

Transverse
colon

Descending
colon

Taenia coli

Haustra

B Mouse fore and glandular stomach 

C Human glandular stomach 

ME

C

M T

ME
M

D Cross-section of mouse colon

E Cross-section of human colon

Fig. 1. Gross anatomy of the human and the mouse gastrointestinal
tract. (A) The human colon is divided into different sections (i.e. ascending,
transverse and descending colon) with the presence of taenia coli and
compartmentalization in haustra, which are absent in the mouse colon. The
human stomach is lined with a glandular mucosa (C) that secretes gastric
acid, whereas the mouse stomach is divided in two regions – a glandular
stomach and a non-glandular or fore-stomach (B). The mouse glandular
stomach is responsible for secreting gastric acid, whereas the non-glandular
stomach functions as a temporary site of food storage and digestion.
(E) Cross-section of a human colon, which has a thicker muscular wall and
mucosa compared with the mouse colon (D). M, mucosa; ME, muscularis
externa; TC, taenia coli. Panels B and C are reproduced from “Comparative
anatomy and histology: A mouse and human atlas” by Piper M. Treuting and
Suzy Dintzis, 2012, with permission from Elsevier. D is reproduced from the
website http://theses.ulaval.ca/archimede/fichiers/24866/ch07.html with the
author’s permission. E is re-used from www.anatomyatlases.org with the
author’s permission. 

differences in colonic micro-compartmentalization and structuring
might contribute to the creation of diverse ecological micro-niches
hosting differing microbial communities.

At  the  cellular  level,  there  are  also  a  number  of  notable
differences  between  humans  and  mice.  The  first  example  is  the
distribution of mucin-producing goblet cells (Table 1). In mice, these
cells  are  abundant  along  the  surface  of  intestinal  crypts  in  the
proximal colon but, in the distal colon and rectum, their number
decreases at the base of the crypt. Conversely, in humans, goblet
cells are abundant from cecum to rectum. The second example is the
difference in distribution between mice and humans of another type
of intestinal epithelial cell – the Paneth cell (Table 1). Paneth cells
secrete  antimicrobial  compounds  into  the  lumen  of  the  small
intestine. They are rare but present in the cecum and proximal colon
of humans, whereas, in the mouse, these cells are entirely absent in
the colonic mucosa and uniquely found in the cecum. In addition to
location differences, the amount of defensins (peptides involved in
the host defense) secreted by Paneth cells, their storage and secretion
were  also  reported  to  be  different  between  mice  and  humans

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

Box 1. Glossary of scientific terms
Adiponectin: a protein involved in regulating glucose level and fatty-acid
breakdown.
Bacteroidetes: Gram-negative, non-spore-forming anaerobic bacteria;
one of the major bacterial phyla in human and mouse gut microbiota.
Coprophagy: consumption of feces. 
Dysbiosis: imbalance  of  human-associated  microbial  communities,
usually related to disease, with compositional (microbial species) and
functional (microbial metabolism) deviation from the normal microbiota.
Enterotype: classification of humans (or other host organisms) based
on the composition of their gut microbiota. 
Firmicutes: Gram-positive, endospore-producing anaerobic bacteria;
one of the major bacterial phyla in human and mouse gut microbiota.
Gut-brain axis: bidirectional signaling between the gut microbiota and
the host brain, affecting normal homeostasis and contributing to disease.
Haptens: small  molecules  that  can  elicit  immune  responses  when
attached to larger non-immunogenic carriers.
Haustra: small  pouches  segmenting  the  large  intestine,  caused  by
tension of shorter exterior muscle ribbons (cf. taenia coli). 
Humanized gnotobiotic mice: mice born germ-free and inoculated with
a human gut microbiota sample.
Isobiotic mice: genetically identical mice, only differing in microbiota
composition.
Metagenomic analysis: study of a microbial community by sequencing
the genetic material pool from an environmental or clinical sample.
Muscularis mucosae: thin muscle layer, separating the lamina propria
mucosae from the submucosae.
Taenia coli: three longitudinal smooth muscle ribbons along the outside
of the colon.

deeper  taxonomic  classifications,  Ley  et  al.  showed  that  85%  of
bacterial genera found in the mouse gut microbiota are not present
in  human  (Ley  et  al.,  2005).  Several  differences  in  research
techniques  hamper  the  comparison  of  the  murine  and  human
microbiome. First, most human gut microbiome studies use stool
samples,  whereas  cecal  contents  are  usually  used  in  mouse  gut
microbiome  studies  (with  the  exception  of  longitudinal  studies,
where pellets are sampled). Furthermore, the composition of the
human  gut  microbiota  has  been  investigated  in  several  studies
(Arumugam et al., 2011; Human Microbiome Project Consortium,
2012;  Qin  et  al.,  2010;  Yatsunenko  et  al.,  2012)  using  both
metagenomic and 16S rDNA sequencing approaches, whereas the
standard choice for mouse studies is mostly 16S rDNA sequencing
(Brinkman et al., 2011; Brinkman et al., 2013; Hildebrand et al.,
2013; Kellermayer et al., 2011; Riboulet-Bisson et al., 2012; Ubeda
et  al.,  2013;  Ward  et  al.,  2012;  Zenewicz  et  al.,  2013),  although
metagenomic analysis has also begun to be used in mouse studies
(Wang et al., 2014). Here, we compare the composition of mouse
and  human  gut  microbiota  based  on  all  currently  available  16S
rDNA sequenced data from fecal samples of healthy adults .
Considering the restrictions referred to previously, the analysis is
based on a limited number of samples: five murine fecal 16S rDNA
studies  (Nagy-Szakal  et  al.,  2012;  Riboulet-Bisson  et  al.,  2012;
Ubeda et al., 2013; Ward et al., 2012; Zenewicz et al., 2013) and
four  public  16S  rDNA  healthy  adult  human  datasets  (Human
Microbiome Project Consortium, 2012; Yatsunenko et al., 2012).

In these datasets, we found 79 genera occurring in both human
and mouse gut microbiotas. The relative abundances of most of the
dominant genera in mouse and human are quite different (Fig. 3A;
supplementary material Table S1). Genera with high abundance in
human  gut  microbiota,  as  compared  to  mouse  gut  microbiota,
include Prevotella, Faecalibacterium and Ruminococcus, whereas
Lactobacillus,  Alistipes and  Turicibacter are  more  abundant  in
mouse  gut  microbiota  (supplementary  material  Table  S1).

4

Clostridium, Bacteroides and Blautia, on the contrary, have a similar
relative  abundance  in  both  organisms.  However,  none  of  the
differences  found  between  human  and  mouse  gut  microbiota
survives multiple testing corrections due to the limited size of the
dataset,  so  these  results  should  be  considered  as  exploratory.
Although it is important to keep in mind the major inter-organism
variations, as well as technical discrepancies in the gut microbiota
studies  compared  above  (such  as  different  human  populations,
mouse  houses,  mouse  strains,  sample  handling,  processing
techniques and method of analysis), the results nonetheless mostly
agree with current knowledge. For instance, Prevotella abundance
is  known  to  be  low  in  mouse  gut  microbiota  (Hildebrand  et  al.,
2013) and Faecalibacterium is reported to be one of the dominant
members  in  healthy  gut  microbiota  in  humans,  as  it  has  been
suggested to be the marker for anti-inflammatory gut microbiota in
IBD patients in remission (Sokol et al., 2008; Sokol et al., 2009).

We then defined the core gut microbiota of mice, i.e. the taxa that
are always present in each individual gut microbiota (intersection set
of genera across samples). The comparative analysis of six mouse gut
microbiota  datasets  (Cho  et  al.,  2012;  Nagy-Szakal  et  al.,  2012;
Riboulet-Bisson et al., 2012; Ubeda et al., 2013; Ward et al., 2012;
Zenewicz et al., 2013) 
shows  that  the  core  mouse  gut  microbiota  plateaus  down  to  four
genera [note that this number increases to 13 genera if we exclude the
limited Zenewicz’s dataset (Zenewicz et al., 2013), which overlaps
very poorly with the other datasets (data not shown)]. In humans,
using 16S rDNA cloned sequences from 17 individuals, Tap et al.
found seven genera that were common in 50% of the cohort (Tap et
al., 2009). On the other hand, a study by the MetaHIT consortium
investigating metagenomes from 124 European individuals discovered
that 90% of the individuals of the cohort share a common core of nine
genera, at a 10% sequence coverage threshold (i.e. species being only
considered  present  if  a  minimum  of  10%  of  their  genome  was
recovered in the sequenced metagenome) (Qin et al., 2010). More
recently,  Martínez  et  al.  defined  a  core  set  of  24  bacterial  genera
(Martínez et al., 2013) in a longitudinal study of three healthy human
individuals during one year, which would constitute a ‘healthy’ core
microbiota set. Thus, first observations indicate that the murine core
microbiota could be smaller than the humans’, but this needs further
follow  up  to  be  sure  that  this  result  is  not  driven  by  insufficient
sequencing depth in these first datasets.

The total set of genera found across the six mouse gut microbiota
datasets  previously  referred  to  (pan-gut  microbiota:  union  set  of
genera across samples) cumulates to 352 genera , of which
only 44 are found in more than three mouse gut microbiota datasets.
This number is higher than the one observed in humans: the overall
stool microbiota richness (i.e. the number of different genera in the
population) was estimated at 226 bacterial genera across 208 donors,
using the data from the Human Microbiome Project Consortium (Li
et al., 2013).

Recently, a study by Krych et al. identified about 80 genera that
are shared between mice and humans (with abundance threshold set
to  0.19%  to  filter  out  variations  due  to  sequencing  method  or
sequencing depth) (Krych et al., 2013), a number that is very similar
to  the  79  found  in  our  meta-analysis.  The  authors  proposed  that
multiple genera are present exclusively in the human gut microbiota:
Faecalibacterium,  Mitsuokellla,  Megasphera,  Dialister,
Asteroleplasma,  Succinivibio,  Sutterella,  Paraprevotella and
Phascolarctobacterium, with Mucispirillum being the only genus
exclusive to mice (Krych et al., 2013). However, as a case in point,
Faecalibacterium was found in the mouse gut microbiota datasets
from Ward (Ward et al., 2012), Riboulet-Bisson (Riboulet-Bisson et

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

Increased in mouse GM

Increased in human GM

Mouse core GM

Mouse pan GM

500

200

100

50

30

20

10

5 3

Core/pan gut microbiota size (number of genera)

B

Organism

Mouse

Human

A

100

80

60

40

20

0

Relative abundance (%)

D orea
A naeroplas m a
Johnsonella
*F aecalibacteriu m
*S utterella
*Lactobacillus
*O scillospira
*Lachnospira
E ubacteriu m
Clostridiu m
Prevotella
Blautia
*R u minococcus
S uccinivibrio
Alkaliphilus
C oprococcus
B acteroides
R oseburia
Alistipes
P arabacteroides
*Streptococcus
P aludibacter
*T uricibacter
*Dialister

Genera

2

3

4

5

6

Number of datasets compared

Fig. 3. Meta-analysis of mouse and human fecal microbiota based on published 16S rDNA sequencing data. (A) Comparison of human and mouse
healthy adult gut microbiota. The relative abundances of genera in the gut microbiota of both organisms [four human datasets (Human Microbiome Project
Consortium, 2012; Yatsunenko et al., 2012) and five mouse datasets (Nagy-Szakal et al., 2012; Riboulet-Bisson et al., 2012; Ubeda et al., 2013; Ward et al.,
2012; Zenewicz et al., 2013)] are ordered according to their overrepresentation in either mouse or human gut microbiota (non-parametric Wilcoxon Z score).
Genera with significant differences (P<0.05) between human and mouse gut microbiota are annotated with an asterisk. Note that none of these differences are
significant after multiple testing corrections. Note that only five mouse datasets are used in this comparison because the dataset from Cho et al. (Cho et al.,
2012) does not include data for abundance and thus cannot be used for comparison of relative abundances between mouse and human gut microbiota.
(B) Mouse core and pan-gut microbiota size in all possible combinations of the six mouse gut microbiota datasets (Cho et al., 2012; Nagy-Szakal et al., 2012;
Riboulet-Bisson et al., 2012; Ubeda et al., 2013; Ward et al., 2012; Zenewicz et al., 2013). The pan-gut microbiota is the set of genera found at least once in
any of the datasets compared (union set), whereas the core gut microbiota is the set of genera found in all compared datasets (intersection set). It should be
noted that Zenewicz’s dataset overlaps poorly with the others.

al., 2012) and Nagy-Szakal (Nagy-Szakal et al., 2012). The genus
was also detected in a mouse study from Werner et al. (Werner et
al.,  2011).  These  examples  indicate  the  difficulty  of  inferring  a
bacteria’s  exclusivity  to  an  organism  based  on  a  lack  of  its
observation in community studies, where only a fraction, albeit an
increasing  one,  of  bacterial  genera  are  accessible  with  current
techniques. Such conclusions are thus affected by sequencing depth,
the  age  of  the  mice/human  subjects,  the  mouse  strains/human
populations  chosen,  the  different  microbiota  pools  in  different
laboratories and by other practical factors involved in gut microbiota
studies. In addition, the effect of multi-generation specific pathogen
free  (SPF)  conditions  might  serve  to  reduce  the  murine  gut
microbiota  diversity  to  below  that  of  healthy  wild  mice.
Accordingly, a study by Linnenbrink et al. reveals that wild mice
have  a  greater  bacterial  diversity  in  their  cecal  microbiota  than
laboratory mice housed in SPF facility (Linnenbrink et al., 2013).
Another  important  point  is  that,  in  most  current  analyses,  low-
abundance  genera  on  the  boundary  of  sequencing  depth  are
overlooked. However, a recent study investigating microbiota across
human body habitats suggests that low-abundance genera might play
more important roles, because they are ubiquitous in different sites
of the body (Li et al., 2013). Together, these findings highlight that
inter-study variations should be considered more carefully, and that
a final conclusion on discrepancies and similarities between humans
and mice has not been reached.

One important finding in the inter-individual diversity in human
gut microbiota was the observation of the existence of a limited set
of possible gut communities – termed enterotypes (Arumugam et al.,
2011). Although the degree of distinctiveness between these clusters

of  human  gut  microbiota  is  still  a  matter  of  debate  (Ding  and
Schloss, 2014; Koren et al., 2013), a consensus on their usefulness
as  a  stratification  tool  is  growing  (Moeller  and  Ochman,  2014).
Enterotypes  were  also  identified  in  the  laboratory  mouse  gut
microbiota  (Hildebrand  et  al.,  2013),  being  dominated  by
Lachnospiraceae  and  Ruminococcaceae  or  Bacteroidaceae  and
Enterobacteriaceae, respectively. Although the cause of stratification
of human and mouse individuals into enterotypes is still unknown,
there is a noticeable parallel between dominant bacterial families of
the mouse and human enterotypes. Namely, one mouse enterotype
is dominated by Lachnospiraceae/Ruminococcaceae, similarly to the
human Ruminococcaceae enterotype (also known as enterotype 3).
In  addition, 
the  second  mouse  enterotype,  dominated  by
Bacteroidaceae/Enterobacteriaceae,  is  similar  to  the  human
Bacteroides enterotype  (enterotype  1)  (Arumugam  et  al.,  2011).
Interestingly,  two  enterotypes  were  also  identified  in  wild  mice,
dominated by Bacteroides and Robinsoniella, respectively (Wang et
al., 2014). Moreover, the laboratory mouse enterotypes were found
to correlate with species-richness and inflammation: mice belonging
(Bacteroidaceae/
species-richness  enterotype 
to 
Enterobacteriaceae) had higher levels of calprotectin, a marker of
inflammation. This result is consistent with what has been recently
found  in  studies  of  human  obesity  (Cotillard  et  al.,  2013;  Le
Chatelier et al., 2013), in which low species-richness individuals
were  found  to  have  more  pronounced  inflammation,  and  to  be
dominated by Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria, the same bacterial
groups that dominated the ‘inflamed’ mouse enterotype.

low 

the 

Overall,  these  observations  show  that  clear  differences  can  be
observed at the level of specific genus/species abundances between

5

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

the murine and human gut microbiota. The observed differences
might  be  caused  by  intrinsic  differences  between  these  two
mammalian  systems,  but  also  by  various  confounding  factors
ranging  from  diet  to  exposure  to  pathogens.  At  the  same  time,
overall community composition rules as well as the factors driving
them might be similar (e.g. enterotypes). Thus, although absolute
comparisons might be difficult, murine models are likely relevant
for studying the processes responsible for microbiota variation and
shifts upon disturbance.

Do gut microbiota shifts in murine models mimic those reported in
human disease?
Mouse  models  are  a  powerful  tool  to  study  the  underlying
mechanisms  of  gut-microbiota-associated  diseases.  Given  the
anatomical  and  compositional  differences  in  the  healthy  control
individuals, we review the concordance in the major shifts in gut
microbiota associated with the most popular gut microbiota-related
diseases: obesity and IBD.

Obesity
The influence of diet on the gut microbiota has received increasing
research attention over recent years. With the rising incidence of
metabolic  disturbances,  such  as  obesity  and  diabetes  in  Western
countries,  the  impact  of  the  ‘Western’  diet  (high  in  simple
carbohydrates and animal fats) on the gut microbiota and our health
is a key question in this field. Many studies have been conducted on
mice or humanized mouse models (i.e. germ-free mice administered
human gut microbiota), which have been fed diets that are high in
fat  or  saturated/unsaturated  fat  to  investigate  changes  in  the  gut
microbiota  (Ley  et  al.,  2006;  Liu  et  al.,  2012;  Turnbaugh  et  al.,
2009b; Wu et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2012). Some common trends
have emerged from this research. For instance, mice fed on a high
animal-fat diet show a decreased Bacteroidetes:Firmicutes ratio in
their gut microbiota (Murphy et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2012). This
shift  is  driven  by  more  complex  alterations  at  lower  taxonomic
levels  within  the  phylum  Bacteroidetes:  most  genera,  including
Prevotella and Roseburia, decreased in abundance (Neyrinck et al.,
2011), whereas other genera of this phylum, such as Barnesiella,
Bacteroides and  Alistipes,  significantly  increased  (Zhang  et  al.,
2012). Interestingly, the overall trend observed in mouse studies
agrees with that found in human studies. Human dietary studies have
revealed that the Bacteroides enterotype in humans is associated
with people whose diet contains more animal fats over long periods
of time, whereas the Prevotella enterotype is found to predominate
in people consuming more carbohydrates (Wu et al., 2011). A study
comparing European and rural African children also confirmed this
link between microbiota and diet (De Filippo et al., 2010). African
children, who eat fiber-rich diets, had a higher abundance of specific
Bacteroidetes (Prevotella and Xylanibacter), a reduced amount of
Firmicutes  and  decreased  amounts  of  Proteobacteria  (Shigella,
Escherichia),  compared  with  European  children.  The  study
suggested  that  European  children  with  a  high-fat  diet  harbor  the
Bacteroides enterotype,  which  might  predispose  them  to  many
metabolic  diseases  (Le  Chatelier  et  al.,  2013).  Overall,  this
highlights  that  the  use  of  diet  intervention  in  murine  models,
including the use of humanized gnotobiotic mice, can mimic the
changes in gut microbiota that occur in relation to human diet.

However, the dynamics of enterotypes during diet interventions
do show discrepancies between human and mouse studies. Wu et al.
followed enterotype switches in participants with controlled diets
(randomized to a high-fat/low-fiber or low-fat/high-fiber diets) over
a period of 10 days (Wu et al., 2011). There was no switch between

6

Bacteroides enterotype, which is associated with animal protein, and
Prevotella enterotype, which links to diets with more carbohydrates
and simple sugars. The authors therefore suggested that a long-term
dietary  intervention  might  be  needed  to  modify  an  individual’s
enterotype (Wu et al., 2011). On the other hand, a study on wild
mice by Wang et al. showed that feeding wild mice with chow diet
can change mice enterotypes as quickly as within 1 week, from the
Bacteroides enterotype (associated with protein metabolism) to the
Robinsoniella enterotype (associated with carbohydrate metabolism)
(Wang et al., 2014). The discrepancies in these results suggest that
humans need more time for the diet interventions to change their
enterotypes given the more drastic changes in diet in the wild mouse
study.  The  discrepancies  might  otherwise  illustrate  the  intrinsic
differences,  e.g.  the  effect  of  genetic  background  on  enterotype
identities,  as  well  as  external  confounding 
factors,  e.g.
environmental influences, which affect the two organisms.

Similarly, there is controversy over the gut microbiota changes
observed in human and mouse obesity studies. For instance, in some
human  studies,  obese  individuals  have  been  reported  to  have  an
increased  Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes  ratio  (Ley  et  al.,  2006;
Turnbaugh et al., 2009a), which decreases when submitted to a low-
calorie diet (Ley et al., 2006). In mouse studies, besides feeding
wild-type  mice  ad  libitum with  a  high-fat  diet,  leptin-deficient
(ob/ob)  mice  have  also  been  used  as  a  model  for  obesity.  These
mice, which lack the gene encoding the hormone leptin, which has
a crucial role in the regulation of the appetite, have increased food
intake  as  compared  with  wild-type  mice  and  ultimately  become
obese.  The  gut  microbiota  of  this  obese  mouse  model  was  also
found to have an increased ratio of Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes (Ley et
al.,  2005;  Murphy  et  al.,  2010),  as  seen  in  some  human  studies
mentioned  above  (Ley  et  al.,  2006;  Turnbaugh  et  al.,  2009a).
Moreover,  a  genome-wide  association  study  of  obesity  in  mice
identified genes associated with obesity in mice that overlap with
some genes involved in human obesity (Parks et al., 2013). This
genetic  background  overlap  suggests  conserved  mechanisms  for
obesity susceptibility across mammalian species. Conversely, other
studies  reported  conflicting  results  for  the  ratio  of  Firmicutes  to
Bacteroidetes,  in  which  overweight  and  obese  individuals  were
found  to  have  reduced  Firmicutes  and  increased  Bacteroidetes
(Schwiertz et al., 2010) or have no change in proportions of either
Bacteroidetes or Firmicutes (Duncan et al., 2008). A reduced ratio
of Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes was also found in a study linking gut
microbiota composition and metabolic adaptations in mice on high-
fat diets (Serino et al., 2012). The discrepancies in the importance
of the Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes ratio found across studies could be
linked to the heterogeneity in age of subjects, because the ratio of
Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes has been found to change with age (Mariat
et  al.,  2009),  or  to  the  different  sample-processing/analyzing
techniques used in these studies. Another possibility is that focusing
on the ratio of Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes, which does not completely
capture the compositional changes of the gut microbiota associated
with  obesity,  is  an  overly  simplistic  metric  to  study  metabolic
disorders.

The  mechanisms  by  which  gut  microbiota  contribute  to  the
pathophysiology of obesity have been investigated in many mouse
studies  and,  thanks  to  their  results,  we  can  now  draw  a  clearer
picture  of  the  impact  of  gut  microbiota  on  maintaining  energy
balance of the host. Using wild-type and leptin-deficient (ob/ob)
mice,  Turnbaugh  and  colleagues  proposed  that  the  obese  gut
microbiome has an increased capacity to harvest energy from the
host diet (Turnbaugh et al., 2006). The obese gut microbiome was
shown to produce a higher level of monosaccharides and SCFAs,

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

which  supply  the  host  with  extra  energy  from  indigestible  food
components,  as  compared  with 
lean  animals.  The  higher
concentration  of  SCFAs  in  feces  of  obese  compared  with  lean
individuals was also observed in humans (Schwiertz et al., 2010). In
addition,  by  using  germ-free  and  leptin-deficient  (ob/ob)  mice,
Bäckhed and colleagues were able to suggest other mechanisms by
which  the  gut  microbiota  could  regulate  fat  storage  in  the  host
(Bäckhed et al., 2007). Particularly, the gut microbiota can control
fatty-acid  oxidation  in  the  host  via  suppression  of  the  AMP-
activated protein kinases (AMPKs). By contrast, the gut microbiota
can also induce fat storage in the host by suppression of fasting-
induced adipose factor (Fiaf) (Bäckhed et al., 2007). These results
are valuable in understanding the pathology of obesity because they
determine  the  inside  mechanisms  of  how  gut  microbiota  can
contribute to energy balance of the host. Although it remains to be
elucidated  whether  the  same  mechanisms  exist  in  humans,  this
example  well  illustrates  the  usefulness  of  mouse  studies  in
performing experiments that cannot be done in humans.

importance  of 

Inflammatory bowel disease
The  development  of  IBD  has  been  linked  to  genetic  factors,
infectious pathogens and alterations in the composition of the gut
microbiota (Jostins et al., 2012; Khor et al., 2011), even though the
respective  causal 
these  factors  still  awaits
clarification. With respect to the role of the gut microbiota, large
inter-individual variations among IBD patients regarding genetic
background, stage of the disease and diet have made it difficult to
identify clear associations between compositional changes in the gut
microbiota  and  the  pathology.  The  comparison  of  trends  of
alterations in gut microbiota composition in IBD between human
and  model  organisms  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  IBD
encompasses a heterogenous group of diseases, including Crohn’s
disease (ileal, colon), ulcerative colitis and intermediate colitis, all

of which can also be at different stages (for example, active or in
remission). This said, some prominent changes in the gut microbiota
have been concomitantly observed in independent IBD studies using
a  variety  of  techniques  on  different  cohorts,  such  as  reduced
bacterial  diversity  in  both  Crohn’s  disease  and  ulcerative  colitis
patients (Andoh et al., 2012; Nemoto et al., 2012; Sokol et al., 2006;
Walker  et  al.,  2011),  a  reduction  in  the  levels  of  the  anti-
inflammatory  bacterium  Faecalibacterium (Andoh  et  al.,  2012;
Joossens et al., 2011; Sokol et al., 2009; Willing et al., 2009), as well
as  of  Clostridium  coccoides and  Bifidobacterium (Sokol  et  al.,
2009), and an increase in abundance of Enterobacteriaceae (such as
E. coli) (Duboc et al., 2013; Joossens et al., 2011; Willing et al.,
2009; Willing et al., 2010).

Increasing numbers of mouse models have been created and used
in  IBD  research,  with  the  aim  of  mimicking  the  disease’s
pathophysiology in humans. In general, these models were created
by  introducing  genetic  modifications  in  mice  that  resemble  the
genetic  defects  of  IBD  patients,  or  by  relying  on  external
disturbances to induce disease. The latter include biological agents,
such as infective pathogens (for example, Helicobacter hepaticus
and Citrobacter rodentium), or chemicals, such as dextran sulfate
sodium  (DSS)  and  2,4,6-trinitrobenzene  sulfonic  acid  (TNBS),
which  cause  the  initial  damage  that  leads  to  chronic  intestinal
inflammation  (Peloquin  and  Nguyen,  2013;  Wirtz  et  al.,  2007).
However, most mouse models of colitis do not fully recapitulate the
pathophysiology of human IBD and generally only cause colonic
inflammation , which is more similar to ulcerative colitis
(reviewed in Wirtz and Neurath, 2007 and discussed further below).
Despite this, the major gut microbiota shifts that have been observed
in  different  colitis  mouse  models  are  similar  to  those  found  in
human  IBD  studies.  In  these  models,  gut  bacterial  diversity  was
found to be reduced, with certain shifts in gut microbiota profiles
in  Enterobacteriaceae
being  observed,  such  as 

increases 

A
A)
A)))))))))))))))))))))))))))))
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A

G

V

B

G

V

C
C
C
C

C

C

MT
ME
SM
MM

L V

M

M

L

SM

B
 

10 μm

ME

MT

10 μm

MT
ME
SM
MM

L V

SM

L

MM
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M

 

A 

Fig. 4. Histological features of murine DSS-induced colitis. (A,B) Histology images of colon cross-sections from control (A) and dextran sulfate sodium
(DSS)-treated (B) mice. The diagram under each panel illustrates an outline of a mouse colon cross-section with boxes A and B indicating the histological
regions shown in panels A and B, respectively. Mir29-knockout mice from a Black6 background were treated either with water (control animals) or with 1.5%
DSS for 8 days prior to examination. Whereas the cross-section of the colon wall from a control mouse shows normal morphology (A), the colon of the DSS-
treated mouse (B) shows alterations in the mucosal epithelium such as cell necrosis, and loss of structure of both villi and intestinal crypts (C; indicated by
arrowhead). In addition, infiltration of immune cells such as macrophages, neutrophils, eosinophils and lymphocytes (indicated with arrowheads) is found in the
colonic lamina propria (L) and submucosa (SM), indicative of the inflammatory status of the DSS-treated mouse. C, intestinal crypts; G, goblet cells; L, lamina
propria; ME, muscularis externa; MM, muscularis mucosae; MT: muscularis tunics; SM: submucosa; V: villi.

7

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

(Escherichia), Bacteroidaceae (Bacteroides) and Ruminococcaceae
(Berry et al., 2012; Lupp et al., 2007; Wohlgemuth et al., 2009).
However,  the  reduction  in  the  anti-inflammatory  bacterium
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, which is observed to occur in many
human IBD studies, was not observed in murine colitis models. In
addition, Akkermansia was found to be reduced in abundance in a
human  ulcerative  colitis  study  (Vigsnæs  et  al.,  2012),  but  was
increased in the DSS-induced mouse model (Berry et al., 2012).
Mouse studies have also detected changes in abundance of bacterial
phylotypes that solely happen in mice, such as of Tenericutes and
Deferribacteriaceae (Nagalingam et al., 2011). Conversely, changes
in the diversity of TM7 phylotypes (Kuehbacher et al., 2008) or in
the abundance of Roseburia (Willing et al., 2010) were found only
in human Crohn’s disease studies. Vereecke et al. recently developed
a mouse model prone to spontaneous colitis (Vereecke et al., 2014),
while  studying  A20  –  an  inhibitor  of  both  NF-κB  and  apoptotic
signaling that has previously been associated with susceptibility to
IBD  in  humans  (Catrysse  et  al.,  2014;  Ma  and  Malynn,  2012).
Deleting  A20  in  intestinal  epithelial  and  myeloid  cells  in  mice
(A20IEC/myel-KO) induced intestinal epithelial apoptosis, Paneth and
goblet  cell  loss,  and  gut  microbiota  dysbiosis.  The  latter  was
characterized  by  a  reduced  bacterial  diversity  and  altered
composition as compared with wild type. Furthermore, the mouse-
specific  genus  Mucispirillum was  significantly  increased  in
A20IEC/myel-KO mice  and  was  thus  suggested  as  a  biomarker  for
spontaneous colitis in this model. Interestingly, mucosal expression
levels  of  A20  in  humans  have  been  put  forward  as  a  prognosis
marker  for  response  to  anti-TNF  treatment  in  IBD  patients
(Vereecke et al., 2014).

Overall,  these  results  show  that  obesity  and  IBD  have  quite
different ‘translatability’ from models to humans, and illustrate both
the potential and the drawbacks of this process.

Practical issues influence the composition of human and
murine gut microbiota
The  murine  and  human  gut  microbiota  are  not  only  intrinsically
different,  but  are  also  affected  by  environmental  factors.  These
factors  can  be  confounders  but  can  also  be  controlled  for  with
appropriate experimental design in mouse studies. Here, we discuss
how  the  genetic  backgrounds  of  mouse  models,  as  well  as
environmental factors, contribute to the overall composition of the
mouse gut microbiota.

Housing conditions
To prevent mice in gut microbiota studies from being contaminated
by pathogens from the surrounding environment, they are usually
housed in clean facilities, such as in SPF conditions, where hygiene
is  strictly  controlled.  Although  the  microbes  allowed  in  SPF
facilities  are  strictly  regulated,  each  mouse  house  is  home  to  a
distinct pool of microorganisms, including a variety of pathogens
that come from contaminations or adventitious infections (Jacoby
and  Lindsey,  1998;  Pritchett-Corning  et  al.,  2009;  Taylor  et  al.,
2007). Because mice are housed in a semi-closed environment in
which the types of microbes and other environmental factors are
partly controlled, their microbiota, including their gut microbiota,
depend largely on the microbe pool of the mouse house, on the other
mice  present  and  possibly  even  on  their  carers,  who  can
unintentionally pass their microbes onto housed mice. As such, the
gut  microbiota  of  laboratory  mice  cannot  be  considered  to  fully
represent  that  of  normal,  free-living  mice,  and  adds  to  the
differences with human gut microbiota, which is exposed to a wide
range of environmental cues. It is also possible that, in such a semi-

8

closed  system,  stochastic  effects  will  influence  the  available
microbiota pool over time (McCafferty et al., 2013). Notably, the
accidental discovery of segmented filamentous bacteria that account
for the differences in microbiota of mice from two different mouse
vendors  (Ivanov  et  al.,  2009)  highlights  the  variations  in  gut
microbiota  composition  brought  about  by  different  housing
conditions.

It is not only external environmental factors that affect mice in
mouse  houses;  ‘in-house’  interactions  with  cage  mates  also
influence the composition of their gut microbiota. Within one cage,
for example, mice will engage in coprophagy in order to obtain
additional nutrients from fecal matter (Soave and Brand, 1991).
This activity is considered to be the main reason for the gradual
homogenization of the gut microbiota between co-housed mice, as
shown by multiple studies (Elinav et al., 2011; Zenewicz et al.,
2013). Another factor to be taken into account in gut microbiota
research  is  the  maternal  transmission  of  the  microbiota  in
mammals  at  birth,  which  is  reported  to  be  an  important
confounding factor in mouse studies (Benson et al., 2010; Friswell
et al., 2010; Ley et al., 2005). Microbes from the maternal vaginal,
fecal  and  skin  microbiota,  are  the  first  ones  to  occupy  the  gut
microbiota.  Maternal  inoculation  was  shown  to  influence  the
composition of gut microbiota across four generations (Benson et
al., 2010), and is thus an important factor shaping the composition
of the gut microbiota. However, the importance of the effect of this
initial inoculate on the final composition of the adult microbiota is
not clear compared with dietary, physiological, host genetic and
stochastic  effects  during  the  development  of  the  animal
(Hildebrand et al., 2013; Spor et al., 2011). Furthermore, in closed
housing conditions, where mice are confined in a limited space,
stress related to human handling, noise and social contacts with
cage mates is considered to affect gut microbiota composition (Ma
et al., 2012). Specifically, it has been shown that animals behave
differently  when  they  are  caged  in  isolation  (Blanchard  et  al.,
1991).  Although  eliminating  stress  induced  by  conspecific
aggression, isolation is a source of stress in social animals. Indeed,
it has been shown that mice in groups are buffered against stress
and that they show more positive signs of health such as faster
wound healing and a lower level of stroke-induced neuronal death
(DeVries et al., 2007; Galley et al., 2014). This is relevant within
the  context  of  increasing  evidence  that  there  is  bidirectional
communication  between  the  nervous  system  and  the  gut
microbiota.  Given  the  nature  of  these  interactions,  stress  could
alter gut microbiota composition (Bercik et al., 2012; Cryan and
O’Mahony, 2011; Galley et al., 2014; Neufeld et al., 2011).

Dietary impacts
Usually, laboratory mice are fed a standardized chow diet, a closed
formula diet in which the exact amount of each ingredient is not
disclosed by the producer. The nutritional content of chow varies
from batch to batch, depending on agronomical market fluctuations.
Even with these variations, chow diet is composed mainly of plant
materials  and  thus  differs  considerably  to  the  composition  and
variation in a human daily diet. In most cases, mice being used in
an  experiment  are  fed  the  same  diet,  obtained  from  the  same
supplier, throughout the experiment. Chow diet might differ from
human diets in components that have a significant impact on gut
microbiota  composition.  As  a  case  in  point,  coumestrol,  a
phytoestrogen, from alfalfa (clover) is used in rodent diets, which
increases the ingestion of estrogen equivalents by mice compared
with humans (Degen et al., 2002). In fact, changes in gut microbiota
composition  have  been  found  to  follow  changes  in  the  estrogen

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

Box 2. Advantages and limitations of mouse models used in gut microbiota research

Advantages
• Allow interventions that are not possible in humans to study the causal
role of gut microbiota in health and disease.
• Comprehensive knowledge of mouse genetics and availability of
numerous genetically modified mouse models more than any other
models.
• Low cost of maintenance, high reproductive rate, short life cycle.
• Omnivorous mammal, with gut physiology and anatomy comparable to
the human.
• Allow targeting of a specific gene/pathway in the complex gut-
microbiota – host interactions by using knock-out models.
• Mouse models are inbred, providing a homogenous genetic
background, a cleaner system to dissect signals from gut-bacteria–host
interactions and improve reproducibility of experiments. 
• Sources of variations such as diets and housing conditions are
generally controlled for in experiments, limiting unwanted influences of
noises from the surrounding environment to gut microbiota. 

Limitations
• Despite important similarities, mice are different from humans in
anatomy, genetics and physiology, and thus mouse models cannot fully
recapitulate human systems.
• Different mouse models can give rise to diverged shifts in gut
microbiota composition. 
• Cross-talk between gut microbiota and the host is host-specific so
observations in mouse models might not be applicable in humans.
• Genetic homogeneity implies that the inbred mouse strains cannot
capture the inherent genetic variations in the human population.
• Multiple factors, such as genetic background, birth mode of delivery
(caesarean or vaginal), mode of feeding (breast or bottle), diet, 
medical history and social activities all contribute to shaping a ‘real-life’
gut microbiota in humans. Absence of these factors in mice implies 
that gut microbiota in mouse models cannot reflect a ‘real-life’ gut
microbiota.

content in diets of both humans and mice (Akaza, 2012; Menon et
al., 2013). Some xenobiotics, such as antibiotics, can also strongly
affect the gut microbiota composition and function (Maurice et al.,
2013). Humans, through diet or treatments, are often exposed to
such compounds and their potential synergistic effects. The mouse
models have the advantage of allowing researchers to control for the
impact  of  such  compounds  on  the  gut  microbiota,  by  either
minimizing exposure or recording levels of exposure.

Furthermore, dietary variations between humans represent a large
potential source of gut microbiota inter-individual variation, which
would not be detected in lab mice under uniform chow diet. For
instance, the Prevotella enterotype is known to be sensitive to diet
changes and is linked to a high carbohydrate/fiber diet in humans
(De Filippo et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2012; Willing et al., 2010; Wu et
al.,  2011).  In  both  mouse  (Neyrinck  et  al.,  2011)  and  human
(Fernandez-Raudales et al., 2012; Wu et al., 2011) gut microbiota
studies,  the  abundance  of  Prevotella was  found  to  change  upon
dietary  intervention.  Furthermore,  Wang  et  al.  have  shown  that
hosting wild mice in a laboratory environment on chow diet causes
a shift in enterotypes, from the original Bacteroides-dominated (with
microbial metabolism more dedicated to protein degradation) to the
Robinsoneilla-dominated 
to  carbohydrate
degradation) enterotype (Wang et al., 2014).

(more  dedicated 

In  summary,  it  is  essential  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  murine
models’ controlled diet might skew analyses by focusing only on a
subset of the mouse gut microbiota inter-individual variance. On the
other hand, controlling mouse diets provides a clearer experimental
setup to disentangle the associations between the gut microbiota
composition and function, and the perturbations studied, such as
disease and host physiology (Box 2).

Genetic background and founder effects
A wide range of experiments in which gene-knockout mouse models
have  been  created,  yielding  different  genetic  backgrounds,  have
highlighted  that  genetics  is  an  important  determinant  of  gut
microbiota  composition  (Benson  et  al.,  2010;  Hildebrand  et  al.,
2013; Kovacs et al., 2011). In experiments using wild-type inbred
mouse strains, genetic background effects have been suggested to
be  stronger  than  gender  (Hildebrand  et  al.,  2013;  Kovacs  et  al.,
2011) but to contribute less than environmental (cage) factors and
stochastic  effects  to  variation  in  gut  microbiota  composition
(Hildebrand  et  al.,  2013).  One  explanation  for  the  influence  of
genetic background is the variation in the efficacy of colonization

by  bacteria  on  hosts  with  different  genetic  backgrounds.  For
example, Wos-Oxley et al. found that Clostridiales bacteria colonize
the gut of humanized rats more efficiently than that of humanized
mice (Wos-Oxley et al., 2012).

In humans, the role of genetics in gut microbiota composition has
been  scrutinized  in  twin  studies.  A  study  by  Turnbaugh  and
colleagues shows that monozygotic twins are less dissimilar in terms
of  gut  microbiota  composition  within  twin  pairs  than  pairs  of
dizygotic  twins,  and  that  the  gut  microbiota  of  twins  are  more
similar  to  each  other  than  to  their  mothers’  (Turnbaugh  et  al.,
2009a). Given the similar environment that the twins share with
each other and with their mother, it is obvious that the more closely
related  they  are  in  genetics,  the  more  similar  the  gut  microbiota
composition becomes.

Murine  models  are  usually  inbred  in  order  to  reduce  the
phenotypic  variation  that  arises  from  genetic  heterogeneity.
Controlling genetic background offers opportunities to disentangle
complex relationships between host genetics and gut microbiota, and
potentially  to  elucidate  the  mechanisms  of  host-microbiota
interaction. Knock-out mouse models, for example, are crucial tools
for  functional  experiments  on  gut  pathologies.  For  instance,  the
study  of  Muc2  knock-out  mice,  which  lack  Muc2,  the  most
abundant secreted gastrointestinal mucin, led to the discovery of the
link  between  this  protein  and  suppression  of  colorectal  cancer
(Velcich et al., 2002). Nevertheless, model knock-out work is not
without pitfalls either. Genetic homogeneity, which fails to portray
inter-individual  variations  in  humans,  can  pose  problems  when
translating  the  results  of  studies  using  inbred  mouse  strains  to
humans in gut microbiota research. For instance, results from the IL-
10  knock-out  mouse  model  implied  that  this  anti-inflammatory
cytokine  plays  an  important  role  in  controlling  IBD.  However,
clinical trials of IL-10 treatment on IBD in humans yielded modest
results  (Fedorak  et  al.,  2000;  Schreiber  et  al.,  2000).  One  of  the
the  unexpected
the  minimal  results  was 
explanations  for 
heterogeneity in IL-10 receptor pool in humans as compared with
mice (Barnett and Fraser, 2011). This heterogeneity might influence
the efficiency of IL-10 in dampening inflammation via interactions
with target cells that express IL-10 receptors. Similarly, variations
in drug efficacy due to genetic polymorphism in human population
are another important issue that was discussed (Ma and Lu, 2011).
However, the lack of genetic background diversity in inbred mice
could be solved in experimental setups by using outbred strains or
wild  mice,  or  genetically  modified  models  from  multiple  mouse

9

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

strains, in order to partially mimic the genetic diversity of the human
population. Another advantage of this approach is that the maternal
effect is minimized when mice are all from different mothers.

Given the complex interactions of gut microbiota with the host and
the surrounding environment, and stochastic effects, which still largely
contribute to gut microbiota variations (Hildebrand et al., 2013), it is
crucial to control for all contributing factors to increase statistical
power.  These  include  genetic  background,  cage  effects,  maternal
effects, diet, treatments and the number of biological replicates. In
addition,  for  the  reproducibility  of  gut  microbiota  studies,
standardization of protocols for animal handling as well as sample
storage and processing and data analysis are of utmost importance.

The limitations of certain mouse models
Given its involvement in a wide range of physiological processes,
the gut microbiota inevitably plays an important role in maintaining
host health and wellbeing. The number of associations between gut
microbiota composition and function and host diseases is increasing,
with  such  diseases  including  obesity,  IBD,  diabetes  and  allergic
diseases, such as asthma (Russell et al., 2012) and atopy (Lee et al.,
2014). These chronic diseases place a substantial financial burden
on the healthcare systems of developed societies (Burisch et al.,
2013; Meng et al., 2014; Yang and Zhang, 2014). These pathologies
were  already  known  to  be  triggered  by  multiple  genetic  and
environmental factors. In addition, the discovery of a contribution
of the gut microbiota to their development has added another layer
of  complexity 
their  pathophysiological
mechanisms.  Although  the  association  of  gut  microbiota  with  a
disease does not imply causality, understanding its role does open
up  potentially  new  opportunities  to  treat  or  mitigate  the  disease.
Employing mouse models to study host-microbe interactions allows
functional experimentation to dissect underlying mechanisms that
are  not  always  possible  in  humans.  On  the  other  hand,  mouse
models also have their limitiations (Box 2). Here, we illustrate the
limitations of mouse disease models from a microbiota perspective,

to  understanding 

focusing on models of colitis as well as on models in which germ-
free  mice  are  inoculated  with  human  gut  microbiota  samples
(humanized gnotobiotic mice) (Table 2).

Genetically modified and/or chemically induced models
Genetically modified murine models are powerful tools for studying
the pathophysiological mechanisms of human diseases, and are now
increasingly used to study the complex interactions between the gut
microbiota and host in normal homeostasis and disease. However,
targeted genes are often involved in multiple pathways, confounding
the inferences that can be made about the association between the
gene  expression  and  gut  microbiota  composition  and  function.
Moreover,  many  mouse  models  do  not  recapitulate  exactly  the
modeled human disease (Table 2), with each model having different
limitations that need to be taken into account to translate the results
to humans. A typical example is colitis, for which there are currently
about  60  different  mouse  models  (Peloquin  and  Nguyen,  2013;
Wirtz and Neurath, 2007).

IBD is a complex disease, proposed to be an autoimmune disorder
with the involvement of multiple genetic loci as well as a contribution
of the gut microbiota in the development of the disease. IBD research
has  yielded  several  mouse  models  (usually  referred  to  as  colitis
models  because  the  pathology  mostly  resembles  ulcerative  colitis
symptoms,  as  mentioned  above),  including  genetically  modified
models,  where  a  candidate  gene  involved  in  IBD  development  is
altered or knocked out, and models in which chemicals or infectious
pathogens are used to induce gut inflammation and changes in gut
microbiota  composition,  leading  to  colitis.  Despite  the  numerous
mouse  models  developed  for  IBD  and  their  contributions  to  our
knowledge of the underlying mechanisms of the disease, none of them
fully  mimic  the  pathophysiology  of  human  IBD  (Peloquin  and
Nguyen, 2013; Wirtz and Neurath, 2007) (Table 2). However, these
genetically modified models can resemble pretty well the phenotype
of a subset of individuals with IBD who carry genetic defects and thus
are predisposed for developing IBD (Table 2). On the other hand,

able 2. Features that mouse models can and cannot recapitulate human IBD and obesity 

Modeled human 
disease 

Features of the human pathology that 
are recapitulated in mice 

Features of the human pathology that are 
not recapitulated in mice  

References 

Mouse models 

Genetically modified 

IBD 

Mimic the disease phenotype associated 
with genetic susceptibility to IBD (for 
example, the NOD2 gene) as seen in 
a subset of patients  

Cannot capture the whole genetic 

Jurjus et al., 2004; 

heterogeneity of human IBD owing to  
the inherent genetic differences between 
the two species 

Barnett and Fraser, 
2011 

Chemically induced 

IBD 

Mostly resemble pathology of colitis as 

seen in a subset of IBD patients 

Induced by infectious 

IBD 

pathogens 

Convey risks for developing IBD/colitis 
after gastrointestinal infections as 
seen in a subset of IBD patients 

Obesity, IBD, 

Resemble the majority of the human gut 

microbiota composition 

Humanized gnotobiotic 
mice (germ-free mice 
inoculated with 
human microbiota)  

confirmation of 
alterations in the 
gut microbiota 
due to diet 
changes 

Inflammation does not occur throughout 
the intestine; no remission unless 
treatment is stopped 

Inflammatory responses differ from those 
in humans depending on the type of 
infectious agents used and on the 
deficient virulence factors of the infecting 
bacteria 

 

Boismenu and Chen, 
2000; Barnett and 
Fraser, 2011; Wirtz 
and Neurath, 2007 

Nell et al., 2010 

do not exist in humans  

Lack of some human-specific gut bacteria; 
proportion of bacterial phyla is different 
compared with humans; the immune 
responses as well as other responses 
from physiological processes in 
experiments using humanized 
gnotobiotic mice cannot be considered 
the same as in humans 

Chung et al., 2012; 
Eun et al., 2014; 
Turnbaugh et al., 
2009b; Wos-Oxley 
et al., 2012 

Leptin-deficient mice 

Obesity 

Mice are predisposed to obesity 

Mice exhibit other disease phenotypes that 

Farooqi et al., 1999 

  T

 
10

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

most of the models show inflammation/lesions in the large, instead of
the small, intestine, which more closely resembles ulcerative colitis
symptoms (Peloquin and Nguyen, 2013). Moreover, the development
of  colitis  in  mouse  models  has  been  shown  to  be  affected  by  the
genetic  background  of  the  used  strain  [i.e.  some  strains  are
intrinsically more susceptible to developing colitis (Büchler et al.,
2012)] and the interactions with the gut microbiota [e.g. some models
do not develop colitis in germ-free conditions (Hudcovic et al., 2001)].
The  concern  is  not  only  that  symptoms  are  not  concordant  with
human IBD, but that the underlying mechanism, such as the cross-talk
between the immune system and the gut microbiota, might not be the
same in the mouse model being used.

Another  common  way  to  induce  colitis  in  mice  is  by  using
chemical agents, such as DSS, to damage gut epithelial cells, or
molecules to stimulate an immune response in the colonic mucosa
(e.g. haptens, such as TNBS and oxazolone). These agents induce
either acute or chronic intestinal inflammation in mice, leading to
the development of colitis. Although widely used, variations exist
in  experimental  protocols  and  in  the  mice  housing  conditions,
sometimes giving rise to differing results in experiments conducted
on the same mouse model. For instance, Kitajima et al. observed
that germ-free laboratory mice are very susceptible to DSS-induced
colitis, whereas conventionally housed wild-type laboratory mice are
more  tolerant  (Kitajima  et  al.,  2002).  This  result  contradicts  the
observation  that  germ-free  mice,  either  immune-deficient  or
immune-competent,  are  resistant  to  DSS-induced  colitis  as
compared  with  their  respective  conventionally  housed  mice,  as
reported in the study by Hudcovic et al. (Hudcovic et al., 2001).
Another  example  of  inconsistencies  from  chemically  induced
models  of  colitis  is  from  the  diverging  results  of  the  studies  by
Fayad et al. (Fayad et al., 2007) and Nishihara et al. (Nishihara et
al., 2006). In the former, the adiponectin knock-out mice did not
develop  colitis  when  administered  with  either  DSS  or  TNBS,
whereas, in the latter, the DSS-treated adiponectin knock-out mice
developed more severe colitis compared with wild-type mice. The
discrepancies in outcomes of these studies raise concerns for the use
of  these  models  in  IBD  and  colitis  research.  Furthermore,  the
chemical  itself  might  affect  the  composition  or  function  of  the
resident gut microbiota before the onset of colitis (Nagalingam et
al., 2011). In support of this proposition, DSS has recently been
shown to alter the protein expression profiles of gut-resident E. coli
in DSS-treated mice (Schumann et al., 2012). These cases highlight
how the use of colitis mouse models in gut microbiota research will
require  controlling  for  additional  variables  beyond  the  common
confounders (such as host genetic background and environmental
factors). Therefore, the interpretation of results from colitis mouse
models, at least from the microbiota perspective, should be done
with caution. The intrinsic complexity of gut microbiota research,
together with the inconsistency of colitis mouse models (chemically
induced or genetically engineered), makes interpreting the results of
gut  microbiota  research  from  these  models  in  terms  of  human
disease far from easy.

Humanized gnotobiotic mice
Humanized gnotobiotic mice, which result from the inoculation of
a  human  gut  microbiota  sample  in  germ-free  mice,  provide  a
powerful tool for gut microbiota studies because these models can
recapitulate a large part of the human gut microbiota phylogenetic
composition (100% of phyla, 11/12 classes and ~ 88% of genus-
level  taxa).  This  approach  has  been  widely  employed  in  many
studies because it allows perturbations in a ‘human-like system’ and
is considered to be the gold standard for confirming associations and

trying to prove causality in gut microbiota research (Faith et al.,
2011;  Goodman  et  al.,  2011;  McNulty  et  al.,  2011;  Smith  et  al.,
2013a; Turnbaugh et al., 2009b). However, it should be highlighted
that the host-microbe relationships in these humanized models do
not necessarily reflect the real relationships seen in humans, because
the gut microbiota is transplanted into a host with which it has not
co-evolved. Turnbaugh et al. reported that some resident bacterial
taxa in the human gut microbiota are absent in the humanized mouse
gut microbiota (Turnbaugh et al., 2009b). Given the low abundance
of these bacteria, their absence is generally considered to be less
important  for  the  balance  and  functions  of  the  gut  microbiota.
However, the complex interactions between the bacteria composing
the gut community (Faust and Raes, 2012) suggest that this might
not be the case. Furthermore, low-abundance microbial species can
be of essential importance to the ecosystem, as shown by a recent
study  in  which  the  immune  system  of  humanized  mice  did  not
mature normally (Chung et al., 2012). This study shows that the gut
microbiota  composition  of  humanized  mice  in  general  does  not
differ significantly from that of the initial human donors, except for
the absence of many low-abundance Firmicutes, but these mice fail
to recapitulate a comprehensive response to infections. Moreover,
as discussed above, gnotobiotic mouse phenotypic responses can
vary in different recipient germ-free mouse genetic backgrounds.
Overall, it has been found that even though gnotobiotic mice are
being  increasingly  used  as  models  for  studying  the  human  gut
microbiota, they might not fully recapitulate the mechanisms of the
human-host–gut-microbiota interaction. This said, they are one of
very few methods to assess causality in microbiota research, and
thus  further  development  and  improvement  of  this  approach  is
essential.

In summary, mouse models are a powerful tool in gut microbiota
research, and offer the possibility to perform experiments that would
be  too  invasive  for  human  subjects  and  with  better  control  over
confounding  factors.  Despite  the  various  drawbacks  of  mouse
models for colitis, these models have provided valuable insights into
colitis  and  the  physiopathology  of  IBD,  identifying  factors  that
trigger the progression of this complex disease (Barnett and Fraser,
2011;  Nell  et  al.,  2010;  Peloquin  and  Nguyen,  2013;  Uhlig  and
Powrie,  2009).  Similarly,  although  the  gap  between  humanized
mouse models and the human gut microbiota within its original host
needs to be acknowledged, these models provide unique possibilities
to manipulate the human microbiota and potentially assess causality
in the role of the gut microbiota in health and disease. Recently, a
study  by  Ridaura  et  al.  showed  that  obesity  phenotypes  can  be
transferred from human to humanized mice and between co-housed
mice (Ridaura et al., 2013). Such studies are extremely valuable for
understanding  the  underlying  disease  mechanisms  and  causative
agents,  and  thus  for  getting  closer  to  developing  preventive  or
therapeutic treatments.

Outlook: alternatives to mice
The strengths and limitations of mice as models for gut microbiota
research are clear, but are there better alternatives for the research
community  to  develop  or  consider?  Some  studies  have  been
exploring the gut microbiota of other animal models, such as rats
(Alpert et al., 2008; Liou et al., 2013; Wos-Oxley et al., 2012), dogs
(Middelbos et al., 2010), pigs (Lamendella et al., 2011; Riboulet-
Bisson et al., 2012) and primates, such as chimpanzees (Moeller et
al., 2012) and macaques (McKenna et al., 2008). Rats are proposed
to be more representative of the human gut microbiota than mice
because  the  gut  bacterial  communities  of  humanized  rats  more
closely reflect the gut microbiota of human donors (Wos-Oxley et

11

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

al., 2012). Specifically, humanized rat models have a more similar
Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes ratio to human donors and could represent
the human donor better than could germ-free mouse models. This
difference  is  thought  to  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  rat  has  a
microbiota  that  is  more  similar  to  humans  than  mice  do,  thus
facilitating the establishment of the inoculated microbiota (Wos-
Oxley  et  al.,  2012).  Furthermore,  it  was  hypothesized  that  the
differences  between  mice  and  rats  in  recapitulating  the  human
donors’  microbiota  is  due  to  the  intrinsic  differences  in  genetic
backgrounds of the recipient models, which might control for the
establishment of the transferred microbiota (Wos-Oxley et al., 2012).
Another non-murine rodent model that has been employed in gut
microbiota  research  is  the  guinea  pig.  Given  the  homology  that
exists between human and guinea pig E-cadherin, a transmembrane
adhesion protein that locates to the intestinal surface, this animal has
become an important model for studying infection by the human
pathogen Listeria monocytogenes. Because a healthy commensal
intestinal microbiota affects the potential for infection by a pathogen
(pathogen exclusion), the gut microbiota of guinea pigs has been
investigated in several studies (Hildebrand et al., 2012; Yanabe et
al., 2001). For example, in the study by Yanabe et al., germ-free
guinea  pigs  were  inoculated  with  combinations  of  cecal  content
from conventional guinea pigs to determine efficient cocktails to
establish a healthy SPF colony (Yanabe et al., 2001). The authors
found  that  the  transferred  microbiota  became  similar  to  the  gut
microbiota of conventional guinea pigs and stayed stable over a long
period.  More  recently,  another  study  employed  metagenomic
approaches to compare the gut microbiota composition of humans
and guinea pigs (Hildebrand et al., 2012). The study revealed that
humans  and  guinea  pigs  share  dominant  bacterial  phyla,  but  the
abundance  of  these  common  phyla   is
significantly  higher  in  guinea  pigs  as  compared  to  humans.  In
addition, significant differences in abundance were found across 320
out of 376 genera. Functional categories, such as metabolism or cell
membrane  biogenesis,  also  differ  significantly  in  abundance
between the human and guinea pig gut microbiome (Hildebrand et
al., 2012).

The canine gut microbiota has also been investigated in several
studies, given the similarity in gut morphology and functioning to
the digestive system of humans (Middelbos et al., 2010; Suchodolski
et  al.,  2008;  Suchodolski  et  al.,  2009).  Recently,  a  metagenomic
study described the composition (bacteria, archaea and fungi) and
function of the dog microbiome (Swanson et al., 2011). The canine
microbiota  has  similar  dominant  phyla  (Bacteroidetes  and
Firmicutes) to humans. However, at the genus level, the canine gut
microbiota  is  distinct  by  a  greater  prevalence  of  the  genus
Fusobacteria than in humans. The dog gut microbiota also has a
higher  Fibrobacteres  and  Acidobacteria  abundance  and  lower
abundance  of  Actinobacteria  than  humans.  Clustering  of  fecal
microbiomes on the basis of metabolic capacity of gut microbial
communities of canines, humans and mice showed that the canine
microbiome clustered more closely to the human than did the mouse
microbiome (Swanson et al., 2011).

One  potential  competitor  for  mouse  as  a  prime  microbiome
research  model  is  pig.  The  pig  gut  microbiota  is  becoming  an
increasingly intensive area of study owing to the scale of the pig
husbandry  industry,  as  well  as  to  the  similarities  in  anatomy,
physiology  and  immunology  to  the  human  gastrointestinal  tract
(Litten-Brown  et  al.,  2010).  Swine  gut  microbiota  has  been
investigated  in  several  studies,  especially  involving  antibiotic
interventions (Kim et al., 2012), which are of industrial relevance.
An  in-depth  study  of  swine  gut  microbiota  composition  in  the

12

the  human  gut  microbiota. 

Yorkshire pig breed showed that human and pig microbiota shared
similar diversity patterns, with the two dominant phyla in pigs also
being Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes (Lamendella et al., 2011). At the
genus level, the swine gut microbiota harbors more Spirochaetes and
Prevotella than 
Interestingly,
Anaerovibrio and  Treptonema are  genera  exclusive  to  pig  fecal
metagenomes  (Lamendella  et  al.,  2011).  Miniature  pigs  are
becoming promising models for biomedical research owing to their
small size. In general, miniature pigs become obese when fed ad
libitum and  are  therefore  employed  as  models  for  obesity  and
metabolic  syndrome.  In  a  study,  in  which  Ossabaw  and  Yucatan
miniature pig breeds were assessed for their suitability as models of
metabolic syndrome and coronary artery disease, it was indicated
that Ossabaw miniature pig is a superior model (Neeb et al., 2010).
Likewise,  the  gut  microbiota  composition  of  two  miniature-pig
breeds, Gottingen and Ossabaw, was investigated for their responses
to obesity induction (Pedersen et al., 2013). The study showed that
the major phyla of miniature pig gut microbiota are Firmicutes and
Bacteroidetes. Interestingly, the two miniature pig breeds responded
differently  to  an  obesity-inducing  diet:  Ossabaw  gut  microbiota
displayed more of the characteristics of a ‘healthy’ obese microbiota,
whereas Gottigen gut microbiota had changes similar to metabolic
syndrome, such as those found in the gut microbiota profiles of type
2  diabetic  mice,  again  emphasizing  the  importance  of  genetic
background in gut microbiota response to perturbation.

Non-human  primates  are  also  suitable  models  for  human  gut
microbiota  research,  with  the  obvious  advantage  of  close
evolutionary relatedness to humans. Interestingly, chimpanzees were
found  to  harbor  three  enterotypes  and  these  had  a  similar
composition  to  those  found  in  humans  (Arumugam  et  al.,  2011;
Moeller et al., 2012), suggesting a conservation of the stratification
of microbial communities in chimpanzees and humans (Moeller and
Ochman, 2014). By contrast, studies investigating the gut microbiota
composition  of  macaques  showed  that  the  community  of  gut
bacteria in these primates is quite different to that of humans or mice
(McKenna et al., 2008). Specifically, the macaque gut microbiota
clearly  separated  from  that  of  human  and  mice  in  a  principal
coordinate analysis on microbiota phylogenetic composition. One of
the distinct features of the macaque gut microbiota is the presence
and  abundance  of  Treponema,  a  genus  from  the  phylum
Spirochaetes. By contrast, Bacteroides, one of the most abundant
genera in human gut microbiota, is found to be rare in this species
(McKenna et al., 2008). Despite the advantage of close evolutionary
relatedness and physiology to humans, primate models have more
stringent ethical restrictions for experimentation and breeding/care
difficulties compared with mice.

Conclusions
The pioneering studies cited above on new animal models for gut
microbiota  research  have  greatly  demonstrated  their  potential.
However, despite the limitations of mouse models outlined in this
review, their advantages are numerous and, furthermore, the amount
of research and knowledge on mouse gastroenterology, genetics and
immunology far surpasses any other model. Murine mouse models
provide  a  range  of  customizable  genotypes  and  phenotypes  far
superior to any other model organism. They have thus played a very
important role in the emerging gut microbiota research field. Owing
to their widespread use in biomedical research, these models are
complemented with extensive knowledge on genetic background
and deep phenotypic and functional characterization. Moreover, with
well-set-up standardized mouse house facilities throughout labs in

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

the world, conducting experiments on mouse models, even germ-
free ones, can be more easily achieved than with other models.

Each  one  of  the  animal  models  referred  to  here  shows  some
similarity to the physiology of the human digestive system, thus
providing  useful  knowledge  from  different  angles  about  the  gut
microbiota in health and disease. It is clear that information obtained
from  studies  using  alternative  models  has  diversified  our
understanding of the mammalian gut microbiota in general and has
deepened our knowledge of each model separately. It is, however,
important to keep in mind that models always have some degree of
dissimilarity  with  the  system  modeled.  Therefore,  results  from
animal models, including the popular murine ones, are not always
translatable  to  humans  and  conclusions  should  be  made  with
caution.  In  addition,  even  well-controlled  gut  microbiota
experiments  using  mouse  models  show  important  inter-study
variations due to confounding factors in the experimental setup, such
as mouse house origin, maternal effects, environmental conditions
(food composition, light, stress factors, pathogen infection), genetic
backgrounds  and  in  the  downstream  analysis  methods  applied.
There  have  been  recent  efforts  to  standardize  gut  microbiota
experiments, for example by establishing standardized microbiota in
isobiotic mice that would be shared by institutions involved in gut
microbiota research (Hooper et al., 2012). Although these efforts are
still  in  their  infancy  (Würbel,  2000),  they  will  increase  result
reproducibility  and  inter-study  comparability,  and  allow  for  the
healthy growth of the gut microbiota research field.

Acknowledgements
We thank Naomi Ward, Ilseung Cho, Carles Ubeda, Richard Flavell and 
Richard Kellermayer for kindly providing the gut microbiota composition data 
from their studies; and Michael D’Alessandro from Anatomy Atlases
(www.anatomyatlases.org) and Lutz Slomianka from the Blue Histology website
(http://www.lab.anhb.uwa.edu.au/mb140/) for the permissions to reproduce
images. We also thank Raul Tito, Karoline Faust, Gwen Falony and Gianluca
Matteloti for their helpful discussions, and the two anonymous reviewers for their
constructive comments on the review. Finally, we thank all the members of the
Raes and Liston labs for fruitful discussions leading to this work.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

Funding
T.L.A.N. is supported by VIB international PhD program. S.V.-S. is funded by Marie
Curie Actions FP7 People COFUND – Proposal 267139 (acronym OMICS@VIB).
The Raes lab is supported by KU Leuven, the REGA Institute, the Fund for
Scientific Research – Flanders (FWO) and the Agency for Innovation by Science
and Technology (IWT), and the FP7 MetaCardis project (HEALTH-F4-2012-
305312). 

Supplementary material
Supplementary material available online at
http://dmm.biologists.org/lookup/suppl/
