Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

2 of 45

high-throughput sequencing platform that enables analysis of all the genomes within an ecosystem
sample (shotgun metagenomics), or a description of the taxa within a given community by sequencing
conserved marker genes, such as the 16srRNA gene of bacteria and archaea (marker gene metagenomics)
thus removing the requirement for cultivation of clonal cultures [3]. Indeed, such is the interest in the
gut microbiota, it has been reported that in 2017 alone, approximately 4000 research papers on the
topic were published, with more than 12,900 papers published in the preceding four years [4], and to
date the bacterial component has received the most attention. This vast array of data has contributed
to a deeper understanding of the role of the gut microbiome in health and disease, the factors which
shape it, and the potential to harness its therapeutic potential for optimal health.

The gut microbiota serves the host by interacting directly or indirectly with host cells, the latter of
which comes about through microbially-produced bioactive molecules, thus the microbiota is capable
of regulating numerous biological pathways involved in immunity and energy homeostasis, while also
protecting the host against pathogens through colonisation resistance. The dysbiotic microbiota, which
has deviated from the ‘healthy’ status in terms of diversity and functionality, has been implicated in
a range of diseases, including inﬂammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) [5], cancer [6], neuropsychiatric
disorders [7] and cardiometabolic diseases, including obesity, type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular
disease [8]. These diseases tend to inﬂict those living a Westernised lifestyle. Indeed, greater economic
development has been shown to correlate with signiﬁcantly lower within-host gut microbiota diversity,
a common feature of the dysbiotic microbiota [9].

Many researchers have suggested that the gut microbiome can be considered as a virtual organ
but unlike any other organ in the human body, the gut microbiome represents a source of signiﬁcant
inter-individual variation, rendering the analysis of it ever more complicated. However, this vast
inter-individual variation is now being seized upon as an opportunity to utilize the microbiome for
precision medicine [10,11] and personalised nutrition [12]. Indeed, along with the human genome, the
human microbiome has been implicated as the main source of human variation modulating dietary
responses [12]. This variation presumably goes a long way to explaining the pandemic surge in
metabolic diseases despite the fact that universal advice and education on healthy eating practices
have never been more readily available.

Therefore, the overall aim of this two-part review is to investigate the potential of the microbiome
for precision microbiomics, particularly in relation to nutrition. In this regard, precision microbiomics
can be described as the use of the gut microbiome as a biomarker to predict the eﬀect of speciﬁc dietary
components on host health and the use of these data to design precision diets and interventions that
ensure optimal health.

In Part I, we describe the development of the gut microbiota throughout life along with the factors
that shape its composition and how it contributes to host health. We look at dietary practices and
speciﬁc dietary components that inﬂuence the composition and functionality of the gut microbiota and
the consequences for human health with a focus on infection, inﬂammation and metabolic disease.
In Part II, we focus on the potential use of the microbiome to prevent disease and promote health.
We present research regarding opportunities to modulate the microbiota for prevention of over- and
under- nutrition through probiotics, prebiotics and ﬁbre and we look at the impact of environment and
life-stage on the gut microbiota and health and dietary strategies and interventions for optimising
health. Finally, in Part II, we provide evidence from recent research that the gut microbiome has
potential to serve as a biomarker of human responsiveness to diet and assess where this current
knowledge-base places us in terms of putting precision microbiomics into everyday practice and
discuss the value of present-day commercial microbiome testing.

2. Development of Microbiota from Birth/Young versus Mature versus Aged Microbiota

Humans encounter their initial gut microbiota in very early life with most studies focusing on
colonisation after birth and the microbial assembly that ensues. Some studies have led to the hypothesis
that colonisation begins in utero by providing evidence of a placental microbiome in healthy pregnancies,

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

3 of 45

the presence of microorganisms in the amniotic fluid and meconium. These studies have been presented
and critically assessed in a recent review by Perez-Mu ˇnoz et al. [13]. The authors concluded that there is
insufficient evidence to date to support the ‘in utero colonisation hypothesis’, since the studies lacked
appropriate controls for contamination, the molecular approaches used were incapable of studying
low-biomass microbial populations and evidence of bacterial viability was not provided. Thus, for the
purpose of this review, we have focused on gut microbiota development from birth onwards.

Although gut microbiota composition varies considerably between infants certain patterns have
been identiﬁed. Several factors have been shown to inﬂuence microbial colonisation of the gut at this
stage, including gestational age, birth mode, sanitation, antibiotic exposure, feeding regime and host
genetics [14–20]. However, facultative anaerobes have been identiﬁed as the initial colonisers [21].
Depletion of the available oxygen creates the necessary environment for the establishment of strict
anaerobes [16,21]. Anaerobes which colonise the gut in the early days and weeks of life include
Biﬁdobacterium, Bacteroides, Clostridia and Parabacteroides [16,18,21,22]. Although the diversity of the
microbiota is generally low at this stage, dominated largely by members of the Actinobacteria phylum
in the case of full-term spontaneously vaginally delivered infants, it has been shown to be greatest in
this cohort compared to full-term infants delivered by caesarean section (dominated by Firmicutes) or
pre-term infants (dominated by Proteobacteria) at one week old [16]. Interestingly, by week 24, no
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in alpha diversity were recorded between any of these groups [16]). Diversity
increases with age with a gradual increase in the presence of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes by the ﬁrst
year [17] (Canadian infants); [20] (Canadian infants); [18] (Swedish infants) where the introduction of
solid food to the diet has been identiﬁed as an important step in the succession of the microbiota [22]
(Spanish infants), and [23] (Danish infants). In terms of metabolic function, genes involved in the
de novo biosynthesis of folate have been shown to be enriched in the infant microbiome across three
diﬀerent populations (Malawian rural communities, Amerindians from the Amazonas of Venezuela,
families from the USA) relative to adults [24]. By three years of age, obligate anaerobes have been
shown to dominate the microbiota in breast-fed infants [21] which is trending towards an adult-like
composition. The establishment of a stable adult-like microbiota occurs between 2–5 years of age and
is dominated by Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes [25–27].

Few studies have speciﬁcally investigated the pre- adolescent and adolescent microbiota of healthy
humans. However, those which have investigated these age groups indicate that the microbiota has
not yet reached the adult-state and is providing essential functions towards the developmental process
of its human host. The gut microbiota of children is more stable than that of infants with composition
largely inﬂuenced by dietary habits and geography [28]. The pre-adolescent microbiota (7–12 years of
age) is still in a state of immaturity and based on observations from a group of children from Houston,
Texas, has been shown to be more diverse and harbor signiﬁcantly greater abundances of Firmicutes
and Actinobacteria than observed in healthy adults [26]. The pre-adolescent microbiome was also
found to be enriched in functions potentially involved in ongoing development, such as vitamin B12
synthesis and de novo folate synthesis relative to the adult microbiome. In terms of the adolescent
microbiota, Agans et al. [29] identiﬁed a core microbiota of 46 species common to both adults and
adolescents (11–18 years) who consumed a standard Western diet, however, the abundances of the
genera Biﬁdobacterium and Clostridium were signiﬁcantly higher in adolescents relative to adults.

The healthy adult gut microbiota is composed primarily of the phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes,
and to a lesser extent the phyla Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Verrucomicrobia [30,31]. As with
any age-group, due to the extensive inter-individual variation, it has been virtually impossible to
deﬁne the composition of the ‘healthy’ adult gut microbiota. However, the ‘enterotype’ concept
was introduced in 2011 [32]) when faecal metagenomes of individuals from America, Europe and
Japan were found to be dominated by one of three diﬀerent bacterial communities, namely Bacteroides
(enterotype 1), Prevotella (enterotype 2) or Ruminococcus (enterotype 3). The enterotype ‘concept’ has
since been used in other studies when evaluating the gut microbiota as we will see further on, although
further analysis has resulted in the identiﬁcation of only two enterotypes, one of which is dominated

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

4 of 45

by Prevotella and the other by Bacteroides which have been linked to long term carbohydrate-, or animal
fat and protein-rich diets, respectively [33]. More recently, it has been suggested that Prevotella and
Bacteroides should be interpreted as ‘biomarkers’ of diet, lifestyle and disease state given that gradients
of both Bacteroides and Prevotella have been found within gut communities as opposed to distinct and
consistent community taxa [34].

Reports on the estimated number of species and strains in an individual have varied greatly but
in a study examining the stability of the gut microbiota in 37 US adults over a ﬁve year period, Faith et
al. [35] reported an average of 101 ± 27 species and 195 ± 48 strains in the faecal gut microbiota of each
individual with family members sharing strains, which was not observed in unrelated individuals.
However, other studies estimate the number of species to be greater than 1000 [36,37]. More recently,
Forster et al. [38] presented the Human Gastrointestinal Bacteria Culture Collection which consisted
of 737 whole-genome-sequenced bacterial isolates, representing 273 diﬀerent species, including 105
novel species from 31 families found in the human gastrointestinal microbiota. The healthy adult
microbiota has been shown to be stable over long periods of time [35] but can be inﬂuenced by a
number of factors. These include geographical location [24,39] albeit diet would appear to be an
important contributing factor in this regard [40–42], direct antibiotic usage [43], and indirectly by
consumption of antibiotic containing animal derived products, such as beef and chicken as a result of
their use in livestock production [44], non-antibiotic drugs [45], illness, injury [46,47] and hormonal
changes [48]. The healthy gut microbiota is generally characterised by rich species diversity [49] which
has been found to be reduced/altered in individuals with certain diseases, particularly those typiﬁed
by a dysregulated immune response (as discussed further on).

Ageing has a signiﬁcant impact on the gut microbiota with dramatic compositional and functional
changes observed in the elderly microbiota (in general >65 years). Several physiological and lifestyle
changes associated with the ageing process may be contributing factors resulting in changes in dietary
habits and ultimately nutrition, including a decline in dentition and salivary function, a reduction
in digestion and absorption, due to gastrointestinal dysmotility, changes in appetite as a result of
prescribed drugs and psychological state, or changes in living conditions, such as residential care
or hospitalisation [50]. Gastric hypochlorhydria which is associated with ageing and is prevalent in
individuals experiencing or who have experienced Helicobacter pylori infection can cause malabsorption
and bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine [50,51].

In general, the elderly microbiota has been characterised by a decline in microbial diversity, an
increase in the abundance of opportunistic pathogens and a decrease in species associated with short
chain fatty acid (SCFA) production, in particular butyrate [52]. The inter-individual variation observed
in the gut microbiota of adults is even greater in the elderly cohort. Indeed, while Bacteroidetes was
found to be the dominant phylum in an elderly Irish cohort (age 65 years and older), the proportion of
Bacteroidetes within individual composition datasets ranged from 3% to 92%, while the proportion of
Firmicutes ranged from 7% to 94% [53]. Mariat et al. [54] reported a change in the ratio of Firmicutes:
Bacteriodetes with age, which was recorded as 0.4 in infants (3 weeks to 10 months old), 10.9 in adults
(25–45 years old) and 0.6 in the elderly cohort (70-90 years), of which the latter two consumed an
unrestricted Western-type diet. In a study involving 178 elderly Irish subjects (65–96 years), Claesson et
al. [55] identiﬁed distinct microbiota composition groups as a result of residence location (community
versus day-hospital versus rehabilitation versus long-stay residential care) which also overlapped with
diet (low fat/high ﬁbre versus moderate fat/high ﬁbre versus moderate fat/low ﬁbre versus high fat/low
ﬁbre, respectively). The gut microbiota of people in long-stay care was found to be signiﬁcantly less
diverse than that of healthy community dwellers, which was found to be more similar to healthy young
adults. Furthermore, increased frailty as observed in the less healthy, long-stay subjects correlated
with a loss of community-associated microbiota. Indeed, a distinct negative correlation between frailty
and gut microbiota alpha diversity has been reported [56]. In the same study, the species Eubacterium
dolichum and Eggerthella lenta were found to be more abundant with frailty, while a Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii operational taxonomic unit (OTU) was less abundant in frailer individuals. Interestingly,

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

5 of 45

F. prausnitzii is an important butyrate producer [57], while E. lenta is considered a pathogen [58]. More
recently, Haran et al. [59] also reported lower abundances of butyrate-producing organisms in the
microbiota of American elderly nursing home residents (age 65 years or older) consuming a low-ﬁbre,
typical nursing home diet with increasing frailty and higher abundances of recognised dysbiotic species.
Increasing age was also associated with a decrease in the abundance of microbiome-encoded genes
and pathways associated with vitamin B, a nitrogenous base and essential amino acid production.

Interestingly, the centenarian microbiota (99–104 years) has been shown to signiﬁcantly diﬀer from
that of young adults (25–40 years) and even elderly subjects (63–76 years) [60] (Italian subjects), being
characterised by an enrichment in facultative anaerobes, mainly pathobionts, and a rearrangement in the
Firmicutes population with a marked decrease in symbiotic species associated with anti-inﬂammatory
properties e.g., F. prausnitzii and relatives. Increased inﬂammatory markers were also identiﬁed in
centenarian blood samples, indicative of increased inﬂammatory status. Rampelli et al. [61] also
reported a rearrangement in Firmicutes in Italian centenarians (99–102 years), which was not observed
in 70-year-old subjects. In this study a functional description of the coding capacity of an ageing
human cohort revealed a decrease in saccharolytic potential and an increased abundance of proteolytic
functions in the centenarian microbiome. Remarkably, a study investigating the semi-supercentarian
microbiota (105–109 years old) revealed not only a decrease in saccharolytic butyrate producers
(Faecalibacterium, Coprococcus, Roseburia) and an increase in potential opportunistic bacteria, as expected,
but also an enrichment and/or higher prevalence in health associated bacterial groups, including
Akkermansia, Biﬁdobacterium and Christensenellaceae. Whether these species were present at a younger
age or related to past lifestyle or genetics is not known [62].

In certain regions of the world, “healthy” ageing is the norm and the average lifespan of residents
surpasses general averages. Goatian village in Liuyang city of Hunan province in mid-South China is
such an example, which boasts an average lifespan of 92, much higher than the average 74.83 years
for China in general, along with a lack of chronic diseases amongst its people. An analysis of the gut
microbiota in its long-living elderly residents (ages spanning from 50 to >90 years) revealed much
greater species diversity than that observed in the control group (healthy subjects from other areas in
China, average age of 50 years) [63]. Similarly, Bian et al. [64] reported that the overall gut microbiota
composition of healthy aged Chinese subjects was similar to that of much younger people, reporting
little diﬀerences between individuals from 30 to >100 years which the authors speculate may be a
consequence of the healthy lifestyle and diet of the study subjects.

3. Role of Microbiome in Health, Development and Immune Functioning

The gut microbiome is integral to the health of its host, serving a myriad of functions. It provides
essential nutrients and bioactive metabolites, which can be produced directly by the microorganisms
or indirectly by microbial conversion of host or environmental molecules. It is involved in energy
regulation (as discussed in Section 5). It prevents pathogen colonisation directly or indirectly through a
phenomenon referred to as colonisation resistance. It sustains the integrity of the mucosal barrier and
is an essential component in the orchestration of immune functioning within the gut. The bidirectional
interactions within the brain-gut-microbiome axis, in which the gut microbes communicate to the
central nervous system, have been demonstrated largely by preclinical and some clinical studies [65].
Alterations in brain-gut-microbiome communication have been implicated in various disease states,
from irritable bowel syndrome to psychiatric and neurologic disorders, and this is an area of research
that has the potential for identiﬁcation of novel therapeutic targets and therapies [66]

3.1. Nutrients and Bioactive Metabolites

Fruits, vegetables and cereals are major components of the human diet providing essential
carbohydrates and dietary ﬁbres, although digestion of the latter is beyond the scope of the human
genome [67]. Cantarel et al. [68] identiﬁed only 17 enzymes within the human genome to breakdown
carbohydrate nutrients which included starch, lactose and sucrose. Thus, plant cell wall polysaccharides

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

6 of 45

and resistant starch, which constitute most dietary ﬁbres and cannot be digested or absorbed in the small
intestine, enter the large intestine and undergo microbial breakdown and subsequent fermentation [67].
The microbiota also feeds on animal-derived dietary carbohydrates (glycosaminoglycans and N-linked
glycans from cartilage and tissue), host epithelial glycome, and microbe-derived carbohydrates from
resident gut microbes or foodborne microbes [69,70]. Collectively, the carbohydrates consumed by the
microbiota have been termed “microbiota accessible carbohydrates” (MACs) [70].

into

active

enzymes

(CAZymes)

Carbohydrate

breakdown MACs

fermentable
monosaccharides [67]. For example, the gut bacterium Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron was recently shown
to metabolise the most structurally complex plant polysaccharide known, rhamnogalacturonan-II,
using a highly speciﬁc enzyme system [71]. Biﬁdobacterium longum strains derived from the infant gut
were shown to be capable of metabolising human milk oligosaccharides [72]. In-silico analysis of
CAZyme proﬁles in the guts of 448 individuals from diverse geographies and age groups revealed
89 CAZyme families which were present across 85% of the gut microbiome and revealed several
geography/age-speciﬁc trends in the CAZyme repertoires of individuals [73]. The major end products
of microbial fermentation of the resulting monosaccharides are the SCFAs, including butyrate,
propionate, and acetate which reach a combined concentration of 50–150 mM in the colon at a ratio
of 1:1:3, respectively [74]. They are rapidly absorbed by the intestinal epithelial cells where they
are involved in a number of cellular and regulatory processes [75,76] with only 5% excreted in
faeces [77]. Butyrate is mainly produced by Firmicutes, propionate by Bacteroidetes, and acetate by
most gut anaerobes [78]. Butyrate is the main energy source for the epithelial cells [79] and plays an
important role in brain function [80]. It is also known for its anti-cancer [81–83] and anti-inﬂammatory
properties [77,84] and for its role in the development of the intestinal barrier [85–87]. Propionate
contributes to gluconeogenesis in the liver [86] and, along with butyrate, has been shown to activate
intestinal gluconeogenesis, albeit both use diﬀerent circuits [88]. Propionate derived from the gut
microbiota has also been shown to reduce cancer cell proliferation in the liver [89]. The SCFAs are
also involved in regulating immune responses, a topic which has been extensively reviewed by
Corrêa et al. [90]. For example, acetate has recently been shown to promote intestinal antibody IgA
responses to the gut microbiota via the G protein coupled receptor GPR43 [91]. Intestinal IgA is
specialised in protecting the mucosa [92]. These SCFAs also stimulate secretion of gut hormones, such
as glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and plasma peptide YY (PYY) involved in appetite regulation
and satiety from enteroendocrine cells [93,94] proposedly through the SCFA receptors GPR41 and
GPR43 [95,96], thus playing a role in energy regulation in the body. Unsurprisingly, changes in
the production of these compounds as a result of disturbances to the gut microbiota can result in
pathological consequences for the host. As an example, increased acetate production from an altered
gut microbiota in a rodent model was shown to promote metabolic syndrome [97].

The gut microbiota is also responsible for the biosynthesis of several essential vitamins, including
B vitamins, such as cobalamin, folic acid, biotin, thiamine, riboﬂavin, nicotinic acid, pyrodixine and
pantothenic acid, as well as vitamin K [98]. Interestingly, Arumugam et al. [32] observed vitamin
biosynthesis pathways across the three identiﬁed enterotypes; however, enterotype 1 was enriched in
the biosynthesis of riboﬂavin, biotin, ascorbate and pantothenic acid, while enterotype 2 was enriched
in the biosynthesis of thiamine and folic acid.

Primary bile acids are produced in the liver from dietary cholesterol and cholesterol derived
from hepatic synthesis, and their main function is to aid absorption of dietary lipids and lipid soluble
nutrients [99]. However, bile acids are also important signalling molecules and are known to activate a
number of nuclear receptors, including farnesoid X receptor (FXR), preganane X receptor, and vitamin
D receptor, as well as the G-protein-coupled receptor TGR5, and cell signalling pathways in the liver
and GIT thus modulating their own biosynthesis, as well as glucose, lipid, and energy metabolism [100].
In humans, 200-800 mg of bile acids escape enterohepatic circulation every day, pass into the colon
and are metabolised by bacteria to secondary bile acids [99]. In a mouse model, such secondary bile
acids produced through the action of bacterial bile salt hydrolase (BSH) have been shown to regulate

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

7 of 45

weight gain, lipid metabolism and cholesterol levels via regulation of key genes in the liver or small
intestine [101]. The gut microbiota has also been shown to inhibit bile acid synthesis in the liver by
alleviation of FXR inhibition in the ileum [102].

In recent years, there has been a growing appreciation for the ability of the gut microbiota to
produce neurochemicals that can inﬂuence the peripheral enteric and central nervous systems [103].
For example, gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) is a major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain [104]
and neuropsychiatric disorders, including anxiety and depression have been linked to GABA system
dysfunction [105]. Strains of culturable lactobacilli and biﬁdobacteria from the human intestine
were shown to produce GABA, namely Lactobacillus brevis, Biﬁdobacterium dentium, adolescentis and
infantis [106]. Furthermore, GABA was found to serve as a growth factor for a previously uncultured
gut bacterium, Flavonifractor sp. which was shown to ferment GABA [107]. In the same study, the
authors identiﬁed several gut bacteria capable of producing GABA which included Bacteroides, Dorea,
Parabacteroides, Alistipes and Ruminococcus species. More recently, a co-culture experiment revealed that
GABA produced by Bacteroides fragilis was essential for the growth of a gut isolate termed KLE1738
which is believed to be an unreported bacterial genus [108]. This led to the isolation of a variety
of GABA-producing bacteria and the Bacteriodes species in particular were found to produce large
quantities of GABA. Furthermore, in the same study relative abundance levels of faecal Bacteriodes
negatively correlated with brain signatures associated with depression in patients with major depressive
disorder. Bacterially-produced GABA is generated by the enzyme glutamate decarboxylase (GAD)
which catalyzes the irreversible α-decarboxylation of glutamate to GABA and is believed to protect the
microorganism against stomach acidity [109]. GAD is also found in higher plants and animals [110].
Interestingly, daily consumption of a GABA-producing Bif. dentium gut isolate was found to modulate
sensory neuron activity in a rat faecal retention model of visceral hypersensitivity revealing that
bacterially-produced GABA can modulate abdominal pain [111]. GABA-enriched black soybean milk
fermented with a GABA-producing ﬁsh gut isolate, L. brevis, generated similar antidepressant activity
in rats as the common antidepressant drug, ﬂuoxetine, but without the side eﬀects normally associated
with the drug, such as appetite loss and reduced body weight [112].

Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) is a brain neurotransmitter and performs regulatory
functions in the gut and other organ systems [113]. It is derived from the amino acid tryptophan
and plays an important role in the regulation of mood [114] such that several antidepressants act on
serotonin transporters in the brain [115]. Yano et al. [113] demonstrated that human- and mouse-derived
gut bacteria promote serotonin biosynthesis in colonic enterochromaﬃn cells which supply serotonin to
the lumen, mucosa and circulating platelets. Spore forming bacteria, dominated by clostridial species,
were found to elicit this eﬀect. Furthermore, conventional mice were found to have 2.8 times more
plasma serotonin levels than their germ-free counterparts [116]. This peripherally produced molecule
does not pass the blood brain barrier under physiological conditions [117] but is an important signalling
molecule in the gut involved in peristalsis, secretion, vasodilation, pain perception and nausea, as well
as promoting inﬂammation and being involved in neuron development and maintenance in the enteric
nervous system, while platelet serotonin derived from the gut inﬂuences bone development amongst
other functions [118,119]. The mechanisms involved in gut microbiota-mediated serotonin biosynthesis
have not yet been fully elucidated but are thought to be linked to microbial metabolite-stimulation of
the enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase 1 in enterochromaﬃn cells which produces a serotonin precursor
that is subsequently metabolised to serotonin [113]. In particular, rectal injection with the microbial
metabolites deoxycholate, p-aminobenzoate, α-tocopherol and tyramine, were shown to increase
colonic and serum concentrations of serotonin in mice [113].

Metabolism of tryptophan in the gut results in tryptophan catabolites which have profound eﬀects
on the host [120]. Direct transformation of tryptophan by intestinal microbes results in the formation of
several molecules, including ligands for the ligand-activated aryl hydrocarbon receptors (AhRs) [117].
AhRs, which are transcription factors, are expressed by several cells of both the adaptive and innate
immune systems [121]. Upon binding of AhR to its ligand molecule, the activated transcription factor

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

8 of 45

translocates into the nucleus of the cell where it mediates cell-speciﬁc transcriptome changes [122]. Thus,
AhR signalling plays a key role in immune functioning in health and disease. Lamas et al. [123] showed
that intestinal inﬂammation in mice harbouring a microbiota incapable of metabolizing tryptophan
was attenuated following treatment with Lactobacillus strains capable of activating AhRs through the
production of tryptophan metabolites. In the same study, faecal samples from healthy subjects induced
signiﬁcantly greater AhR activation compared to faecal samples from IBD subjects, the latter of which
harbored signiﬁcantly less tryptophan and tryptophan metabolites. The tryptophan-metabolising
strain Peptostreptococcus russellii provided a protective eﬀect against colitis in mice, which the authors
suggest is linked to its ability to produce the tryptophan metabolite and AhR ligand, indoleacrylic acid
which mitigates inﬂammatory responses and promotes intestinal barrier function [124]. The authors
also noted a diminishment of tryptophan-metabolising capacity in stool samples of IBD patients.
The metabolite indole has been shown to enhance epithelial barrier function and attenuate indicators
of inﬂammation [125,126].

3.2. Colonisation Resistance

The intestinal microbiota protects its host against colonisation by exogenous pathogens and
prevents the overgrowth of potentially pathogenic endogenous members, referred to as colonisation
resistance [127]. This phenomenon is elicited through competition for nutrients and colonisation sites,
direct inhibition of pathogens through the production of antimicrobial substances, and indirectly
through modulation of the luminal environment and via host-commensal interactions involving the
epithelial barrier function, modulation of the host cell surface and the host immune system [128].

Members of the established microbiota are controlled by ‘substrate competition,’ defined as the
superior ability of a species/strain to utilise one or a few substrates over other species and the control of
that population by the limited concentration of these substrates [129]. Furthermore, one microorganism’s
by-product can serve as substrate for another [127]. In this regard, nutrient resources in the gut are in huge
demand and simultaneously limited, making it challenging to become established or outcompete with
resident microbiota. Indeed, nutrient utilisation by the colonic microbiota of mice was shown to restrain
the growth of Clostridium difficile, since it was incapable of competing with the mouse microbiota for the
available carbon sources [130]. Unfavourable environmental conditions created as a result of commensal
fermentations can also inhibit the growth of undesirable microorganisms. The utilisation of human milk
(cid:48)
oligosaccharides, particularly the dominant secretor associated oligosaccharide 2
-fucosyllactose, by
infant strains of bifidobacteria led to an increase in their proportions, an increase in lactate concentration
and a subsequent reduction in pH which was shown to decrease the proportions of Escherichia coli
and Clostridium perfringens during in vitro anaerobic fermentations [131]. Furthermore, consumption
of butyrate by epithelial cells as an energy source has been implicated as important in maintaining a
hypoxic environment in the gut lumen [132]. Decreased intestinal butyrate levels due to depletion of
a commensal butyrate producer in a mouse model resulted in increased epithelial oxygenation and
aerobic expansion of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium [133]. Butyrate has also been shown to
down-regulate virulence gene expression in Salmonella [134].

In terms of niche competition, Lee et al. [135] identified specific colonisation factors conserved
within the Bacteroides genus, one of the most prominent genera of the human microbiota. The specific
genetic locus referred to as commensal colonisation f actors (ccf ) was shown to be up-regulated in
Bac. fragilis during gut colonisation, especially at the colonic surface such that the strain was able to
reside deep within the crypt channels whereas ccf mutants were defective in terms of crypt association.
Such species-specific physical interactions with the host provide an example of direct competition for
niche occupation.

The gut microbiota is a rich reservoir of bacteriocin producers [136,137]. Bacteriocins are
ribosomally synthesised peptides with antimicrobial activity against either a broad range of species or
a narrow range of closely-related species. Their mode of action varies depending on the bacteriocin
class, but they generally exert their antimicrobial activity by forming pores in the target cell (Classes

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

9 of 45

I and II), by degrading cell wall peptidoglycan (Class III bacteriolysins) or interfering with cellular
processes (Class III non-lytic bacteriocins) [138]. The genetic machinery for bacteriocin synthesis is
encoded in gene clusters or operons where many of the genes are conserved. Based on this knowledge,
Walsh et al. [139] identiﬁed 74 bacteriocin gene clusters within the genomes of the GIT subset of the
Human Microbiome Project’s reference genome database using an in-silico approach of which the most
commonly identiﬁed were bacteriolysins, then lantibiotics and sactibiotics. Thuricin CD is an example
of a sactibiotic bacteriocin produced by a human gut isolate, Bacillus thuringiensis [140]. While it has a
narrow spectrum of inhibition, thuricin CD is capable of killing a wide range of C. diﬃcile isolates, its
antimicrobial activity being as potent as the antibiotics vancomycin and metronidazole, but without the
concomitant damage to other members of the microbiota [141]. Bacteriocin production can also aid niche
occupation of the producing strain. Indeed, bacteriocin production in Enterococcus faecalis harboring
the bacteriocin-encoding conjugative plasmid pPD1 was shown to replace indigenous enterococci and
out-competed E. faecalis strains lacking the plasmid in a mouse model [142]. Supplementing mice
with bacteriocin-producing strains resulted in transient advantageuous changes, such as inhibition of
Staphylococcus by enterocins and Enterococcus by garvicin and promotion of LAB by sakacin, plantaricins
and garvicin [143].

Other antimicrobials generated by the gut microbiota can also aid colonisation resistance.
For example, a single bacterial species, namely Clostridium scindens, was shown to confer colonisation
resistance against C. diﬃcile infection in vivo [144]. In this instance, secondary bile acids generated by
C. scindens from host-derived bile cells were found to inhibit the pathogen.

3.3. Immunity and Mucosal Integrity

Commensal interactions with the host promote immune system maturation and immune
homeostasis through complex microbiota-host networks although much of our understanding of these
mechanisms today have been extrapolated from animal or in vitro studies [145–147]. We have already
seen how several microbial metabolites play essential roles as signalling molecules for the immune
system, such as the SCFAs and tryptophan metabolites. More speciﬁcally, a polysaccharide (PSA)
produced by Bac. fragilis was shown to promote cellular and physical maturation of the developing
immune system in mice [148]. Interestingly, this species is an early colonizer of the infant gut [149]
and plays an important role in the development of the infant immune system. A 15 kDa protein
produced by F. prausnitzii, a commensal microbe deﬁcient in Crohn’s disease patients, was shown to
have anti-inﬂammatory properties, decreasing activation of the NF-κB pathway and also prevented
colitis in an animal model [150]. M-cells are speciﬁc phagocytic epithelial cells which sample particulate
antigens [151]. Rios et al. [151] showed that eﬃcient induction of IgA is brought about by M-cell
sampling of commensal microbes. Paneth cells (a specialized intestinal epithelial lineage) sense enteric
bacteria through activation of the MyD88-dependent toll-like receptor which results in the induction
of several antimicrobial factors that are essential for controlling bacterial translocation across the
intestinal barrier [152]. Colonisation by segmented ﬁlamentous bacteria was shown to induce the
maturation of T-cell responses in a gnotobiotic mouse model, suggesting these microbes could play a
role in the postnatal maturation of the gut immune system [153]. These studies provide a snapshot
of how commensals modulate host immunity. The importance of the microbiota for host immunity
can also be appreciated from the consequences of its absence in germ free animals. Indeed, germ free
animals exhibit reduced expression of IgA and antimicrobial peptides and are deﬁcient in Peyers’
patches [128,151,154,155].

Goblet cells are specialised epithelial cells that secrete mucus, composed primarily of
O-glycosylated proteins called mucins, resulting in the formation of a mucus layer whose composition
and density is inﬂuenced by the commensal microbiota [128,156,157]. The mucus layer creates a
protective barrier for the epithelial cells making it diﬃcult for pathogens to gain access to epithelial
cell receptors [127]. Germ free mice have been shown to have an extremely thin colonic mucus layer
which can be restored to levels observed in conventional mice following exposure to bacterial products,

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

10 of 45

including peptidoglycan and lipopolysaccharide [158]. Mice treated with the antibiotic metronidazole
were shown to have a thinning of the mucus layer which correlated with an increased attachment of the
mouse pathogen Citrobacter rodentium [159]. Certain commensals have been shown to modulate mucin
gene expression and glycosylation patterns [160–162]. This may be achieved through the activity of
SCFAs which have been shown to increase expression of mucin-associated genes [163]. Furthermore,
the SCFA butyrate provides energy for the epithelial cells and has also been implicated in enhancing
the intestinal barrier by up-regulating the tight junction protein, Claudin-1 [87].

4. Low Diversity of the Microbiota Caused by Poor Quality Diet Linked With Risk of Infections
and Inﬂammation Predominantly

Dysbiosis is a term used to describe imbalances in gut microbiota communities and is linked with
disease when these imbalances negatively impact microbiota functions required for health or when
they promote disease occurrence [164]. For a number of these diseases, the dysbiotic state is manifested
as a reduction in microbial diversity and often an increase in facultative anaerobes relative to the
‘healthy’ gut microbiota [164], such as IBD [165–167], cancer [168], liver disease [169,170] and recurrent
C. diﬃcile infection (CDI) [171]. Such diseases tend to primarily inﬂict those living a Westernised
lifestyle and consuming a Western diet which is characterised by low fruit and vegetable intake and
high consumption of animal-derived protein (meat and processed meat), saturated fats, reﬁned grains,
sugar, salt, alcohol and corn-derived fructose [172–175] (Figure 1). Whether these changes in microbial
diversity are the cause or consequence of these diseases is as yet unconﬁrmed, although having
reviewed a number of studies, Mosca et al. [176] suggest the argument for a causal eﬀect is strong in
the case of several human conditions, a stance we concur with in terms of inﬂammation and infection
based on the body of research presented here.

Figure 1. Comparison of consequences of poor-quality diet versus a healthy diet on the gut and gut
microbiota (MUFAs = monounsaturated fatty acids; PUFAs = polyunsaturated fatty acids).

That diet inﬂuences the composition of the gut microbiota has been conﬁrmed in several
studies [177–183]. Even short-term dietary changes (four days) have been shown to alter human gut
microbiota composition [178]. In this particular study, David et al. [178] reported that the entirely
animal-based diet (meats, eggs and cheeses) had a greater impact on gut microbiota composition
than the plant-based diet (grains, legumes, fruits and vegetables), resulting in a decrease in plant
polysaccharide-metabolising Firmicutes (Roseburia, Eubacterium rectale, and Ruminococcus bromii) and

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

11 of 45

an increase in the abundance of bile-tolerant microorganisms presumably owing to the increase in
bile acid secretion as a result of high fat intake [184]. Indeed, the animal-based diet signiﬁcantly
increased the levels of faecal deoxycholic acid (DCA), a secondary bile acid produced by microbial
dehydroxylation of bile, and has been shown to promote liver cancer in mice [185], and inhibit the
growth of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes members in rats [186]. Microbial genes required for DCA
production exhibited signiﬁcantly higher expression on the animal-based diet. Furthermore, the
abundance and activity of the sulﬁte-reducing bacterium, Bilophila wadsworthia, was also shown to be
increased on the animal-based diet.

In mouse models, this particular microorganism has been shown to cause IBD, which is thought
to be due to its production of hydrogen sulﬁde which inﬂames intestinal tissue [187]. Overall microbial
gene expression was strongly linked to diet, thus as expected, the animal-based diet resulted in lower
levels of carbohydrate fermentation end-products, the SCFAs. Despite the increase in dietary ﬁbre,
four days of the plant-based diet did not increase the microbiota diversity of participants, most likely
owing to the short time frame. Two days after the animal-based diet ended, the gut microbiota of
participants reverted to their original structure. In a study investigating the associations between
long-term dietary habits and lifestyle, and short-term dietary changes, with gut microbiota composition,
Klimenko et al. [179] reported that alpha diversity was positively linked to the number of vegetables
consumed in long-term dietary patterns.

In certain rural regions of the world, communities continue to live a traditional lifestyle and thus
consume diets resembling those of our early ancestors which are naturally high in ﬁbre. For example,
inhabitants of a rural African village in Burkina Faso still consume a high ﬁbre diet similar to that of
early human settlements at the time of the birth of agriculture. A comparative study examining the gut
microbiota composition of the children of Burkina Faso versus European children (from Florence, Italy)
consuming a Western diet (age of participants, 1−6 years) revealed a signiﬁcantly higher richness and
biodiversity in the gut microbiota of the Burkina Faso group [180]. The African children also displayed
an enrichment of Bacteroidetes and depletion of Firmicutes relative to their European counterparts.
Within the Bacteroidetes, the genera Prevotella and Xylanibacter were uniquely abundant in the African
children being absent in the European children. These speciﬁc bacteria harbor genes for cellulose and
xylan hydrolysis. In contrast, the potentially pathogenic Enterobacteriaceae (Shigella and Escherichia)
were signiﬁcantly over-represented in European children compared to their African counterparts.
Furthermore, SCFAs were signiﬁcantly more abundant in the African children. The authors hypothesise
that the gut microbiota of the Burkina Faso children evolved with their polysaccharide-rich diet and
protects them from inﬂammation and non-infectious colonic diseases. The traditionally-living Hadza
people of Tanzania are one of the last hunter-gatherer communities in the world. A recent study
reported no evidence of cardiovascular disease risk factors in this population [188] and older studies
reported that this group of people had relatively low rates of metabolic diseases, infectious diseases
or nutritional deﬁciencies compared to other settled groups in the surrounding regions [189–191].
A comparison of the gut microbiome of the Hadza people with an Italian urban cohort revealed higher
levels of microbial richness and diversity in the Hadza group [192]. These studies suggest that the
Western microbiota, even in a healthy person, may in fact be dysbiotic in terms of microbial diversity
owing to the low consumption of MACs, and predisposes its host to a range of diseases, particularly
those which are characterised by an inappropriate immune response, a theory which has been proposed
by Sonnenburg and Sonnenburg [70].

The link between inﬂammation and low microbiota diversity was corroborated in a study involving
123 non-obese and 169 obese Danish individuals [193]. Within this collective group of 292 subjects,
two groups could be diﬀerentiated by the number of gut microbial genes and thus bacterial richness.
The ‘low gene count’ (LGC) group represented 23% of the total population studied and included
a signiﬁcantly higher proportion of obese subjects. The LGC group was characterised by a more
pronounced inﬂammatory phenotype, marked overall adiposity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidaemia.
Obese individuals within the LGC group were found to gain more weight over time. Only a few

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

12 of 45

bacterial species were suﬃcient to distinguish between the LGC group and the ‘high gene count’ (HGC)
group but interestingly anti-inﬂammatory species, such as F. prausnitzii [194] were more prevalent
in HGC individuals while potentially pro-inﬂammatory species associated with IBD, Bacteroides and
Ruminococcus gnavus [195–197], were more frequently found in LGC individuals. In an accompanying
intervention study involving 49 obese and overweight subjects of whom 40% was deﬁned as LGC, a
similar phenomenon in terms of clinical parameters and inﬂammatory status was observed such that the
authors concluded that LGC individuals are at increased risk of obesity-associated co-morbidities [177].
Members of the LGC group were found to consume fewer fruits and vegetables and fewer ﬁshery
products than the HGC group. An energy-restricted diet with increased ﬁbre intake for six weeks
resulted in an increase in microbial gene richness in the LGC group which approached but remained
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent to that of the HGC group. Both groups showed a loss in body fat mass and an
improvement in clinical phenotypes (lipid and insulin levels and insulin resistance) and a trend towards
a decrease in inﬂammation (as measured by highly sensitive C-reactive protein) though the eﬀects were
more pronounced for the HGC group. Although this was a short-term intervention study, it suggests
that measures of gene richness and microbial diversity may help predict the eﬃcacy of interventions.
Furthermore, it seems that long term improvements to dietary habits may be required to improve
and stabilise gut microbial diversity which agrees with the observations of Klimenko et al. [179] who
reported considerable correlations between long-term dietary habits and gut community structure.

Loss of microbial diversity is also associated with increased risk of infection, presumably due to loss
of colonisation resistance. For example, human studies have shown that the presence of the gut pathogen
C. diﬃcile is associated with decreased gut microbiota diversity in CDI patients [198–201], as well as in
asymptomatic carriers [199]. Gu et al. [201] also reported a dramatic increase in endotoxin-producing
opportunistic pathogens and lactate-producing phylotypes in CDI patients. Community richness
and diversity were signiﬁcantly lower in the gut microbiota of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA)-positive patients compared to individuals without MRSA [202]. The alpha diversity
of the gut microbiota of children suﬀering from acute infectious diarrhoea caused by rotavirus was
signiﬁcantly less diverse than those of healthy children [203]. In this case, probiotic intervention for
ﬁve days resulted in recovery from diarrhoea. By day 3, diarrhoea symptoms had ceased, by days 10
and 30 after the intervention, microbiota diversity had increased to the point that it was no longer
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from healthy children. Future studies are required to determine the exact role of
the microbiota in diarrhoea-related processes. Other viral infections have also been associated with
low-diversity dysbiosis, including hepatitis C [204] and HIV [205].

While the exact mechanisms underlying the link between low microbial diversity, diet and disease
are not fully understood, SCFAs undoubtedly play a role given that low MAC diets are directly linked
to low SCFA levels [70,180,182]. Livanos et al. [206] reported a signiﬁcant decrease in the proportion
of the SCFA-producing Clostridial Clusters IV/XIVa in intensive care unit patients 72 h following
hospital admission which was associated with reduced gut microbiota diversity and community
stability over time. Simultaneously, the facultative anaerobe Enterococcus signiﬁcantly expanded.
These changes were associated with receipt of broad-spectrum antibiotics. The depletion of SCFAs
and in particular butyrate producers has been reported in cases of CDI and asymptomatic carriage of
C. diﬃcile, in suﬀerers of nosocomial diarrhoea and in MRSA-positive patients [199–202]. The potential
importance of butyrate in maintaining an oxygen-depleted environment in the lumen and impeding
colonisation by facultative anaerobes has already been mentioned [133]; however, its speciﬁc role,
if any, in colonisation resistance against C. diﬃcile infection has not yet been elucidated and thus
the viable bacteria themselves are most likely the responsible agents [200,207]. Indeed, the loss of a
speciﬁc butyrate-producing species, C. scindens, a member of the Clostridium XIVa clade [208], was
directly associated with susceptibility to C. diﬃcile infection in a mouse model as a result of antibiotic
treatment [144]. Administration of C. scindens alone or in combination with three other bacteria to
antibiotic-treated mice ameliorated CDI. In this case, secondary bile acids produced by C. scindens were
found to be responsible for the anti-C. diﬃcile eﬀect. However, a recent study reported the presence

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

13 of 45

of C. scindens and C. diﬃcile in the same stool sample and suggested that the former does not inhibit
the latter [209] but the study does not provide data on bile acid proﬁles or the 7-α -dehydroxylating
activity of C. scindens, the enzyme responsible for secondary bile acid production.

Furthermore, Sonnenburg et al. [210] showed that in the absence of dietary polysaccharides, a
human gut microbe turned to host mucus glycans as a nutrient source. Mouse models have shown that
a defective mucus barrier enables contact between epithelial cells and bacteria resulting in spontaneous
colitis in mice [211], a feature shared with suﬀerers of ulcerative colitis [212]. But a direct connection
between dietary ﬁbre and the status of the colonic mucosal barrier was more recently presented in a
mouse study by Desai et al. [213]. In this study, a dietary-ﬁbre deprived gut microbiota resorted to
host-secreted mucus glycoproteins, which resulted in the erosion of the colonic mucus barrier and
enabled the gut pathogen Cit. rodentium greater access to the epithelial cells, resulting in lethal colitis.
In another study, mice fed a Western style diet presented with an altered gut microbiota composition
that resulted in increased permeability and reduced growth rate of the inner mucus layer compared
with mice fed a CHOW diet [214]. However, administration of Bif. longum or the ﬁbre inulin prevented
mucus defects. Inulin prevented penetrability of the inner colonic mucus layer while Bif. longum
restored mucus growth.

The Winning the War on Antibiotic Resistance (WARRIOR) project which is being undertaken by
researchers from the University of Wisconsin aims to investigate the relationship between dietary ﬁbre
intake, the gut microbiota and colonisation by multi-drug resistant microorganisms using 600 randomly
selected Wisconsin residents over the age of 18 of which the main results will be published in a
peer-reviewed journal [215]. The results of this study should help us to further delineate the role of
diet and the microbiota in protecting against pathogen invasion.

5. Diet-Derived Microbial Metabolites—Many Are Beneﬁcial but Speciﬁc Metabolites Are
Associated with Risk of Metabolic Disease

Metabolic disease refers to any disease in which the normal metabolic processes in the body are
disrupted and examples include obesity, type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome, all of which are risk
factors for cardiovascular disease. Obesity and overweight are described as abnormal or excessive
fat accumulation that negatively impacts health [216] and according to the WHO, obesity has tripled
since 1975. Indeed, in 2016, 39% of adults aged 18 years and over were described as overweight and
13% as obese [216]. A recent study found that body mass index (BMI) had a J-shaped association with
overall mortality among 3.6 million adults in the UK [217]. Obesity results from ingestion of excess
energy which does not get expended and is a strong risk factor for type 2 diabetes, the latter of which
is characterised by high blood sugar levels, insulin resistance and relative lack of insulin [218]. In 2014,
the WHO [219] estimated that 422 million adults had diabetes, of which the majority were inﬂicted
with type 2 diabetes. Diabetic dyslipidaemia which describes high levels of triglycerides in blood
plasma, increased levels of small, dense, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and decreased
levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol is associated with insulin resistance and is a risk
factor for cardiovascular disease in diabetic individuals [218,220]. Metabolic syndrome describes the
abnormal metabolism of glucose and lipids and is characterised by abdominal obesity along with two
or more of the following factors: reduced HDL cholesterol, elevated triglycerides, high blood pressure
and increased fasting blood glucose [218]. Metabolic syndrome is also a risk factor for type 2 diabetes
along with cardiovascular disease [221].

The association between the gut microbiota and regulation of energy storage in the body was
initially documented in mice. Indeed, germ free mice are protected against the obesity that usually
develops after consuming a Western-style, high fat, sugar rich diet [222]. Conventionalisation of
adult germ-free mice with a normal microbiota from conventionally raised animals resulted in a 60%
increase in body fat and insulin resistance within 14 days [223]. The obesity-resistance phenotype
of germ-free animals fed a high fat diet was attributed to increased excretion of lipids and reduced
calorie consumption [224]. The interactions between high fat diet and the gut microbiota in mice

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

14 of 45

were shown to promote pro-inﬂammatory changes in the small intestine which preceded weight gain
and obesity and also showed signiﬁcant associations with obesity progression and development of
insulin resistance [225]. In terms of microbiota composition, an increased abundance of Firmicutes
and decreased abundance of Bacteroidetes has been reported in obese mice compared to their lean
counterparts [226]. It has been suggested that such a microbiota may be more eﬃcient at generating
energy in the form of SCFAs from the diet thus contributing to weight gain [227]. Diﬀerences in gut
microbiota composition and functionality have also been recorded in humans between obese and
lean people. Ley et al. [228] reported a decrease in the relative proportion of Bacteriodetes in obese
people relative to their lean counterparts and which was found to increase on calorie-restricted diets.
This observation was also corroborated by Turnbaugh et al. [229] who also noted a higher proportion
of Actinobacteria in obese subjects. Furthermore, faecal SCFA concentrations tend to be higher in obese
individuals [230–233]. The obese gut microbiota has also been characterised by reduced diversity and
altered representation of bacterial genes and metabolic pathways [229]. More recently, a systematic
review investigated the link between the gut microbiota and low-grade inﬂammation, a hallmark of
obesity which plays a major role in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in humans [234]. Fourteen,
mostly observational studies were included with n = 10 to 471 participants. Higher white blood cell
counts and high sensitivity C reactive protein levels were associated with lower gut microbial diversity,
and the abundances of Biﬁdobacterium, Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcus and Prevotella were inversely
linked to diﬀerent markers of low-grade inﬂammation. Compositional and functional diﬀerences have
been observed in the gut microbiota of type 2 diabetes individuals which included a moderate degree
of microbial dysbiosis, reduction in the abundance of some universal butyrate-producing bacteria, an
increase in opportunistic pathogens, and an increase in microbial functions conferring oxidative stress
resistance [235,236]. In apparently healthy participants, Kashtanova et al. [237] reported an association
between compromised metabolic status, lower gut microbial alpha diversity, and higher representation
of opportunistic pathogens and as a consequence propose that the “gut-heart axis” may be involved
in the very early stages of cardiovascular disease. These studies clearly illustrate the link between
the gut microbiota and metabolic disease of which certain microbial metabolites undoubtedly play a
signiﬁcant role [238].

The beneﬁcial role of microbially-produced SCFAs in energy regulation of the host, insulin
sensitivity and glucose and lipid metabolism has been presented in numerous studies which have been
the topic of recent reviews [76,238,239]. However, certain microbial metabolites have been shown to
be detrimental to health and may be signiﬁcant contributors to the development and progression of
metabolic diseases in the host [97]. Dietary-derived microbial metabolites are of particular interest
given that dietary modulation and probiotic and prebiotic inventions oﬀer viable routes to alter
microbial metabolite signatures.

Trimethylamine (TMA) is a microbial metabolite generated from dietary choline, as well as
the choline derivative betaine, lecithin, and L-carnitine [238]. Red meat, dairy products, eggs and
salt-water fish are rich sources of choline, lecithin and carnitine [240]. Gut microbes known to be
involved in TMA production include members of the families Deferribacteraceae, Anaeroplasmataceae,
Prevotellaceae, and Enterobacteraceae [240–243]. The microbially-produced TMA crosses the intestinal
epithelial cells, enters the circulation and is transported to the liver where it is converted to the uremic
toxin, trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) mainly by the enzyme flavin-containing monooxygenase-3
(FMO3) [244]. Elevated plasma TMAO levels derived from microbial metabolism of the lipid
phosphatidylcholine have been identified as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease in humans [245].
In the same study, dietary supplementation of mice with TMAO or choline was found to promote
atherosclerosis and studies with germ free mice indicated the significance of the gut microbiota and
dietary choline in TMAO production, increased macrophage cholesterol accumulation and foam cell
formation. Gut microbial-derived production of TMAO from L-carnitine, which is abundant in red
meats, has also been confirmed in humans, suggesting a mechanism for the link between dietary
Interestingly, in the same study dietary
red meat ingestion and accelerated atherosclerosis [241].

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

15 of 45

supplementation of mice having intact intestinal microbiota with TMAO was shown to reduce the
expression of key liver enzymes involved in bile acid synthesis, as well as a number of liver bile acid
transporters which resulted in significant decreases in the total bile acid pool and decreased reverse
cholesterol transport. The interaction between consumption of dietary components, TMAO levels and
various disease endpoints may be affected more by interindividual variations in TMAO production than
consumption of the dietary components themselves [246]. Additionally, there is significant variability
in one of the key enzymes (FMO3) involved in TMAO production (can be 20–30× difference between
individuals) making it difficult to generalise and draw conclusions about diet and disease endpoints in
regard to TMAO production. TMAO has also been shown to induce inflammatory markers in mice
and in human aortic endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells owing to activation of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase, extracellular signal kinase, and the NF-κB signalling cascade, and it
promoted recruitment of activated leukocytes to endothelial cells [247]. It has also been shown to activate
the NLRP3 inflammasome [248]. The link between plasma TMAO levels and the gut microbiota in
humans was further confirmed following phosphatidylcholine challenge (ingestion of two hard-boiled
eggs and deuterium [d9]-labelled phosphatidylcholine) in the presence and absence of broad-spectrum
antibiotics [249] whereby plasma TMAO levels were suppressed after antibiotic administration but
reappeared after withdrawal of antibiotics. Furthermore, the study confirmed the link between elevated
TMAO plasma levels and increased risk of incident major adverse cardiovascular events. The metabolite
has also been associated with disease severity and survival of patients with chronic heart failure [250],
and was shown to cause platelet aggregation in humans receiving a choline supplement for two
months thus revealing a link between TMAO and risk of thrombosis [251]. A systematic review and
meta-analysis of 19 prospective studies found an association between elevated plasma TMAO levels
and its precursors (L-carnitine, choline or betaine) with increased risks of major adverse cardiovascular
events and death, independent of traditional risk factors [252]. Higher plasma TMAO levels were also
found to be associated with diabetes [253]. Interestingly, however, a structural analogue of choline,
namely 3,3-dimethyl-1-butanol (DMB), was able to non-lethally inhibit TMA formation by cultured
microbes, by physiological polymicrobial cultures (intestinal contents, human faeces), and reduce
TMAO levels in mice fed a high carnitine or choline diet [254]. In the same study, DMB also inhibited
choline diet-enhanced endogenous macrophage foam cell formation and development of atherosclerotic
lesions in apolipoprotein e-/- mice without altering circulating cholesterol levels. This study provides a
specific example of a therapeutic approach towards the treatment and prevention of a metabolic disease
through direct manipulation of gut microbiota metabolism.

The aromatic amino acids tyrosine and phenylalanine are metabolised by intestinal bacteria to
the phenolic compound, p-cresol, which is a uremic toxin [255,256]. This compound is detoxiﬁed
in the liver and colon where it is sulfated to become p-cresol-sulfate [257,258]. The absence of
p-cresol-sulfate in the plasma of germ-free mice provides further evidence of the role of the gut
microbiota in its production [116]. Under normal conditions p-cresol-sulfate enters the circulation
and ends up in the urine where it is excreted from the body [256]. Information regarding the speciﬁc
intestinal microbes responsible for p-cresol generation is still unclear, but in vitro studies have shown
that members of the following families can produce it; Clostridiaceae, Eubacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae,
Ruminococcaceae, Staphylococcaceae, Veillonaceae, Bacteroidaceae, Porphyromonadaceae, Biﬁdobacteriaceae,
and Fusobacteriaceae [256]. However, in patients suﬀering from chronic kidney disease, excretion is
impaired. Chronic kidney disease and cardiovascular disease are closely associated and risk of death
from cardiovascular disease is much higher in patients with end-stage renal disease [259] and evidence
strongly indicates that p-cresol-sulfate is a causal link. p-Cresol-sulfate has been shown to disturb
the normal cell cycle in a mouse preadipocyte cell line, to induce apoptosis, inhibit diﬀerentiation
of preadipocyes to mature adipocytes, and to decrease glucose uptake at baseline and after insulin
stimulation [260]. It has been shown to have a pro-inﬂammatory eﬀect on unstimulated leucocytes [261].
It induced shedding of endothelial microparticles in human endothelial cells, a marker of endothelial
It induced oxidative stress in both endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells
damage [262].

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

16 of 45

at a concentration representative of that found in dialysis patients, and it increased contraction
of mouse thoracic aorta and eventually led to inward eutrophic remodelling, a feature of uremic
vasculopathy, suggesting it may contribute to hypertension and cardiovascular mortality in chronic
kidney disease [263]. In nephrectomised mice, it promoted cardiac apoptosis which was at least partly
attributed to the induction of NADPH oxidase activity and production of reactive oxygen species [264].
Poesen et al. [265] showed that intestinal uptake of p-cresol in patients with chronic kidney disease
associated with cardiovascular disease independent of renal function.

Indoxyl sulfate is another uremic toxin derived from gut microbial metabolism of the essential
amino acid, tryptophan [266]. In this case, bacterial trytophanases generate indole from tryptophan
which is transported to the liver where it is hydroxylated and O-sulfated to produce the uremic
toxin. Like p-cresol, serum indoxyl sulfate is problematic for chronic kidney disease patients.
Barreto et al. [267] reported that baseline indoxyl sulfate levels presented an inverse relationship
with renal function and a direct relationship with aortic calciﬁcation in chronic kidney disease patients.
While the causative relationship between indoxyl sulfate and the pathology of cardiovascular disease has
not yet been proven, studies to date suggest its actions are linked to multiple NADPH oxidase-mediated
redox signalling pathways which have been implicated in diﬀerent forms of cardiovascular disease
pathophysiologies, including coronary calciﬁcation, atherosclerotic vascular disease, arrhythmia, and
chronic heart failure [268]. Similarly, the microbial metabolite phenylacetylglutamine, which is derived
from the microbial conversion of phenylalanine [269], has been shown to be a strong and independent
risk factor for cardiovascular disease and mortality in chronic kidney disease patients [270].

The branched chain amino acids (BCAAs), leucine, isoleucine and valine represent three of the nine
essential amino acids. As well as being building blocks of protein synthesis, the BCAAs are involved in
nutrition metabolism, regulation of energy homeostasis, gut health, immunity and disease [271]. Our
gut microbiome has been shown to be enriched with genes involved in the biosynthesis of essential
amino acids, including the BCAAs [272]. While BCAAs are not precisely ‘diet-derived’ microbial
metabolites, a recent study linking microbial BCAAs to glucose intolerance and insulin resistance
renders them worthy of mention. Indeed, Pedersen et al. [273] reported that the serum metabolome
of insulin-resistant individuals was characterised by increased levels of BCAAs which correlated
with a gut microbiome with enriched biosynthetic potential for BCAAs. Transfer of Prevotella copri to
mice, one of the main species driving the association between BCAA synthesis and insulin resistance,
increased circulating levels of BCAAs, induced insulin resistance and aggravated glucose intolerance.
The authors state that further studies are required to determine how the intestinal BCAAs enter the
bloodstream and from what intestinal location. However, elevated circulating BCAA levels and their
breakdown products have been positively associated with insulin resistance in humans. A metabolic
signature related to BCAA catabolism in obese subjects which included circulating BCAAs and
downstream products of their catabolism (acylcarnitines and glutamate) was identiﬁed in “healthy”
obese subjects free of diabetes or other serious illnesses [274]. These obese subjects were also more
insulin resistant compared to their lean counterparts. In the same study, animals fed a high fat diet
supplemented with BCAAs had reduced food intake and weight gain compared to the high fat diet
alone but became equally insulin resistant as those on the high fat diet. The authors proposed a
pathway of dysregulated BCAA metabolism as a result of overnutrition of protein which leads to
insulin resistance, glucose intolerance and eventually type 2 diabetes. A systematic review of 23 studies
involving 20,091 participants found that circulating BCAAs are a useful biomarker for detection of
insulin resistance and diabetic risk later on [275]. A causal role of BCAA metabolism in the aetiology
of type 2 diabetes was reported following a large-scale human genetic and metabolomic study [276].
Therefore, modulation of the microbiota to inﬂuence BCAA levels could represent a potential route
towards the prevention of insulin resistance and its associated aetiologies.

As we have seen from these studies, metabolomics alongside metagenomics is a powerful tool
towards identifying diet-derived microbial metabolites involved in human disease. These metabolites

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

17 of 45

not only serve as biomarkers of disease occurrence and disease risk but may provide new routes
towards disease management through modulation of the intestinal microbiota.

6. Role of Diet Type in Shaping the Microbiome

The Mediterranean diet is characterised by high intake of non-refined grains, legumes, and a large
diversity of fresh vegetables and fruits daily; yogurt and milk are consumed only a few times per week;
there is reduced intake of fish and seafood, eggs, white meat and high fat dairy products (a few times per
week); red meat is consumed only a few times per month; alcohol intake is also minimised; dietary lipids
are mainly derived from olive oil [277]. Epidemiological studies and randomized clinical trials have
shown that consumption of a Mediterranean diet bestows protective effects against several diseases,
including obesity, diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, stroke, numerous cancers, allergic
diseases, as well as Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease (recently reviewed by Tosti et al. [278]). Based
on evidence to date, Tosti et al. [278] concluded that the health benefits of the Mediterranean diet are
due to its lipid-lowering effects, protection provided against inflammation, oxidative stress and platelet
aggregation, modulation of growth factors and hormones involved in cancer pathogenesis, inhibition
of nutrient sensing pathways by specific amino acid restriction and gut microbiota metabolites which
influence host metabolic health. Indeed, the accumulating evidence suggests that the Mediterranean
diet modulates gut microbiota composition and functionality resulting in microbiome and metabolome
which differs from that of the Western diet and reduces risk of disease. For example, consumption
of the Mediterranean diet for one year by obese men (n = 20) significantly decreased the genera
Prevotella and increased Roseburia and Oscillospira [279]. Roseburia is a known butyrate-producer with
immune maintenance and anti-inflammatory properties [280] and Oscillospira is positively associated
with leanness and health [281]. Long-term consumption of the diet also increased the abundance
of Parabacteroides distasonis [279], a strain recently shown to block colon tumor formation in high fat
diet-fed azoxymethane-treated mice [282]. Faecal metabolite changes linked to amino acid, peptide
and sphingolipid metabolism were reported on the Mediterranean diet and an improvement in insulin
sensitivity was noted [279]. The same group investigated the effect of chronic consumption of the
Mediterranean diet for 2 years in obese patients with severe metabolic disease (n = 33), obese patients
without metabolic dysfunction (n = 32) and non-obese subjects (n = 41) [283]. Obese patients with severe
metabolic disease showed a marked dysbiosis in their gut microbiota which was reversed following
consumption of the Mediterranean diet; furthermore, there was a significant reduction in plasma
triglyceride levels and a trend for glucose depletion in the same group. In this case, consumption
of the Mediterranean diet for two years increased the abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which
make up the Bacteriodetes phylum, which has previously been reported to be reduced in obese
In addition, genera with saccharolytic activity, including Faecalibacterium, Roseburia
people [228].
and Ruminococcus were also increased. Interestingly, such changes were not observed for non-obese
individuals or obese individuals without metabolic syndrome. De Filippis et al. [284] reported that
adherence to the Mediterranean diet in a cohort of Italian individuals (n = 153) was associated with
increased levels of faecal SCFAs which correlated with enrichment of members of Firmicutes and
Bacteroidetes. In contrast, low adherence to the diet (particularly observed in omnivores) was associated
with increased levels of urinary TMAO which correlated with L-Ruminococcus (Ruminococcus genus
assigned to Lachnospiraceae family). Interestingly, the mucin-degrading bacterium Ruminococcus torques
has been shown to be increased in transgenic mice representative of Crohn’s disease and receiving a
high fat/high sugar Western diet [285]. These mice had decreased mucus layer thickness and increased
intestinal permeability. Higher adherence to the Mediterranean diet in a Spanish cohort (n = 74) was
also associated with higher levels of Clostridium cluster XVIa and F. prausnitzii [286]. Clostridium cluster
XVIa contains the Blautia coccoides group which are known butyrate producers [287], are involved in
secondary bile acid production [288], as well as in the formation of T-regulatory cells [289]. F. prausnitzii
is now recognised as one of the most abundant butyrate producers in the human gut microbiota and has
anti-inflammatory properties [194]. Interestingly, Mitsou et al. [290] reported that fast food consumption

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

18 of 45

in an adult population resulted in a microbiota with suppressed representation of Lactobacillus and
butyrate-producing bacteria while adherence to the Mediterranean diet led to lower faecal E. coli
counts, a higher Bifidobacterium: E. coli ratio and greater molar ratio of acetate (n = 120). The study also
reported increased levels and prevalence of Candida albicans due to the Mediterranean diet which the
authors suggest could be linked to the ingestion of foodstuffs that are carriers of yeast. Overall, the
studies presented here strongly indicate that increased SCFA production as a result of gut microbiota
modulation on the Mediterranean diet plays a key role in its beneficial health effects.

Another “trendy” diet type that shapes the microbiome is the gluten-free diet. De Palma et al. [291]
showed that a 30-day gluten-free diet decreased populations of Biﬁdobacterium and Lactobacillus while
increasing unhealthy bacteria, such as E. coli and Enterobacetriaceae that could further increase the risk
of infection by opportunistic bacteria. Others, such as Bonder et al. [292] found reductions in R. bromii
and Roseburia faecis coupled to increased Victivallaceae and Clostridiaceae in individuals consuming
a gluten-free diet. Whilst a gluten-free diet is an eﬀective therapy for treating patients diagnosed
with celiac disease it is often associated with a number of health issues and nutritional deﬁciencies.
Interestingly, over the last 5–10 years, there has been an increasing number of healthy, non-celiac
individuals following gluten-free diets and do so under the impression that such a diet is healthier
for them when paradoxically it may be increasing their risk of the similar health issues and nutrient
deﬁciencies as those commonly seen in those with celiac disease.

7. Dietary Components (Protein, Carbohydrate, Fat) Inﬂuencing Microbiota Composition

Protein, carbohydrate and fat are macronutrients required in large amounts to maintain bodily
functions and to provide energy for the body. FAO/WHO recommends that daily dietary fat should
not exceed 30% of total energy intake, protein should account for 10–15%, and carbohydrate should
account for the remainder (between 55–75%). Dietary ﬁbre intake is recommended at 25 g/day for
women and 38 g per day for men [293]. However, the proportions of these macronutrients in the typical
Western diet are skewed towards high-energy and low nutrient-dense foods containing large amounts
of saturated fat and sugar, and ﬁbre intake has been reported to be as low as 15 g/day in 90% of the
population in developed countries [294]. Furthermore, each of these macronutrients contains diﬀerent
types and studies have shown that these diﬀerences along with quantity consumed can dramatically
inﬂuence gut microbiota composition and functionality.

7.1. Fat

Dietary fat is composed mainly of triglycerides where each triglyceride molecule contains a
glycerol backbone with three fatty acids attached [295]. Some dietary fats reach the colon after escaping
absorption in the small intestine. Indeed, we have already seen that an animal-based diet high in
fat and protein alters the gut microbiota resulting in an increase in the abundance of bile-tolerant
microorganisms, such as Bilophila, Alistipes and Bacteroides [178] and long-term consumption selects for
a Bacteroides enterotype [33]. Recently, Agans et al. [296] directly investigated if typically consumed
dietary fatty acids alone could sustain the growth of the human gut microbiota using an in vitro
multi-vessel simulator system of the human small intestine. Switching from a balanced Western
diet type medium to one lacking carbohydrates and proteins resulted in substantial changes to the
microbiota and metabolites produced. Several speciﬁc genera increased in abundance, including
Alistipes, Bilophila and several genera within the class Gammaproteobacteria. Increased abundance
of Alistipes has been correlated with a greater frequency of pain in paediatric patients with irritable
bowel syndrome [297], has been found in patients with major depressive disorder [298] and has been
associated with type 2 diabetes [236]. We have already seen that Bil. wadsworthia was increased in
humans consuming the animal-based diet [178] and is associated with inﬂammation owing to its
hydrogen sulﬁde-producing capabilities [187]. E. coli is a member of Gammaproteobacteria which
also harbours many pathogenic members, including Salmonella, Yersinia, Vibrio, and Pseudomonas [299].
The abundances of well known glycan and protein degraders, including Bacteroides, Clostridium and

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

19 of 45

Roseburia decreased in the fats-only medium and there was also a decrease in the production of
antioxidants and SCFAs, a concomitant decrease in the abundance of glycan-degradation genes, and an
increase in the abundance of genes coding for fatty acid degradation enzymes and anaerobic respiratory
reductases [296]. Overall, the results show that the gut microbiota is capable of utilising dietary fats
typical of the Western diet but the resulting changes may negatively impact human health. In mice,
Murphy et al. [300] showed that high fat feeding of mice was more inﬂuential for altering gut microbiota
composition than genetically induced obesity, generating a progressive increase in Firmicutes which
reached statistical signiﬁcance. In another study, high fat feeding of mice was shown to decrease the
proportion of Ruminococcaceae, which are known to utilise plant polysaccharides, and to increase the
proportion of Rikenellaceae [301], of which the genus Alistipes is a member. The results also suggested
that high fat feeding altered overall cellular composition within the abundant bacterial groups, namely,
Bacteroidales and Lachnospiraceae based on cecal chemical ﬁngerprints analysis. Metaproteome analysis
revealed a decrease in proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism and a shift towards amino acid
and simple sugar metabolism. This is in agreement with Yatsunenko et al. [24] who reported that
metagenomes associated with the Western diet are enriched in amino acid and simple sugar degrading
enzymes relative to African populations consuming diets rich in complex carbohydrates. More recently,
Vaughn et al. [302] reported that a high fat diet fed to Sprague-Dawley rats increased the Firmicutes:
Bacteriodetes ratio and increased proliferation of pro-inﬂammatory Proteobacteria which were found to
be toxic to vagal aﬀerent neurons in culture. Overall, the results suggest that high fat-diet-induced
shifts in gut microbiota could disrupt vagal gut-brain communication ultimately leading to increased
accumulation of body fat.

However, dietary fat is not a homogenous macronutrient, since the structure and function of
diﬀerent fatty acids can vary greatly depending on chain length (6 to 24 carbons) and absence or
presence of carbon-carbon double bonds [295]. Saturated fatty acids (SFAs) have no double bond,
monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) contain a single double bond, while polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFAs) have two or more double bonds. Furthermore, the double bond can be in a cis or
trans conﬁguration depending on whether the hydrogens attached to the carbons in the double
bond are on the same side or opposing sides of the molecule, respectively. Trans fats are produced
commercially by the partial hydrogenation of unsaturated fats or naturally via biohydrogenation in
ruminant animals [303]. Studies have shown that diﬀerent fatty acids exert diﬀerential eﬀects on
the gut microbiota. For example, a high fat diet rich in saturated fat in the form of palm oil (PUFA:
SFA ratio = 0.4) induced higher body weight gain and liver triglyceride content in mice compared
with diets rich in polyunsaturated fats (olive oil, PUFA: SFA ratio = 1.1, or saﬄower oil, PUFA: SFA
ratio = 7.8) [304]. Interestingly, the overﬂow of dietary fat to the distal intestine was greater on the
palm oil diet compared with the others. Indeed, the high-saturated fat, palm oil diet reduced microbial
diversity and increased the Firmicutes: Bacteroidetes ratio which the authors suggest may be due to
antimicrobial eﬀects of the saturated fats. A diet high in SFAs derived from milk fat, but not PUFAs
derived from saﬄower oil, promoted expansion of the low abundance sulﬁte-reducing Bil. wadsworthia
in mice which was associated with a pro-inﬂammatory immune response and increased incidence
of colitis in genetically susceptible mice, but not wild type mice [187]. Due to their hydrophobicity,
milk fats promote taurine-conjugation of hepatic bile acids which increases the availability of organic
sulfur for use by bacteria, such as Bil. wadsworthia. In the same study, both the SFA- and PUFA-rich
diets reduced microbiota richness compared with a low-fat diet. In this case, the low-fat diet promoted
Firmicutes while the two high fat diets resulted in higher abundances of Bacteroidetes and low levels
of Firmicutes. Interestingly, mice fed high fat diets derived from milk fat, or lard (both high in SFAs),
or saﬄower oil (high in PUFAs) revealed that all three high fat diets induced dramatic and speciﬁc
changes to gut microbiota composition which were associated with diﬀerent host adipose tissue
inﬂammatory/lipogenic proﬁles [305]. Saﬄower oil is rich in omega-6 PUFAs which are associated
with a pro-inﬂammatory status [306]. Indeed, the saﬄower oil-rich diet resulted in a greater localized,
tissue-speciﬁc pro-inﬂammatory eﬀect compared to the milk fat and lard-based diets [305]. However,

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

20 of 45

in both milk fat- and saﬄower oil-fed mice, Tenericutes were decreased, a phylum which has been
shown to be reduced under inﬂammatory conditions [307,308] and Proteobacteria was increased, of
which Bil. wadsworthia is a member. Consumption of extra virgin olive oil (rich in MUFAs and phenolic
compounds), reﬁned olive oil (rich in MUFAs but low in phenolic compounds), or butter (rich in
SFAs and cholesterol) by mice resulted in diﬀerential eﬀects on gut microbiota composition [309].
The butter-induced changes resembled those reported for obese individuals while the changes induced
by extra virgin olive oil diﬀered most from butter. In a more recent study, the same group investigated
the eﬀect of extra virgin olive oil on mouse gut microbiota compared to butter using more in-depth
analysis [310]. Highest levels of systolic blood pressure were recorded for mice fed butter which
correlated positively with Desulfovibrio sequences in faeces, which were signiﬁcantly higher in mice fed
butter compared to olive oil. Interestingly, Desulfovibrionaceae are sulfate reducers, which the authors
suggest could be sustained by butter sulfate sources, whereas the authors suggest that the lower
levels in the olive oil diet may be due to the higher presence of polyphenols. Olive oil had the lowest
plasmatic insulin levels which correlated inversely with Desulfovibrio, and the lowest plasmatic leptin
values which correlated inversely with Sutterellaceae, Marispirillum and Mucilaginibacter dageonensis
which were signiﬁcantly higher for olive oil. Mice fed the standard diet had the lowest total cholesterol
levels which correlated positively with Fusicatenibacter and Prevotella, the latter of which has been
associated with an improvement in glucose metabolism [311] but its relationship with cholesterol is
less clear [310]. Interestingly, butter was also associated with an increase in Alistipes indictintus and
Pontibacter lucknowensis which correlated positively with total cholesterol, ghrelin, insulin, body weight
and HDL/LDL. Lam et al. [312] reported a rapid increase of hydrogen sulﬁde-producing bacteria
in mice consuming a diet high in saturated fat which was not observed for mice fed high fat diets
containing omega-6 or omega-3 PUFAs. In fact, these bacteria remained relatively stable in mice fed
omega-6 PUFAs and were mostly reduced in mice fed omega-3 PUFAs. Likewise, Shen et al. [313]
reported that mice fed a diet high in saturated fat had a greater abundance of three types of sulﬁdogenic
bacteria (Bil. wadsworthia, Desulfobulbus and Desulfovibrio) primarily in the colonic mucosa compared
to mice fed a low-fat diet after chronic feeding (20 weeks). In addition, high fat feeding increased
intestinal inﬂammation by week 20, which was not observed at week 6. However, by week 6, high fat
feeding had impaired the localization of the tight junction protein zonula occludens 1 at the apical area
of the ileal epithelium which was also observed at week 20. The authors concluded that chronic high
saturated fat feeding may contribute to chronic intestinal inﬂammation owing to microbial metabolic
pathways. In humans at risk of metabolic syndrome, a high saturated fat diet, a high MUFA diet
combined with high glycemic index (GI) carbohydrates, or a high MUFA diet combined with low GI
carbohydrates caused a decrease in total bacteria and the high saturated fat diet increased faecal SCFA
concentrations which the authors suggest could be due to lower absorption in the gut [314].

Interestingly, transgenic mice constitutively producing omega 3-PUFAs fed a high fat/high sucrose
diet displayed higher phylogenetic diversity in the cecum compared to wild-type mice fed the
same diet [315]. The transgenic mice were protected from obesity, glucose intolerance and hepatic
steatosis and maintained a normal gut barrier function unlike wild-type mice. Transplantation of
the faecal microbiota from the transgenic mice to the wild-type mice reversed their weight gain and
normalised their glucose tolerance and intestinal permeability. The authors concluded that the omega-3
mediated changes to the gut microbiota were involved in the prevention of metabolic syndrome in the
transgenic mice.

Trans fats contain unsaturated fatty acids with at least one double bond in the trans configuration.
In industry, they are formed during the partial hydrogenation of unsaturated fats (vegetable oils),
a process performed to generate semi-solid fats for use in commercial cooking, margarines and
manufacturing processes [316]. These fats, also referred to as partially hydrogenated oils (PHOs) have a
long shelf life and can be customised to enhance palatability of sweets and baked goods and thus are
an attractive ingredient for food manufacturers [316]. However, their consumption is associated with
increased risk of disease, such as cardiovascular disease [303], type 2 diabetes [317], and Alzheimer’s

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

21 of 45

disease [318]. Carvalho et al. [319] investigated the impact of PHOs on gut microbiota in mice in the
presence of whey protein hydrolysate or casein as a protein source. The PHOs had minimal impact on
the gut microbiota and were hardly able to invert the Bacteroidetes: Firmicutes ratio but preserved the
normal pattern.

Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) is a collective term describing isomers of linoleic acid (LA) and
while the latter has double bonds in the cis conﬁguration located at carbons 9 and 12, CLA can
have either the cis or trans conﬁguration or both located along the carbon chain [320]. Unlike the
trans fats described earlier, CLA has been associated with numerous beneﬁcial properties based
primarily on results from animal models and cell lines, including protection against cancer, obesity and
atherosclerosis, as well as immunomodulation which has been reviewed by Yang et al. [321]. The most
bioactive isomers of CLA are cis-9, trans-11 CLA and trans-10, cis-12 CLA [321]. Supplementing
mice with dietary trans-10, cis-12 CLA for eight weeks resulted in signiﬁcantly lower proportions
of Firmicutes and higher proportions of Bacteroidetes compared with the control group which
received no supplementation [322]. Gut microbiota composition was signiﬁcantly altered with higher
proportions of the family Porphyromonadaceae and decreased abundance of families Lachnospiraceae
and Desulfovibrionaceae. Porphyromonadaceae has been associated with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD) in mice [323], a manifestation of metabolic syndrome in the liver [324]. The family has also
been associated with cognitive impairment in cirrhosis patients, whereas Lachnospiraceae abundance
was reported to be lower in cirrhosis patients [325]. Lachnospiraceae has also been shown to protect
mice against C. diﬃcile colonisation [326] and most recently has been suggested to play a protective
role against colorectal cancer [327]. Desulfovibrionaceae contains the sulﬁte-reducing species Bil.
Wadsworthia. Desulfovibrionaceae has also been associated with impaired glucose tolerance and most
serious metabolic syndrome phenotypes in mice [328]. Thus, the results of the study indicate that
gut microbiota alterations following long-term supplementation of the trans-10, cis-12 CLA isomer
could be detrimental to health. However, given that CLA supplements are commercially available,
the authors suggest that fatty acid mixtures with equal proportions of CLA isomers or probiotics and
prebiotics may balance such negative eﬀects [322].

In a recent review investigating the available evidence on the impact of dietary fat on
the gut microbiota and low-grade systemic inﬂammation and clinical implications for obesity,
Cândido et al. [329] concluded that high fat diets and saturated fat should be avoided, while MUFAs
and omega-3 PUFAs should be encouraged in order to regulate gut microbiota and inﬂammation
towards promoting control of body weight/fat.

The ketogenic diet, deﬁned as a high fat and low carbohydrate diet, has been eﬀectively used as a
therapeutic treatment for a number of neurological disorders, including epilepsy, Alzheimer’s disease,
Parkinson’s disease, depression, autism, traumatic brain injury and depression, as examples [330].
Recently, researchers have revealed that the protective eﬀects of the ketogenic diet could be mediated
via the gut microbiota based on studies in mice [331,332]. The ketogenic diet administered by
Ma et al. [331] consisted of 75.1% fat composed of SFAs, MUFAs and PUFAs. Following 16 weeks
on the diet, mice revealed several neurovascular enhancements with potential to reduce the risk of
Alzheimer’s disease which could be associated with the observed gut microbiota changes which
included an increase in beneﬁcial bacteria, including Akkermansia muciniphila and Lactobacillus and a
reduction in pro-inﬂammatory microbes Desulfovibrio and Turicibacter. The gut microbiota changes
observed by Olson et al. [332] in mice receiving the ketogenic diet were found to be required for the
protective eﬀects of the diet against acute electrically induced seizures and spontaneous tonic-clonic
seizures. In this case, Akkermansia and Parabacteriodes were signiﬁcantly increased and enrichment of,
and gnotobiotic colonisation with these microorganisms were capable of restoring seizure protection
in germ-free mice or mice treated with antibiotics. Additionally, in a mouse model of glioma, mice fed
the ketogenic diet had slightly increased survival compared to mice fed the control diet and showed
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in several key microorganisms [333]. The ketogenic diet generally includes fats

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

22 of 45

of all chain lengths [334] thus increases in blood ketone levels could be responsible for the observed
gut microbiota changes [331].

7.2. Protein

It has been estimated that up to 25 g of protein, peptides and free amino acids enter the colon on a
daily basis [335–337]. Colonic microbial digestion of these materials generates a range of end products,
including SCFAs, indoles, amines, phenols, thiols, hydrogen sulﬁde, CO2 and H2, some of which are
essential for health maintenance and some of which are detrimental [337]. Studies investigating the
direct impact of protein on gut microbiota composition and functionality have shown that protein
quantity, quality, processing history (which impacts on protein digestion, presentation and overall
function) and source must be taken into consideration. For example, a high protein diet (45% protein,
30% carbohydrate) fed to Wistar rats had detrimental eﬀects on the colonic microbiota compared
to a normal protein diet (20% protein, 56% carbohydrate) [338]. Streptococcus, E. coli/Shigella, and
Enterococcus increased by 5.36 fold, 54.9-fold, and 31.3 fold, respectively, on the high protein diet, whose
abundances correlated positively with genes and metabolites associated with disease pathogenesis,
including the metabolite cadaverine, which is derived from decarboxylation of lysine and in high
amounts has been shown to induce oxidative stress and DNA damage [339]. Sulfate-reducing bacteria
increased by 2.59 fold which correlated with increased sulﬁde. There was also an increase in spermine
which has been shown to be extremely toxic in rats [340]. The following bacteria, which are generally
regarded as being beneﬁcial, decreased in abundance on the high protein diet, including the butyrate
producer F. prausnitzii (by 3.5 fold), Ruminococcus (by 8.04 fold) which contains butyrate producers,
and the mucin degrader Akkermansia (not detected in high protein diet group). A. muciniphila is
considered to be a health promoting bacterium [341–346]. On the high protein diet, butyrate decreased
by 2.16 fold. This diet was also associated with a decrease in genes involved in innate immunity,
O-linked glycosylation of mucin, and oxidative phosphorylation.

Protein source or type has also been shown to impact gut microbiota composition, given that the
amino acid composition diﬀers between types. A 14-day feeding trial in rats fed either protein from
soy, pork, beef, chicken, ﬁsh and casein, (the latter served as a control) revealed changes by day 2
particularly between red meat (pork and beef) and white meat (ﬁsh and chicken). Principal component
analysis revealed distinct microbiota on days 7 and 14, whereby the soy protein group was separate
from the meat and casein groups [347]. In another similar study, soy protein was associated with
increased faecal SCFAs in rats compared to rats fed white meat, red meat or casein [348]. The soy group
also had a higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which are the major propionate and
other SCFA producers [349]. Lactobacillus, a genus known for its beneﬁcial eﬀects was increased in the
gut microbiota by ingestion of meat proteins. In this study, the diets clustered into two subgroups at the
phylum level, the ‘meat class’ and the ‘non-meat class.’ In another study, soy fed hamsters were found
to have a more consistently diverse microbiota in the small and lower intestine compared to hamsters
fed milk protein isolate and the largest diﬀerences were found within the Bacteriodetes phylum [350].
Indeed, the milk protein isolate fed group had a greater relative abundance of Bacteroidaceae and
Porphyromonadaceae compared to the soy fed groups. Those fed partially hydrolyzed soy protein
isolate revealed a bloom of Biﬁdobacteriaceae across most intestinal sections and a higher proportion of
Clostridiales spp. in the cecum compared to the milk protein isolate fed group. Biﬁdobacteria are well
known beneﬁcial microbes and commensal members of Clostridiales are now known to be involved in
maintenance of overall gut function [351]. The milk protein isolate fed group had a greater abundance of
Erysipelotrichacaea in ileum and faecal samples which has been associated with dyslipidemic phenotypes
in humans [352] and hamsters [353]. Plasma lipids were signiﬁcantly reduced in the soy fed hamsters
compared to those that received milk protein isolate, owing at least in part to the gut microbiota changes
induced by soy protein [350]. Under a high fat diet regime, soybean protein isolate reduced high fat
diet induced weight gain and adipose tissue mass accumulation and attenuated hepatic steatosis in
mice which was not observed for dairy protein [354]. An increased cecal bile acid pool was observed

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

23 of 45

in the soybean group with an elevated secondary: primary bile acid ratio, along with an enhancement
in the secretion of GLP-1. This was accompanied by an expansion of taxa proposed to be involved
in bile acid biotransformation. These eﬀects were abolished in germ free mice suggesting that the
metabolic beneﬁts of soy protein are due to the microbiota alterations which bring about increased bile
acid transformation and secretion of GLP-1. Likewise, tartary buckwheat protein proved capable of
preventing dyslipidemia in mice fed a high fat diet which was not observed for casein [355]. The buck
wheat protein inhibited the growth of E. coli and promoted the growth of Lactobacillus, Enterococcus and
Biﬁdobacterium, the latter of which was closely related to plasma lipids. Excretion of total bile acids
and SCFAs were signiﬁcantly increased in faeces from mice fed buckwheat. Mungbean protein also
proved superior to casein in reducing high fat diet induced weight gain in mice [356]. The mungbean
protein caused elevated secretion of GLP-1, an increase in the cecal and faecal bile acid pool with a
dramatically elevated secondary: primary bile acid ratio; eﬀects which were abolished in germ free
mice. In terms of the gut microbiota, mungbean consumption as part of the high fat diet resulted in
an expansion of Ruminococcaceae, a family known to have BSH activity [357] and caused an increase
in taxa belonging to the Bacteroidetes phylum and a decrease in the abundance of Firmicutes [356].
Whey protein extract has been shown to increase diversity, Biﬁdobacterium and Lactobacillus populations
while decreasing Bacteroides and Clostridia [358,359]. Similarly, pea protein extract has been shown to
increase diversity, Biﬁdobacterium and Lactobacillus populations [360]. These studies clearly suggest that
plant-derived proteins are superior to animal-derived proteins for promoting a beneﬁcial microbiota
with positive eﬀects on host metabolism.

Interestingly in humans, a three-week isocaloric supplementation with casein, soy protein or
maltodextrin, which served as control, had no impact on the gut microbiota but altered bacterial
metabolite production [361]. Compared to maltodextrin, both soy protein and casein caused a decrease
in faecal butyrate which the authors suggest may be due to the combination of an increase in protein
intake and a decrease in indigestible carbohydrate intake. Amino acid metabolites increased on the
high protein diet owing to protein degradation by the gut microbiota. These metabolites included
the faecal concentration of 2-methylbutyrate and the urinary concentration of the host-microbiota
co-metabolites phenylacetylglutamine and indoxyl sulfate. Casein speciﬁcally increased p-cresol
sulfate. Transcriptome analysis of rectal biopsies revealed changes in gene expression associated with
mucosal homeostasis maintenance on the two protein diets, albeit the transcriptome proﬁles diﬀered
between the two, which the authors suggest is due to exposure to diﬀerent bacterial metabolites
resulting from the diﬀerent proteins. However, mucosal inﬂammation was not induced on these
diets and faecal water cytotoxicity was not altered either. The authors suggest that high protein diets
should be considered with some caution given the changes observed in gene expression in the rectal
mucosa and that protein source must also be taken into account. More recently, a low protein diet
(0.6 g/kg/day) for six months was reported to reduce serum uremic toxin levels, including p-cresol
sulfate, in non-dialysis, chronic kidney disease patients [362]. DGGE indicated a change in the intestinal
microbiota proﬁle. The low protein diet was also associated with an improvement in renal function and
a reduction in total and LDL cholesterol. A position paper by the MyNewGut Study group analysed
PubMed-referenced publications involving human intervention studies to clarify beneﬁcial versus
deleterious eﬀects of high protein diets on metabolic and gut related health parameters, including
interactions with the gut microbiota [363]. The study concluded that high protein diets are generally
associated with decreased body weight and improvement in blood metabolic parameters but they also
modify various bacterial metabolites and co-metabolites in faecal and urinary contents. The eﬀects
on the gut microbiota were heterogeneous depending on the type of dietary intervention. The eﬀects
of high protein diets on the gut microbiota were dependent on protein source (plant versus animal)
and this should be considered for future investigations and some caution should be exercised around
high protein diets, particularly as long-term or recurrent dietary practices. Note: Processing of
protein, including thermal processing, and its impact on protein function, including modulation of the
microbiome is not fully understood and requires further investigation.

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

7.3. Carbohydrates

24 of 45

The quantity of dietary carbohydrates entering the colon each day has been estimated at
approximately 40 g [364]. We have already seen that a carbohydrate-rich diet (ﬁbre and plant-derived
polysaccharides) results in a microbiota which is dominated by the Prevotella enterotype [33] and
is enriched in polysaccharide degrading members with increased SCFA production [180,365–369].
However, dietary carbohydrates which enter the colon can be categorised as resistant starch, non-starch
polysaccharides, oligosaccharides, as well as some di- and monosaccharides [370], and as with the other
macronutrients, amount and type of carbohydrate has an impact on the gut microbiota. Resistant starch
is an important non-digestible carbohydrate, of which there are four types, (RS1 to RS4) [371,372]. A diet
high in type 3 resistant starch for 10 weeks was found to stimulate the growth of Firmicutes bacteria
related to R. bromii and Eub. rectales in human volunteers [181], both of which possess amylolytic
activity [373,374], and Eub. rectales members are major butyrate producers [375]. Biﬁdobacterium spp.
were found to increase dramatically in one volunteer in response to the resistant starch used in this
diet. In contrast, non-starch polysaccharides (wheat bran) presented little evidence of changes to
the faecal microbiota, which the authors state may be attributable to the smaller increase achieved
for non-starch polysaccharides (1.5 fold) compared to a 4.8 fold increase in resistant starch [181].
Interestingly, of the 14 volunteers, >60% of the resistant starch remained undigested in two compared to
<4% in the remaining 12 volunteers highlighting the signiﬁcance of the initial microbiota composition.
Martínez et al. [376] revealed that resistant starch types 3 and 4 diﬀerentially aﬀected the microbiota in
human volunteers following consumption of each for three weeks in a double-blind cross-over study.
In this case, resistant starch type 4 induced changes at the phylum level resulting in a decrease in
Firmicutes and an increase in Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes. At the species level, resistant starch
type 4 increased Bif. adolescentis and Para. distasonis. In three subjects, resistant starch type 4 induced
a 10-fold increase in biﬁdobacteria. Resistant starch type 2 signiﬁcantly increased R. bromii and Eub.
rectales compared to resistant starch type 4. Importantly, the responses to the resistant starches and their
magnitudes varied between individuals but were reversible and tightly associated with resistant starch
consumption. This interindividual variation was also reported by Venkataraman et al. [377]. In this
case, resistant starch type 2 increased faecal butyrate in a cohort of 20 young healthy individuals but
responses varied widely such that individuals could be categorised into three groups based on butyrate
levels before and during resistant starch consumption: enhanced, high, and low. In the enhanced
group, faecal butyrate increased by an average of 67% which coincided with a dramatic increase in the
relative abundance of resistant starch-degrading organisms, including Bif. adolescentis or R. bromii in
most individuals (increasing from 2% to 9%) and Eub. rectales in almost half of these individuals. In the
high group, levels of butyrate remained the same before and during resistant starch consumption.
In this group, resistant starch-degrading microorganisms increased in abundance, suggesting the
resistant starch was degraded, but there was no concomitant increase in butyrate levels which the
authors suggest may be due to these individuals experiencing a plateau eﬀect owing to the fact that
they are performing well in terms of butyrate production. In the low group, butyrate levels were low
before resistant starch consumption began and did not improve during the trial. The resistant starch
degrading bacteria in the low group did not increase from an initial abundance of ~1.5% suggesting
their microbiota did not degrade the resistant starch which the authors state may be due to the presence
of antagonistic microbes or lack of synergistic microbes. More recently, Vital et al. [378] reported
that distinct parts of the microbiota work together to degrade resistant starch (type 2 in this study)
and successively form health-promoting end products. In this case, resistant starch degradation was
governed by Firmicutes whereby R. bromii degradation of the resistant starch provided fermentation
substrates and increased acetate concentrations to support the growth of major butyrate producers.
H2-scavenging sulphite reducers and acetogens also increased. Again, the individual responses varied
with the observed pattern reported for seven of the twelve participants, while four showed mixed
responses and one individual remained unresponsive.

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

25 of 45

Using an in vitro approach based on isothermal microcalorimetry in conjunction with Illumina
Miseq sequencing of the faecal microbiota and metabolite proﬁling, Adamberg et al. [379] compared
the impact of diﬀerent oligo- and polysaccharides (galacto- and fructooligosaccharides, resistant starch,
levan, inulin, arabinogalactan, xylan, pectin and chitin), as well as a glycoprotein mucin, representing
an indigenous substrate, on the growth and metabolism of the faecal microbiota. Apart from chitin,
more than 70% of all substrates were fermented by the faecal microbiota with total heat generation
up to 8 J/mL. Overall, the diﬀerent ﬁbre types supported the growth of speciﬁc microbiota and
diﬀerent metabolic routes. Arabinogalactan stimulated the growth of several health-promoting genera,
including Biﬁdobacterium, Bacteroides, Coprococcus and Lachnoclostridium. Propionic acid was enhanced
by arabinogalactin, xylan and mucin but not by galacto-, fructooligosaccharides or inulin. Fermentation
of mucin resulted in the generation of acetate, propionate and the highest amount of butyrate
and supported the growth of species from the following genera, Clostridium, Lachnoclostridium and
Parabacteroides. The authors suggest that only a diverse spectrum of glycans in the diet can contribute
to a diverse microbiota. Chung et al. [380] determined the impact of growth substrate complexity and
multiplicity on species diversity of the human colonic microbiota in vitro whereby anaerobic fermenters
were supplied continuously with single carbohydrates (arabinoxylanoligosaccharide, pectin or inulin),
or with a mix of all three, or a mix of all three plus resistant starch, β-glucan and galacto-mannon
as energy sources. Over the ﬁrst six days, inulin supported less microbial diversity than the other
single carbohydrates, the mix of three, or the mix of six carbohydrates. While the communities did
not diﬀer substantially at phylum and family levels, marked diﬀerences were observed at species
level. The overall results strongly suggest that strategies to increase microbial diversity should employ
complex nondigestible substrates mixtures.

Few studies have investigated the impact of high sugar containing diets on the microbiota.
However, recently, Sen et al. [381] investigated the impact of high fat/high sugar (sucrose), low fat/high
sugar and low fat/low sugar diets on Sprague-Dawley rats. As expected, both the high fat/high
sugar and low fat/high sugar diets for four weeks caused signiﬁcant increases in body weight and
body fat compared to the low fat/low sugar diet. The high sugar and high fat diets resulted in gut
microbiota dysbiosis which was characterised by an overall decrease in microbial diversity, a bloom
in clostridia and bacilli and a marked decrease in Lactobacillus species. There was also an increase
in the Firmicutes: Bacteriodetes ratio. Speciﬁcally, the low fat/high sugar diet caused an increase
in two Proteobacteria members, namely Sutterella and Bilophila. The high sugar diet also induced
gut inﬂammation and triggered a remodelling of the gut brain axis [381]. In mice, a high sugar
(sucrose) diet increased Clostridiales belonging to the Firmicutes phylum which was also observed
for the high fat diet [382]. The high sugar diet also caused a decrease in the order Bacteroidales
which belongs to Bacteroidetes. Lactobacillales was also signiﬁcantly increased on the high sugar
diet. Thus, overall the high sugar diet altered more bacterial orders and genera than the high fat
diet. The increase in Clostridiales and decrease in Bacteroidales on the high sugar diet was related to
poor cognitive ﬂexibility. Di Luccia et al. [383] reported that a high fructose diet induced markers of
metabolic syndrome, inﬂammation and oxidative stress in rats, but these were signiﬁcantly reduced
when the animals were treated with antibiotics or faecal samples from control rats fed a standard diet.
Since the number of members from the genera Coprococcus and Ruminococcus were increased by the
high fructose diet but reduced by antibiotics and faecal transplant, the results suggest a correlation
between their abundance and metabolic syndrome.

8. Conclusions

The link between nutrition, the gut microbiota and health has been expounded in the multitude
of studies published in recent years. Long-term dietary habits appear to have the most profound
inﬂuence on the quality of the gut microbiota and hence its eﬃcacy to the human body. In this regard,
healthy eating patterns with adequate fruits and vegetables, ensuring a rich source of dietary ﬁbre,
along with healthy fats (MUFAs and PUFAs) and a trend towards more plant-derived proteins should

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

26 of 45

help promote gut microbiota diversity and functionality enabling it to eﬀectively serve its host. But as
countries become more industrialised and range of choice expands, including foods available for
consumption, consumers tend to eat for taste-satisfaction and/or convenience at the cost of nutritional
value in many instances. Furthermore, not everyone responds eﬀectively to dietary interventions
aimed at improving health. The consequence of this has been an alarming surge in non-communicable
diseases, including cancer and metabolic-related diseases. Understanding the speciﬁc role of the gut
microbiota in the diet-health sequence has enabled scientists and nutritionists to further comprehend
how diet speciﬁcally impacts health at the individual level and why dietary interventions do not
always serve everyone equally. Thus, modiﬁcation of the gut microbiota through diet, probiotics and
prebiotics may oﬀer viable opportunities for preventing many of these ‘Western-associated’ diseases,
particularly in the case of metabolic-related diseases for which microbiota quality and quantity can
be an essential aspect. Indeed, Part II of this review looks at the eﬃcacy of such interventions in
terms of over/under nutrition. We also explore opportunities for optimising health at diﬀerent life
stages (elderly in nursing homes, during pregnancy, physically active individuals and those in high
stress environments) through improved diet and interventions. In this regard, microbiome testing
at the individual level has a signiﬁcant role to play in interpreting how an individual responds to
dietary components and what interventions should be undertaken to improve those responses for a
healthier outcome, thus underpinning the very goal of precision nutrition. In Part II of this review, we
also look at speciﬁc examples of how the microbiota is already being used as a biomarker to predict
responsiveness to speciﬁc dietary constituents and highlight further research which is necessary to
make precision nutrition through the microbiome a reality.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.P.R., C.S., G.J.S., J.A.L.; writing—original draft preparation, S.M.;
writing—review and editing, R.P.R., C.S., G.J.S., S.M.; All authors reviewed the ﬁnal version of the manuscript and
approved for ﬁnal publication.

Funding: This research received no external funding

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.

7.

9.

10.

Sender, R.; Fuchs, S.; Milo, R. Are we really vastly outnumbered? Revisiting the ratio of bacterial to host cells
in humans. Cell 2016, 164, 337–340. [CrossRef]
Bäckhed, F.; Ley, R.E.; Sonnenburg, J.L.; Peterson, D.A.; Gordon, J.I. Host-bacterial mutualism in the human
intestine. Science 2005, 307, 1915–1920. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Oulas, A.; Pavloudi, C.; Polymenakou, P.; Pavlopoulos, G.A.; Papanikolaou, N.; Kotoulas, G.; Arvanitidis, C.;
Iliopoulos, I.; Iliopoulos, L. Metagenomics: Tools and insights for analyzing next-generation sequencing data
derived from biodiversity studies. Bioinform. Biol. Insights 2015, 9, 75–88. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cani, P.D. Human gut microbiome: Hopes, threats and promises. Gut 2018, 67, 1716–1725. [CrossRef]
Hold, G.L.; Smith, M.; Grange, C.; Watt, E.R.; El-Omar, E.M.; Mukhopadhya, I. Role of the gut microbiota in
inﬂammatory bowel disease pathogenesis: What have we learnt in the past 10 years? World J. Gastroenterol.
2014, 20, 1192–1210. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Tilg, H.; Adolph, T.E.; Gerner, R.R.; Moschen, A.R. The intestinal microbiota in colorectal cancer. Cancer Cell
2018, 33, 954–964. [CrossRef]
Grochowska, M.; Wojnar, M.; Radkowski, M. The gut microbiota in neuropsychiatric disorders. Acta Neurobiol.
Exp. 2018, 78, 69–81. [CrossRef]

8. Hansen, T.H.; Gøbel, R.J.; Hansen, T.; Pedersen, O. The gut microbiome in cardio-metabolic health.

Genome Med. 2015, 7, 33. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Stagaman, K.; Cepon-Robins, T.J.; Liebert, M.A.; Gildner, T.E.; Urlacher, S.S.; Madimenos, F.C.; Guillemin, K.;
Snodgrass, J.J.; Sugiyama, L.S.; Bohannan, B.J.M. Market integration predicts human gut microbiome
attributes across a gradient of economic development. mSystems 2018, 3, e00122-17. [CrossRef]
Shukla, S.K.; Murali, N.S.; Brilliant, M.H. Personalized medicine going precise: From genomics to
microbiomics. Trends Mol. Med. 2015, 21, 461–462. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

27 of 45

11. Petrosino, J.F. The microbiome in precision medicine: The way forward. Genome Med. 2018, 10, 12. [CrossRef]
12. Bashiardes, A.; Godneva, A.; Elinav, E.; Segal, E. Towards utilization of the human genome and microbiome

for personalised nutrition. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2018, 51, 57–63. [CrossRef]

13. Perez-Muñoz, M.E.; Arrieta, M.C.; Ramer-Tait, A.E.; Walter, J. A critical assessment of the “sterile womb”and
“in utero colonisation” hypotheses: Implications for research on the pioneer infant microbiome. Microbiome
2017, 5, 48. [CrossRef]

14. Nylund, L.; Satokari, R.; Salminen, S.; de Vos, W.M. Intestinal microbiota during early life—Impact on health
and disease. Conference on ‘Diet, gut microbiology and human health’ Symposium 2: Changes in the
microbiome in disease and lifecourse. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 2014, 73, 457–469. [CrossRef]

15. Rodríguez, J.M.; Murphy, K.; Stanton, C.; Ross, R.P.; Kober, O.I.; Juge, N.; Avershina, E.; Rudi, K.; Narbad, A.;
Jenmalm, M.C.; et al. The composition of the gut microbiota throughout life, with an emphasis on early life.
Microb. Ecol. Health 2015, 26, 75. [CrossRef]

16. Hill, C.J.; Lynch, D.B.; Murphy, K.; Ulaszewska, M.; Jeﬀery, I.B.; O’Shea, C.A.; Watkins, C.; Dempsey, E.;
Mattivi, F.; Tuohy, K.; et al. Evolution of gut microbiota composition from birth to 24 weeks in the
INFANTMET Cohort. Microbiome 2017, 5, 4. [CrossRef]

17. Yasmin, F.; Tun, H.M.; Konya, T.B.; Guttman, D.S.; Chari, R.S.; Field, C.J.; Becker, A.B.; Mandhane, P.J.;
Turvey, S.E.; Subbarao, P.; et al. Cesarean section, formula feeding, and infant antibiotic exposure: Separate
and combined impacts on gut microbial changes in later infancy. Front. Pediatr. 2017, 5, 200. [CrossRef]
18. Bäckhed, F.; Roswall, J.; Peng, Y.; Feng, Q.; Jia, H.; Kovatcheva-Datchary, P.; Li, Y.; Xia, Y.; Xie, H.; Zhong, H.;
et al. Dynamics and stabilisation of the human gut microbiome during the ﬁrst year of life. Cell Host Microbe
2015, 17, 690–703. [CrossRef]

19. Rutayisire, E.; Huang, K.; Liu, Y.; Tao, F. The mode of delivery aﬀects the diversity and colonisation pattern
of the gut microbiota during the ﬁrst year of infants’ life: A systematic review. BMC Gastroenterol. 2016, 16,
804. [CrossRef]

20. Azad, M.B.; Konya, T.; Persaud, R.R.; Guttman, D.S.; Chari, R.S.; Field, C.J.; Sears, M.R.; Mandhane, P.J.;
Turvey, S.E.; Subbarao, T.; et al. Impact of maternal intrapartum antibiotics, method of birth and breastfeeding
on gut microbiota during the ﬁrst year of life: A prospective cohort study. BJOG 2016, 123, 983–993. [CrossRef]
21. Nagpal, R.; Tsuji, H.; Takahashi, T.; Nomoto, K.; Kawashima, K.; Nagata, S.; Yamashiro, Y. Ontogenesis of the
gut microbiota composition in healthy, full-term, vaginally born and breast-fed infants over the ﬁrst 3 years
of life: A quantitative bird’s-eye view. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1388. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

22. Vallès, Y.; Artacho, A.; Pascual-García, A.; Ferrús, M.L.; Gosalbes, M.J.; Abellán, J.J.; Francino, M.P. Microbial
succession in the gut: Directional trends of taxonomic and functional change in a birth cohort of Spanish
infants. PLoS Genet. 2014, 10, 1004406. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

23. Bergström, A.; Skov, T.H.; Bahl, M.I.; Roager, H.M.; Christensen, L.B.; Ejlerskov, K.T.; Mølgaard, C.;
Michaelsen, K.F.; Licht, T.R.; Griﬃths, M.W.; et al. Establishment of intestinal microbiota during early life:
A longitudinal, explorative study of a large cohort of Danish infants. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2014, 80,
2889–2900. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

24. Yatsunenko, T.; Rey, F.E.; Manary, M.J.; Trehan, I.; Dominguez-Bello, M.G.; Conteras, M.; Magris, M.;
Hidalgo, G.; Baldassano, R.N.; Anokhin, A.P.; et al. Human gut virome viewed across age and geography.
Nature 2012, 486, 222–227. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

25. Eckburg, P.B.; Bik, E.M.; Bernstein, C.N.; Purdom, E.; Dethlefsen, L.; Sargent, M.; Gill, S.R.; Nelson, K.E.;
Relman, D.A. Diversity of the human intestinal microbial ﬂora. Science 2005, 308, 1635–1638. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

26. Hollister, E.B.; Riehle, K.; Luna, R.A.; Weidler, E.M.; Rubio-Gonzales, M.; Mistretta, T.-A.; Raza, S.;
Doddapaneni, H.V.; Metcalf, G.A.; Muzny, D.M.; et al. Structure and function of the healthy pre-adolescent
pediatric gut microbiome. Microbiome 2015, 3, 36. [CrossRef]
Fouhy, F.; Watkins, C.; Hill, C.J.; O’Shea, C.-A.; Nagle, B.; Dempsey, E.M.; O’Toole, P.W.; Ross, R.P.; Ryan, C.A.;
Stanton, C. Microbiome Memory of perinatal factors that aﬀect the gut microbiota four years after birth.
Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1517. [CrossRef]

27.

28. Tanaka, M.; Nakayama, J. Development of the gut microbiota in infancy and its impact on health in later life.

Allergol. Int. 2017, 66, 515–522. [CrossRef]

29. Agans, R.; Rigsbee, L.; Kenche, H.; Michail, S.; Khamis, H.J.; Paliy, O. Distal gut microbiota of adolescent

children is diﬀerent from that of adults. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 2011, 77, 404–412. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

28 of 45

30.

Falony, G.; Joossens, M.; Vieira-Silva, S.; Wang, J.; Darzi, Y.; Faust, K.; Kurilshikov, A.; Bonder, M.J.;
Valles-Colomer, M.; Vandeputte, D.; et al. Population-level analysis of gut microbiome variation. Science
2016, 352, 560–564. [CrossRef]

31. Li, J.; Jia, H.; Cai, X.; Zhong, H.; Feng, Q.; Sunagawa, S.; Arumugam, M.; Kultima, J.R.; Prifti, E.; Nielsen, T.;
et al. An integrated catalog of reference genes in the human gut microbiome. Nat. Biotechnol. 2014, 32,
834–841. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

32. Arumugam, M.; Raes, J.; Pelletier, E.; Le Paslier, D.; Yamada, T.; Mende, D.R.; Fernandes, G.R.; Tap, J.; Bruls, T.;
Batto, J.-M.; et al. Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome. Nature 2011, 473, 174–180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Wu, G.D.; Chen, J.; Hoﬀmann, C.; Bittinger, K.; Chen, Y.-Y.; Keilbaugh, S.A.; Bewtra, M.; Knights, D.;
Walters, W.A.; Knight, R.; et al. Linking Long-term dietary patterns with gut microbial enterotypes. Science
2011, 334, 105–108. [CrossRef]

34. Gorvitovskaia, A.; Holmes, S.P.; Huse, S.M. Interpreting Prevotella and Bacteriodes biomarkers of diet and

35.

lifestyle. Microbiome 2016, 4, 15. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Faith, J.J.; Guruge, J.L.; Charbonneau, M.; Subramanian, S.; Seedorf, H.; Goodman, A.L.; Clemente, J.C.;
Knight, R.; Heath, A.C.; Leibel, R.L.; et al. The long-term stability of the human gut microbiota. Science 2013,
341, 1237439. [CrossRef]

36. Claesson, M.J.; O’Sullivan, O.; Wang, Q.; Nikkilä, J.; Marchesi, J.R.; Smidt, H.; De Vos, W.M.; Ross, R.P.;
O’Toole, P.W.; Ross, R. Comparative analysis of pyrosequencing and a phylogenetic microarray for exploring
microbial community structures in the human distal intestine. PLoS ONE 2009, 4, e6669. [CrossRef]
37. Lozupone, C.A.; Stombaugh, J.I.; Gordon, J.I.; Jansson, J.K.; Knight, R. Diversity, stability and resilience of

38.

the human gut microbiota. Nature 2012, 489, 220–230. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Forster, S.C.; Kumar, N.; Anonye, B.O.; Almeida, A.; Viciani, E.; Stares, M.D.; Dunn, M.; Mkandawire, T.T.;
Zhu, A.; Shao, Y.; et al. A human gut bacterial genome and culture collection for improved metagenomic
analyses. Nat. Biotechnol. 2019, 37, 186–192. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

39. Nishijima, S.; Suda, W.; Oshima, K.; Kim, S.-W.; Hirose, Y.; Morita, H.; Hattori, M. The gut microbiome of
healthy Japanese and its microbial and functional uniqueness. DNA Res. 2016, 23, 125–133. [CrossRef]
40. Liao, M.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.; Lu, Z.; Tan, A.; Wu, C.; Zhang, Z.; Chen, Y.; Li, T.; Ye, Y.; et al. Comparative
analysis of faecal microbiota in Chinese isolated Yap population, minority Zhuang and rural Han by 16sRNA
sequencing. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 1142. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

41. Tandon, D.; Haque, M.M.; Saravanan, R.; Shaikh, S.; Sriram, P.; Dubey, A.K.; Mande, S.S. A snapshot of
gut microbiota of an adult urban population from Western region of India. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0195643.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

42. Girard, C.; Tromas, N.; Amyot, M.; Shapiro, B.J. Gut microbiome of the Canadian Arctic Inuit. mSphere 2017,

43.

44.

2, e00297-16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Iizumi, T.; Battaglia, T.; Ruiz, V.; Perez Perez, G.I. Gut microbiome and antibiotics. Arch. Med. Res. 2017, 48,
727–734. [CrossRef]
Francino, M.P. Antibiotics and the human gut microbiome: Dysbioses and accumulation of resistances.
Front. Microbiol. 2016, 6, 655. [CrossRef]

45. Le Bastard, Q.; Al-Ghalith, G.A.; Grégoire, M.; Chapelet, G.; Javaudin, F.; Dailly, E.; Batard, E.; Knights, D.;
Montassier, E. Systematic review: Human gut dysbiosis induced by non-antibiotic prescription medications.
Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2018, 47, 332–345. [CrossRef]

46. Howard, B.M.; Kornblith, L.Z.; Christie, S.A.; Conroy, A.S.; Nelson, M.F.; Campion, E.M.; Callcut, R.A.;
Calfee, C.S.; LaMere, B.J.; Fadrosh, D.W.; et al. Characterizing the gut microbiome in trauma: Signiﬁcant
changes in microbial diversity occur early after severe injury. Trauma Surg. Acute Care Open 2017, 2, e000108.
[CrossRef]

47. McDonald, D.; Ackermann, G.; Khailova, L.; Baird, C.; Heyland, D.; Kozar, R.; Lemieux, M.; Derenski, K.;
King, J.; Vis-Kampen, C.; et al. Extreme dysbiosis of the microbiome in critical illness. mSphere 2016, 1,
e00199-16. [CrossRef]

48. Koren, O.; Goodrich, J.K.; Cullender, T.C.; Spor, A.; Laitinen, K.; Bäckhed, H.K.; González, A.; Werner, J.J.;
Angenent, L.T.; Knight, R.; et al. Host Remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes during
pregnancy. Cell 2012, 150, 470–480. [CrossRef]

49. Heiman, M.L.; Greenway, F.L. A healthy gastrointestinal microbiome is dependent on dietary diversity.

Mol. Metab. 2016, 5, 317–320. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

29 of 45

50. Lovat, L.B.; Lovat, L. Age related changes in gut physiology and nutritional status. Gut 1996, 38, 306–309.

[CrossRef]

51. Vemuri, R.; Gundamaraju, R.; Shastri, M.D.; Dhar Shukla, S.; Kalpurath, K.; Ball, M.; Tristram, S.; Shankar, E.M.;
Ahuja, K.; Eri, R. Gut microbial changes, interactions, and their implications on human lifecycle: An ageing
perspective. Biomed. Res. Int. 2018, 4178607. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

52. Biagi, E.; Rampelli, S.; Turroni, S.; Quercia, S.; Candela, M.; Brigidi, P. The gut microbiota of centenarians:
Signatures of longevity in the gut microbiota proﬁle. Mech. Ageing Dev. 2017, 165, 180–184. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

53. Claesson, M.J.; Cusack, S.; O’Sullivan, O.; Greene-Diniz, R.; de Weerd, H.; Flannery, E.; Marchesi, J.R.;
Falush, D.; Dinan, T.; Fitzgerald, G.; et al. Composition, variability, and temporal stability of the intestinal
microbiota of the elderly. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011, 108, 4586–4591. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

54. Mariat, D.; Firmesse, O.; Levenez, F.; Guimarăes, V.; Sokol, H.; Doré, J.; Corthier, G.; Furet, J.-P.
The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio of the human microbiota changes with age. BMC Microbiol. 2009,
9, 123. [CrossRef]

55. Claesson, M.J.; Jeﬀery, I.B.; Conde, S.; Power, S.E.; O’Connor, E.M.; Cusack, S.; Harris, H.M.B.; Coakley, M.;
Lakshminarayanan, B.; O’Sullivan, O.; et al. Gut microbiota composition correlates with diet and health in
the elderly. Nature 2012, 488, 178–184. [CrossRef]
Jackson, M.A.; Jeﬀery, I.B.; Beaumont, M.; Bell, J.T.; Clark, A.G.; Ley, R.E.; O’Toole, P.W.; Spector, T.D.;
Steves, C.J.; Jackson, M. Signatures of early frailty in the gut microbiota. Genome Med. 2016, 8, 8. [CrossRef]
Ferreira-Halder, C.V.; Faria, A.V.D.S.; Andrade, S.S. Action and function of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii in
health and disease. Best Pract. Clin. Gastroenterol. 2017, 31, 643–648. [CrossRef]

57.

56.

58. Gardiner, B.J.; Tai, A.Y.; Kotsanas, D.; Francis, M.J.; Roberts, S.A.; Ballard, S.A.; Junckerstorﬀ, R.K.;
Korman, T.M. Clinical and microbiological characteristics of Eggerthella lenta bacteremia. J. Clin. Microbiol.
2015, 53, 626–635. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

59. Haran, J.P.; Bucci, V.; Dutta, P.; Ward, D.; McCormick, B. The nursing home elder microbiome stability and
associations with age, frailty, nutrition and physical location. J. Med. Microbiol. 2018, 67, 40–51. [CrossRef]
60. Biagi, E.; Nylund, L.; Candela, M.; Ostan, R.; Bucci, L.; Pini, E.; Nikkïla, J.; Monti, D.; Satokari, R.; Franceschi, C.;
et al. Through ageing, and beyond: Gut microbiota and inﬂammatory status in seniors and centenarians.
PLoS ONE 2010, 5, e10667. [CrossRef]

61. Rampelli, S.; Candela, M.; Turroni, S.; Biagi, E.; Collino, S.; Franceschi, C.; O’Toole, P.W.; Brigidi, P. Functional
metagenomic proﬁling of intestinal microbiome in extreme ageing. Aging 2013, 5, 902–912. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

62. Biagi, E.; Franceschi, C.; Rampelli, S.; Severgnini, M.; Ostan, R.; Turroni, S.; Consolandi, C.; Quercia, S.;
Scurti, M.; Monti, D.; et al. Gut microbiota and extreme longevity. Curr. Biol. 2016, 26, 1480–1485. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

63. Yu, X.; Wu, X.; Qiu, L.; Wang, D.; Gan, M.; Chen, X.; Wei, H.; Xu, F. Analysis of the intestinal microbial
community structure of healthy and long-living elderly residents in Goatian Village of Liuyang City.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2015, 99, 9085–9095. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

64. Bian, G.; Gloor, G.B.; Gong, A.; Jia, C.; Zhang, W.; Hu, J.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, Y.; Zhou, Z.; Zhang, J.; et al. The
gut microbiota of healthy aged Chinese is similar to that of the healthy young. mSphere 2017, 2, e00327-17.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

65. Dinan, T.G.; Cryan, J.F. The microbiome-gut-brain axis in health and disease. Gastroenterol. Clin. N. Am.

66. Martin, C.R.; Osadchiy, V.; Kalani, A.; Mayer, E.A. The brain-gut-microbiome axis. Cell. Mol.

2017, 46, 77–89. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2018, 6, 133–148. [CrossRef]

67. El Kaoutari, A.; Armougom, F.; Gordon, J.I.; Raoult, D.; Henrissat, B. The abundance and variety of
carbohydrate-active enzymes in the human gut microbiota. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2013, 11, 497–504. [CrossRef]
68. Cantarel, B.L.; Lombard, V.; Henrissat, B. Complex Carbohydrate utilization by the healthy human

microbiome. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e28742. [CrossRef]

69. Koropatkin, N.M.; Cameron, E.A.; Martens, E.C. How glycan metabolism shapes the human gut microbiota.

70.

Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2012, 10, 323–335. [CrossRef]
Sonnenburg, E.D.; Sonnenburg, J.L. Starving our microbial self: The deleterious consequences of a diet
deﬁcient in microbiota-accessible carbohydrates. Cell Metab. 2014, 20, 779–786. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

30 of 45

71. Ndeh, D.; Rogowski, A.; Cartmell, A.; Luis, A.S.; Baslé, A.; Gray, J.; Venditto, I.; Briggs, J.; Zhang, X.;
Labourel, A.; et al. Complex pectin metabolism by gut bacteria reveals novel catalytic functions. Nature 2017,
544, 65–70. [CrossRef]

72. Arboleya, S.; Bottacini, F.; O’Connell-Motherway, M.; Ryan, C.A.; Ross, R.P.; Van Sinderen, D.; Stanton, C.
Gene-trait matching across the Biﬁdobacterium longum pan-genome reveals considerable diversity in
carbohydrate catabolism among human infant strains. BMC Genom. 2018, 19, 33. [CrossRef]

73. Bhattacharya, T.; Ghosh, T.S.; Mande, S.S. Global proﬁling of carbohydrate active enzymes in human gut

microbiome. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, 0142038. [CrossRef]

74. Macfarlane, G.T.; Gibson, G.R. Carbohydrate fermentation, energy transduction and gas metabolism in the
human large intestine. In Gastrointestinal Microbiology; Mackie, R.I., White, B.A., Eds.; Chapman and Hall:
London, UK, 1997; Volume 1, pp. 269–318.

75. Thursby, E.; Juge, N. Introduction to the human gut microbiota. Biochem. J. 2017, 474, 1823–1836. [CrossRef]
76. Kasubuchi, M.; Hasegawa, S.; Hiramatsu, T.; Ichimura, A.; Kimura, I. Dietary gut microbial metabolites,

short-chain fatty acids, and host metabolic regulation. Nutrients 2015, 7, 2839–2849. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

77. Lin, L.; Zhang, J. Role of intestinal microbiota and metabolites on gut homeostasis and human diseases.

BMC Immunol. 2017, 18, 837. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

78. Louis, P.; Flint, H.J. Formation of propionate and butyrate by the human colonic microbiota. Environ. Microbiol.

2017, 19, 29–41. [CrossRef]

79. Roediger, W.E. Role of anaerobic bacteria in the metabolic welfare of the colonic mucosa in man. Gut 1980,

80.

21, 793–798. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Stilling, R.M.; Van De Wouw, M.; Clarke, G.; Stanton, C.; Dinan, T.G.; Cryan, J.F. The neuropharmacology
of butyrate: The bread and butter of the microbiota-gut-brain axis? Neurochem. Int. 2016, 99, 110–132.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

81. Bultman, S.J. Molecular pathways: Gene environment interactions regulating dietary ﬁbre induction of
proliferarion and apoptosis via butyrate for cancer prevention. Clin. Cancer Res. 2014, 20, 799–803. [CrossRef]
82. Wei, W.; Sun, W.; Yu, S.; Yang, Y.; Ai, L. Butyrate production from high-ﬁbre diet protects against lymphoma

tumor. Leuk. Lymphoma 2016, 57, 2401–2408. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

83. Donohoe, D.R.; Holley, D.; Collins, L.B.; Montgomery, S.A.; Whitmore, A.C.; Hillhouse, A.; Curry, K.P.;
Renner, S.W.; Greenwalt, A.; Ryan, E.P.; et al. A gnotobiotic mouse model demonstrates that dietary ﬁber
protects against colorectal tumorigenesis in a microbiota- and butyrate–dependent manner. Cancer Discov.
2014, 4, 1387–1397. [CrossRef]

84. Zimmerman, M.A.; Singh, N.; Martin, P.M.; Thangaraju, M.; Ganapathy, V.; Waller, J.L.; Shi, H.;
Robertson, K.D.; Munn, D.H.; Liu, K. Butyrate suppresses colonic inﬂammation through HDAC1-dependent
Fas upregulation and Fas-mediated apoptosis of T cells. Am. J. Physiol. Liver Physiol. 2012, 302, G1405–G1415.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

85. Peng, L.; Li, Z.-R.; Green, R.S.; Holzman, I.R.; Lin, J. Butyrate enhances the intestinal barrier by facilitating
tight junction assembly via activation of AMP-activated protein kinase in Caco-2 cell monolayers. J. Nutr.
2009, 139, 1619–1625. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

86. Morrison, D.J.; Preston, T. Formation of short chain fatty acids by the gut microbiota and their impact on

human metabolism. Gut Microbes 2016, 7, 189–200. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

87. Wang, P.-Y.; Wang, X.; Liu, Y.-C.; Wang, H.-B.; Wan, Y.-L. Butyrate enhances intestinal epithelial barrier
function via up-regulation of tight junction protein Claudin-1 transcription. Am. J. Dig. Dis. 2012, 57,
3126–3135.

88. De Vadder, F.; Kovatcheva-Datchary, P.; Goncalves, D.; Vinera, J.; Zitoun, C.; Duchampt, A.; Bäckhed, F.;
Mithieux, G. Microbiota-generated metabolites promote metabolic beneﬁts via gut-brain neural circuits. Cell
2014, 156, 84–96. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

89. Bindels, L.B.; Porporato, P.E.; Dewulf, E.M.; Verrax, J.; Neyrinck, A.M.; Martin, J.C.; Scott, K.P.; Calderon, P.B.;
Feron, O.; Muccioli, G.G.; et al. Gut microbiota-derived propionate reduces cancer cell proliferation in the
liver. Br. J. Cancer 2012, 107, 1337–1344. [CrossRef]

90. Corrêa-Oliveira, R.; Fachi, J.L.; Vieira, A.; Sato, F.T.; Vinolo, M.A.R. Regulation of immune cell function by

short-chain fatty acids. Clin. Transl. Immunol. 2016, 5, e73. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

31 of 45

91. Wu, W.; Sun, M.; Chen, F.; Yao, S.; Liu, Z.; Cong, Y. Microbiota metabolite short chain fatty acid acetate
promotes intestinal IgA response to microbiota which is mediated by GPR43. Mucosal Immunol. 2017, 10,
946–956. [CrossRef]

92. Gutzeit, C.; Magri, G.; Cerutti, A. Intestinal IgA production and its role in host-microbe interaction.

Immunol. Rev. 2014, 260, 76–85. [CrossRef]

93. Chambers, E.S.; Viardot, A.; Psichas, A.; Morrison, D.J.; Murphy, K.G.; Zac-Varghese, S.E.; MacDougall, K.;
Preston, T.; Tedford, C.; Finlayson, G.S.; et al. Eﬀects of targeted delivery of propionate to the human colon on
appetite regulation, body weight maintenance and adiposity in overweight adults. Gut 2015, 64, 1744–1754.
[CrossRef]

94. Miyamoto, J.; Watanabe, K.; Taira, S.; Kasubuchi, M.; Li, X.; Irie, J.; Itoh, H.; Kimura, I. Barley β-glucan
improves metabolic condition via short-chain fatty acids produced by gut microbial fermentation in high fat
diet fed mice. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0196579. [CrossRef]
Samuel, B.S.; Shaito, A.; Motoike, T.; Rey, F.E.; Bäckhed, F.; Manchester, J.K.; Hammer, R.E.; Williams, S.C.;
Crowley, J.; Yanagisawa, M.; et al. Eﬀects of the gut microbiota on host adiposity are modulated by the
short-chain fatty-acid binding G protein-coupled receptor, Gpr41. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2008, 105,
16767–16772. [CrossRef]

95.

96. Tolhurst, G.; Heﬀron, H.; Lam, Y.S.; Parker, H.E.; Habib, A.M.; Diakogiannaki, E.; Cameron, J.; Grosse, J.;
Reimann, F.; Gribble, F.M. Short-Chain fatty acids stimulate glucagon-like peptide-1 secretion via the
G-protein–coupled receptor FFAR2. Diabetes 2012, 61, 364–371. [CrossRef]

97. Perry, R.J.; Peng, L.; Barry, N.A.; Cline, G.W.; Zhang, D.; Cardone, R.L.; Petersen, K.F.; Kibbey, R.G.;
Goodman, A.L.; Shulman, G.I. Acetate mediates a microbiome-brain-β-cell axis to promote metabolic
syndrome. Nature 2016, 534, 213–217. [CrossRef]

98. LeBlanc, J.G.; Milani, C.; de Giori, G.S.; Sesma, F.; van Sinderen, D.; Ventura, M. Bacteria as vitamin suppliers

to their host: A gut bacteria perspective. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2013, 24, 160–168. [CrossRef]

99. Gérard, P. Metabolism of cholesterol and bile acids by the gut microbiota. Pathogens 2014, 3, 14–24. [CrossRef]
100. Hylemon, P.B.; Zhou, H.; Pandak, W.M.; Ren, S.; Gil, G.; Dent, P. Bile acids as regulatory molecules. J. Lipid Res.

2009, 50, 1509–1520. [CrossRef]

101. Joyce, S.A.; Mac Sharry, J.; Casey, P.G.; Kinsella, M.; Murphy, E.F.; Shanahan, F.; Hill, C.; Gahan, C.G.M.
Regulation of host weight gain and lipid metabolism by bacterial bile acid modiﬁcation in the gut. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 2014, 111, 7421–7426. [CrossRef]

102. Sayin, S.I.; Wahlström, A.; Felin, J.; Jäntti, S.; Marschall, H.U.; Bamberg, K.; Angelin, B.; Hyötylainen, T.;
Orešiˇc, M.; Bäckhed, F. Gut microbiota regulates bile acid metabolism by reducing the levels of
tauro-beta-muricholic acid, a naturally occurring FXR antagonist. Cell Metab. 2013, 17, 225–235. [CrossRef]
103. Forsythe, P.; Sudo, N.; Dinan, T.; Taylor, V.H.; Bienenstock, J. Mood and gut feelings. Brain Behav. Immun.

104. Avoli, M.; Krnjevi´c, K. The long and winding road to gamma-amino-butyric acid as neurotransmitter. Can. J.

2010, 24, 9–16. [CrossRef]

Neurol. Sci. 2016, 43, 219–226. [CrossRef]

105. Cryan, J.F.; Kaupmann, K. Don’t worry ‘B’ happy!: A role for GABA(B) receptors in anxiety and depression.

Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 2005, 26, 36–43. [CrossRef]

106. Barrett, E.; Ross, R.P.; O’ Toole, P.W.; Fitzgerald, G.F.; Stanton, C. γ-Aminobutyric acid production by

culturable bacteria form the human intestine. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2012, 113, 411–417. [CrossRef]

107. Strandwitz, P.; Kim, K.-H.; Stewart, E.; Clardy, J.; Lewis, K. GABA Modulating Bacteria in the Human Gut
Microbiome; Abstract 417 at RISE 2014; Research Innovation and Scholarship Expo. Cabot Center: Boston,
MA, USA, 2014; p. 02115.

108. Strandwitz, P.; Kim, K.H.; Terekhova, D.; Liu, J.L.; Sharma, A.; Levering, J.; McDonald, D.; Dietrich, D.;
Ramadhar, T.R.; Lekbua, A.; et al. GABA-modulating bacteria of the human gut microbiota. Nat. Microbiol.
2019, 4, 396–403. [CrossRef]

109. Cotter, P.D.; Gahan, C.G.M.; Hill, C. A glutamate decarboxylase system protects Listeria monocytogenes in

gastric ﬂuid. Mol. Microbiol. 2001, 40, 465–475. [CrossRef]

110. Ueno, H. Enzymatic and structural aspects on glutamate decarboxylase. J. Mol. Catal. B Enzym. 2000, 10,

67–79. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

32 of 45

111. Pokusaeva, K.; Johnson, C.; Luk, B.; Uribe, G.; Fu, Y.; Oezguen, N.; Matsunami, R.K.; Lugo, M.; Major, A.;
Mori-Akiyama, Y.; et al. GABA-producing Biﬁdobacterium dentium modulates visceral sensitivity in the
intestine. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2017, 29, e12904. [CrossRef]

112. Ko, C.Y.; Lin, H.-T.V.; Tsai, G.T. Gamma-amino butyric acid production in black soybean milk by Lactobacillus
brevis FPA 3709 and the antidepressant eﬀect of the fermented product on a forced swimming rat model.
Process Biochem. 2013, 48, 559–568. [CrossRef]

113. Yano, J.M.; Yu, K.; Donaldson, G.P.; Shastri, G.G.; Ann, P.; Ma, L.; Nagler, C.R.; Ismagilov, R.F.; Mazmanian, S.K.;
Hsiao, E.Y. Indigenous bacteria from the gut microbiota regulate host serotonin biosynthesis. Cell 2015, 163,
258. [CrossRef]

114. Dinan, T.G.; Stanton, C.; Cryan, J.F. Psychobiotics: A novel class of psychotropic. Biol. Psychiatry 2013, 74,

720–726. [CrossRef]

115. Artigas, F. Future directions for serotonin and antidepressants. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2013, 4, 5–8. [CrossRef]
116. Wikoﬀ, W.R.; Anfora, A.T.; Liu, J.; Schultz, P.G.; Lesley, S.A.; Peters, E.C.; Siuzdak, G. Metabolomics analysis
reveals large eﬀects of gut microﬂora on mammalian blood metabolites. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2009, 106,
3698–3703. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

117. Agus, A.; Planchais, J.; Sokol, H. Gut microbiota regulation of tryptophan metabolism in health and disease.

Cell Host Microbe 2018, 23, 716–724. [CrossRef]

118. Mawe, G.M.; Hoﬀman, J.M. Serotonin signalling in the gut—functions, dysfunctions and therapeutic targets.

Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2013, 10, 564. [CrossRef]

119. De Vadder, F.; Grasset, E.; Mannerås Holm, L.; Karsenty, G.; Macpherson, A.J.; Olofsson, L.E.; Bäckhed, F.
Gut microbiota regulates maturation of the adult enteric nervous system via enteric serotonin networks.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2018, 115, 6458–6463. [CrossRef]

120. Morris, G.; Berk, M.; Carvalho, A.; Caso, J.R.; Sanz, Y.; Walder, K.; Maes, M. The role of microbial metabolites
including tryptophan catabolites and short chain fatty acids in the pathophysiology of immune-inﬂammatory
and neuroimmune disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 2017, 54, 4432–4451. [CrossRef]

121. Gutiérrez-Vázquez, C.; Quintana, F.J. Regulation of the immune response by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor.

122. Esser, C.; Rannug, A. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor in barrier organ physiology, immunology, and toxicology.

Immunity 2018, 48, 19–33. [CrossRef]

Pharmacol. Rev. 2015, 67, 259–279. [CrossRef]

123. Lamas, B.; Richard, M.L.; Leducq, V.; Pham, H.P.; Michel, M.L.; Da Costa, G.; Bridonneau, C.; Jegou, S.;
Hoﬀmann, T.W.; Natividad, J.M.; et al. CARD9 impacts colitis by altering gut microbiota metabolism of
tryptophan into aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligands. Nat. Med. 2016, 22, 598–605. [CrossRef]

124. Wlodarska, M.; Luo, C.; Kolde, R.; D’Hennezel, E.; Annand, J.W.; Heim, C.E.; Krastel, P.; Schmitt, E.K.;
Indoleacrylic acid produced by commensal Peptostreptococcus species

Omar, A.S.; Creasey, E.A.; et al.
suppresses inﬂammation. Cell Host Microbe 2017, 22, 25–37.e6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

125. Bansal, T.; Alaniz, R.C.; Wood, T.K.; Jayaraman, A. The bacterial signal indole increases epithelial-cell
tight-junction resistance and attenuates indicators of inﬂammation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107,
228–233. [CrossRef]

126. Shimada, Y.; Kinoshita, M.; Harada, K.; Mizutani, M.; Masahata, K.; Kayama, H.; Takeda, K. Commensal
Bacteria-dependent indole production enhances epithelial barrier function in the colon. PLoS ONE 2013, 8,
e80604. [CrossRef]

127. Lawley, T.D.; Walker, A.W. Intestinal colonisation resistance. Immunology 2012, 138, 1–11. [CrossRef]
128. Rolhion, N.; Chassaing, B. When pathogenic bacteria meet the intestinal microbiota. Philos. Trans. Soc. B Biol.

Sci. 2016, 371, 20150504. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

129. Freter, R.; Brickner, H.; Botney, M.; Cleven, D.; Aranki, A. Mechanisms that control bacterial populations in

continuous-ﬂow culture models of mouse large intestinal ﬂora. Infect. Immun. 1983, 39, 676–685.

130. Wilson, K.H.; Perini, F. Role of competition for nutrients in suppression of Clostridium diﬃcile by the colonic

microﬂora. Infect. Immun. 1988, 56, 2610–2614.

131. Yu, Z.T.; Chen, C.; Kling, D.E.; Liu, B.; McCoy, J.; Merighi, M.; Heidtman, M.; Newburg, D.S. The principal
fucosylated oligosaccharides of human milk exhibit prebiotic properties on cultured infant microbiota.
Glycobiology 2013, 23, 169–177. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

33 of 45

132. Kelly, C.J.; Zheng, L.; Campbell, E.L.; Saeedi, B.; Scholz, C.C.; Bayless, A.J.; Wilson, K.E.; Glover, L.E.;
Kominsky, D.J.; Magnuson, A.; et al. Crosstalk between microbiota-derived short-chain fatty acids and
intestinal epithelial HIF augments tissue barrier function. Cell Host Microbe 2015, 17, 662–671. [CrossRef]

133. Rivera-Chávez, F.; Zhang, L.F.; Faber, F.; Lopez, C.A.; Byndloss, M.X.; Olsan, E.E.; Xu, G.; Velazquez, E.M.;
Lebrilla, C.B.; Winter, S.E.; et al. Depletion of butyrate-producing Clostridia from the gut microbiota drives
an aerobic luminal expansion of Salmonella. Cell Host Microbe 2016, 19, 443–454. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Gantois, I.; Ducatelle, R.; Pasmans, F.; Haesebrouck, F.; Hautefort, I.; Thompson, A.; Hinton, J.C.;
Van Immerseel, F. Butyrate speciﬁcally down-regulates Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 gene expression.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2006, 72, 946–949. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

135. Lee, S.M.; Donaldson, G.P.; Mikulski, Z.; Boyajian, S.; Ley, K.; Mazmanian, S.K. Bacterial colonisation factors
control speciﬁcity and stability of the gut microbiota. Nature 2013, 501, 426–429. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. Chassaing, B.; Cascales, E. Antibacterial Weapons: Targeted destruction in the microbiota. Trends Microbiol.

2018, 26, 329–338. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

137. Dicks, L.M.T.; Dreyer, L.; Smith, C.; Van Staden, A.D. A Review: The fate of bacteriocins in the human
gastro-intestinal tract: Do they cross the gut–blood barrier? Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 2297. [CrossRef]
138. Alvarez-Sieiro, P.; Montalbán-López, M.; Mu, D.; Kuipers, O.P. Bacteriocins of lactic acid bacteria: Extending

the family. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2016, 100, 2939–2951. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

139. Walsh, C.J.; Guinane, C.M.; Hill, C.; Ross, R.P.; O’Toole, P.W.; Cotter, P.D.; Ross, R. In silico identiﬁcation of
bacteriocin gene clusters in the gastrointestinal tract, based on the Human Microbiome Project’s reference
genome database. BMC Microbiol. 2015, 15, 183. [CrossRef]

140. Rea, M.C.; Sit, C.S.; Clayton, E.; O’Connor, P.M.; Whittal, R.M.; Zheng, J.; Vederas, J.C.; Ross, R.P.; Hill, C.;
Ross, R. Thuricin CD, a posttranslationally modiﬁed bacteriocin with a narrow spectrum of activity against
Clostridium diﬃcile. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 9352–9357. [CrossRef]

141. Rea, M.C.; Dobson, A.; O’Sullivan, O.; Crispie, F.; Fouhy, F.; Cotter, P.D.; Shanahan, F.; Kiely, B.; Hill, C.;
Ross, R.P. Eﬀect of broad- and narrow spectrum antimicrobials on Clostridium diﬃcile and microbial diversity
in a model of the distal colon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011, 108, 4639–4644. [CrossRef]

142. Kommineni, S.; Bretl, D.J.; Lam, V.; Chakraborty, R.; Hayward, M.; Simpson, P.; Cao, Y.; Bousounis, P.;
Kristich, C.J.; Salzman, N.H. Bacteriocin production augments niche competition by enterococci in the
mammalian GI tract. Nature 2015, 526, 719–722. [CrossRef]

143. Umu, Ö.C.O.; Bäuerl, C.; Oostindjer, M.; Pope, P.B.; Hernández, P.E.; Pérez-Martínez, G.; Diep, D.B.
The potential of Class II bacteriocins to modify gut microbiota to improve host health. PLoS ONE 2016, 11,
0164036. [CrossRef]

144. Buﬃe, C.G.; Bucci, V.; Stein, R.R.; McKenney, P.T.; Ling, L.; Gobourne, A.; No, D.; Liu, H.; Kinnebrew, M.;
Viale, A.; et al. Precision microbiome reconstitution restores bile acid mediated resistance to Clostridium
diﬃcile. Nature 2015, 517, 205–208. [CrossRef]

145. Shi, N.; Li, N.; Duan, X.; Niu, H. Interaction between the gut microbiome and mucosal immune system.

Mil. Med 2017, 4, 59. [CrossRef]

146. Gao, J.; Xu, K.; Liu, H.; Liu, G.; Bai, M.; Peng, C.; Li, T.; Yin, Y. Impact of the gut microbiota on intestinal

immunity mediated by tryptophan metabolism. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 8, 13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

147. Clavel, T.; Lagkouvardos, I.; Gomes-Neto, J.C.; Ramer-Tait, A.E. Deciphering interactions between the gut
microbiota and the immune system via microbial cultivation and minimal microbiomes. Immunol. Rev. 2017,
279, 8–22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

148. Mazmanian, S.K.; Liu, C.H.; Tzianabos, A.O.; Kasper, D.L. An immunomodulatory molecule of symbiotic
bacteria directs maturation of the host immune system. Cell 2005, 122, 107–118. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
149. Bjerke, G.A.; Wilson, R.; Storro, O.; Oyen, T.; Johnsen, R.; Rudi, K. Mother-to-child transmission
of and multiple-strain colonisation by Bacteroides fragilis in a cohort of mothers and their children.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2011, 77, 8318–8324. [CrossRef]

150. Quévrain, E.; Maubert, M.A.; Michon, C.; Chain, F.; Marquant, R.; Talihades, J.; Miquel, S.; Carlier, L.;
Bermudez-Humarán, L.G.; Pigneur, B.; et al.
Identification of an anti-inflammatory protein from
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, a commensal bacterium deficient in Crohn’s disease. Gut 2016, 65, 415–425.
[CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

34 of 45

151. Rios, D.; Wood, M.B.; Li, J.; Chassaing, B.; Gewirtz, A.T.; Williams, I.R. Antigen sampling by intestinal M cells
is the principal pathway initiating mucosal IgA production to commensal enteric bacteria. Mucosal Immunol.
2016, 9, 907–916. [CrossRef]

152. Vaishnava, S.; Behrendt, C.L.; Ismail, A.S.; Eckmann, L.; Hooper, L.V. Paneth cells directly sense gut
commensals and maintain homeostasis at the intestinal host-microbe interface. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2008, 105, 20858–20863. [CrossRef]

153. Gaboriau-Routhiau, V.; Rakotobe, S.; Lécuyer, E.; Mulder, I.; Lan, A.; Bridonneau, C.; Rochet, V.; Pisi, A.;
De Paepe, M.; Brandi, G.; et al. The key role of segmented ﬁlamentous bacteria in the coordinated maturation
of gut helper T cell responses. Immunity 2009, 31, 677–689. [CrossRef]

154. Karlsson, J.; Pütsep, K.; Chu, H.; Kays, R.J.; Bevins, C.L.; Andersson, M. Regional variations in Paneth cell

antimicrobial peptide expression along the mouse intestinal tract. BMC Immunol. 2008, 9, 37. [CrossRef]

155. Pollard, M.; Sharon, N. Responses of the Peyer’s patches in germ-free mice to antigenic stimulation.

156. Donaldson, G.P.; Lee, S.M.; Mazmanian, S.K. Gut biogeography of the bacterial microbiota. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.

Infect. Immun. 1970, 2, 96–100. [PubMed]

2016, 14, 20–32. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

157. Kim, Y.S.; Ho, S.B. Intestinal goblet cells and mucins in health and disease: Recent insights and progress.

Curr. Gastroenterol. Rep. 2010, 12, 319–330. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

158. Petersson, J.; Schreiber, O.; Velcich, A.; Roos, S.; Holm, L.; Phillipson, M.; Hansson, G.C.; Gendler, S.J.;
Lundberg, J.O. Importance and regulation of the colonic mucus barrier in a mouse model of colitis. Am. J.
Physiol. Liver Physiol. 2011, 300, G327–G333. [CrossRef]

159. Wlodarska, M.; Willing, B.; Keeney, K.M.; Menendez, A.; Bergstrom, K.S.; Gill, N.; Russell, S.L.; Vallance, B.A.;
Finlay, B.B. Antibiotic treatment alters the colonic mucus layer and predisposes the host to exacerbated
Citrobacter rodentium-induced colitis. Infect. Immun. 2011, 79, 1536–1545. [CrossRef]

160. Wrzosek, L.; Miquel, S.; Noordine, M.-L.; Bouet, S.; Chevalier-Curt, M.J.; Robert, V.; Philippe, C.;
Bridonneau, C.; Cherbuy, C.; Robbe-Masselot, C.; et al. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii inﬂuence the production of mucus glycans and the development of goblet cells in the colonic
epithelium of a gnotobiotic model rodent. BMC Biol. 2013, 11, 61. [CrossRef]

161. Graziani, F.; Pujol, A.; Nicoletti, C.; Dou, S.; Maresca, M.; Giardina, T.; Fons, M.; Perrier, J. Ruminococcus
gnavus E1 modulates mucin expression and intestinal glycosylation. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2016, 120, 1403–1417.
[CrossRef]

162. Morrin, S.T.; Lane, J.A.; Marotta, M.; Bode, L.; Carrington, S.D.; Irwin, J.A.; Hickey, R.M. Bovine
intestinal epithelial cells for increased commensal colonisation.

colostrum-driven modulation of
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2019, 103, 2745–2758. [CrossRef]

163. Willemsen, L.E.M.; Koetsier, M.A.; Van Deventer, S.J.H.; Van Tol, E.A.F. Short chain fatty acids stimulate
epithelial mucin 2 expression through diﬀerential eﬀects on prostaglandin E1 and E2 production by intestinal
myoﬁbroblasts. Gut 2003, 52, 1442–1447. [CrossRef]

164. Kriss, M.; Hazleton, K.Z.; Nusbacher, N.M.; Martin, C.G.; Lozupone, C.A. Low Diversity gut microbiota
dysbiosis: Drivers, functional implications and recovery. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2018, 44, 34–40. [CrossRef]
165. Sha, S.; Xu, B.; Wang, X.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, H.; Kong, X.; Zhu, H.; Wu, K. The biodiversity and composition of
the dominant faecal microbiota in patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease. Diagn. Microbiol. Infect. Dis.
2013, 75, 245–251. [CrossRef]

166. Manichanh, C.; Rigottier-Gois, L.; Bonnaud, E.; Gloux, K.; Pelletier, E.; Frangeul, L.; Nalin, R.; Jarrin, C.;
Chardon, P.; Marteau, P.; et al. Reduced diversity of faecal microbiota in Crohn’s disease revealed by a
metagenomic approach. Gut 2006, 55, 205–211. [CrossRef]

167. Lozupone, C.A.; Stombaugh, J.; González, A.; Ackermann, G.; Wendel, D.; Vázquez-Baeza, Y.; Jansson, J.K.;
Gordon, J.I.; Knight, R. Meta-analyses of studies of the human microbiota. Genome Res. 2013, 23, 1704–1714.
[CrossRef]

168. Ahn, J.; Sinha, R.; Pei, Z.; Dominianni, C.; Wu, J.; Shi, J.; Goedert, J.J.; Hayes, R.B.; Yang, L. Human gut

microbiome and risk for colorectal cancer. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 2013, 105, 1907–1911. [CrossRef]

169. Qin, N.; Yang, F.; Li, A.; Prifti, E.; Chen, Y.; Shao, L.; Guo, J.; Le Chatelier, E.; Yao, J.; Wu, L.; et al. Alterations

of the human gut microbiome in liver cirrhosis. Nature 2014, 513, 59–64. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

35 of 45

170. Bajaj, J.S.; Heuman, D.M.; Hylemon, P.B.; Sanyal, A.J.; White, M.B.; Monteith, P.; Noble, N.A.; Unser, A.B.;
Daita, K.; Fisher, A.R.; et al. Altered proﬁle of human gut microbiome is associated with cirrhosis and its
complications. J. Hepatol. 2014, 60, 940–947. [CrossRef]

171. Chang, J.Y.; Antonopoulos, D.A.; Kalra, A.; Tonelli, A.; Khalife, W.T.; Schmidt, T.M.; Young, V.B. Decreased
diversity of the faecal microbiome in recurrent Clostridium diﬃcile–associated diarrhea. J. Infect. Dis. 2008,
197, 435–438. [CrossRef]

172. Statovci, D.; Aguilera, M.; MacSharry, J.; Melgar, S. The impact of western diet and nutrients on the microbiota

and immune response at mucosal interfaces. Front. Immunol. 2017, 8, 838. [CrossRef]

173. Uranga, J.A.; Lopez-Miranda, V.; Lombo, F.; Abalo, R. Food, nutrients and nutra-ceuticals aﬀecting the course

of inﬂammatory bowel disease. Pharmacol. Rep. 2016, 68, 816–826. [CrossRef]

174. Park, Y.; Subar, A.F.; Hollenbeck, A.; Schatzkin, A. Dietary ﬁber intake and mortality in the NIH-AARP diet

and health study. Arch. Intern. Med. 2011, 171, 1061–1068. [CrossRef]

175. Tilg, H.; Moschen, A.R. Food, immunity, and the microbiome. Gastroenterology 2015, 148, 1107–1119.

[CrossRef]

176. Mosca, A.; Leclerc, M.; Hugot, J.P. Gut microbiota diversity and human diseases: Should we reintroduce key

predators in our ecosystem? Front. Microbiol. 2016, 7, 842. [CrossRef]

177. Cotillard, A.; Kennedy, S.P.; Kong, L.C.; Prifti, E.; Pons, N.; Le Chatelier, E.; Almeida, M.; Quinquis, B.;
Levenez, F.; Galleron, N.; et al. ANR MicroObes Consortium. Dietary intervention impact on gut microbial
gene richness. Nature 2013, 500, 585–588. [CrossRef]

178. David, L.A.; Maurice, C.F.; Carmody, R.N.; Gootenberg, D.B.; Button, J.E.; Wolfe, B.E.; Ling, A.V.; Devlin, A.S.;
Varma, Y.; Fischbach, M.A.; et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature
2014, 505, 559–563. [CrossRef]

179. Klimenko, N.S.; Tyakht, A.; Popenko, A.S.; Vasiliev, A.S.; Altukhov, I.A.; Ischenko, D.S.; Shashkova, T.I.;
Eﬁmova, D.A.; Nikogosov, D.A.; Osipenko, D.A.; et al. Microbiome responses to an uncontrolled short-term
diet intervention in the frame of the Citizen Science Project. Nutrients 2018, 10, 576. [CrossRef]

180. De Filippo, C.; Cavalier, D.; Di Paolo, M.; Ramazotti, M.; Poullet, J.B.; Massart, S.; Collini, S.; Pieraccini, G.;
Lionetti, P. Impact of diet in shaping gut microbiota revealed by a comparative study in children from Europe
and rural Africa. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 14691–14696. [CrossRef]

181. Walker, A.W.; Ince, J.; Duncan, S.H.; Webster, L.M.; Holtrop, G.; Ze, X.; Brown, D.; Stares, M.D.; Scott, P.;
Bergerat, A.; et al. Dominant and diet-responsive groups of bacteria within the human colonic microbiota.
ISME J. 2011, 5, 220–230. [CrossRef]

182. Duncan, S.H.; Belenguer, A.; Holtrop, G.; Johnstone, A.M.; Flint, H.J.; Lobley, G.E. Reduced dietary intake of
carbohydrates by obese subjects results in decreased concentrations of butyrate and butyrate-producing
bacteria in faeces. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2007, 73, 1073–1078. [CrossRef]

183. Turnbaugh, P.J.; Ridaura, V.K.; Faith, J.J.; Rey, F.E.; Knight, R.; Gordon, J.I. The eﬀect of diet on the human gut
microbiome: Analysis in humanized gnotobiotic mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 2009, 1, 6ra14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

184. Reddy, B.S. Diet and excretion of bile acids. Cancer Res. 1981, 41, 3766–3768.
185. Yoshimoto, S.; Loo, T.M.; Atarashi, K.; Kanda, H.; Sato, S.; Oyadomari, S.; Iwakura, Y.; Oshima, K.; Morita, H.;
Hattori, M.; et al. Obesity-induced gut microbial metabolite promotes liver cancer through senescence
secretome. Nature 2013, 499, 97–101. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

186. Islam, K.S.; Fukiya, S.; Hagio, M.; Fujii, N.; Ishizuka, S.; Ooka, T.; Ogura, Y.; Hayashi, T.; Yokota, A. Bile
acid is a host factor that regulates the composition of the cecal microbiota in rats. Gastroenterology 2011, 141,
1773–1781. [CrossRef]

187. Devkota, S.; Wang, Y.; Musch, M.W.; Leone, V.; Fehlner-Peach, H.; Nadimpalli, A.; Antonopoulos, D.A.;
Jabri, B.; Chang, E.B. Dietary-fat-induced taurocholic acid promotes pathobiont expansion and colitis in
Il10

mice. Nature 2012, 487, 104–108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

−/−

188. Raichlen, D.A.; Pontzer, H.; Harris, J.A.; Mabulla, A.Z.; Marlowe, F.Z.; Snodgrass, J.; Eick, G.; Colette
Berbesque, J.; Sancilio, A.; Wood, B.M. Physical activity patterns and biomarkers of cardiovascular disease
risk in hunter-gatherers. Am. J. Hum. Biol. 2017, 29, e22919. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

189. Blurton Jones, N.G.; Smith, L.C.; O’Connell, J.F.; Hawkes, K.; Kamuzora, C.L. Demography of the Hadza,
an increasing and high density population of Savanna foragers. Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 1992, 89, 159–181.
[CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

36 of 45

190. Bennett, F.J.; Barnicot, N.A.; Woodburn, J.C.; Pereira, M.S.; Henderson, B.E. Studies on viral, bacterial,
rickettsial and treponemal diseases in the Hadza of Tanzania and a note on injuries. Hum. Biol. 1973, 45,
243–272. [PubMed]

191. Work, T.; Ifekwunigwe, A.; Jelliﬀe, D.; Jelliﬀe, P.; Neumann, C. Tropical problems in nutrition. Ann. Intern. Med.

1973, 79, 701–711. [CrossRef]

192. Schnorr, S.L.; Candela, M.; Rampelli, S.; Centanni, M.; Consolandi, C.; Basaglia, G.; Turroni, S.; Biagi, E.;
Peano, C.; Severgnini, M.; et al. Gut microbiome of the Hadza hunter-gatherers. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3654.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

193. Le Chatelier, E.; Nielsen, T.; Qin, J.; Prifti, E.; Hildebrand, F.; Falony, G.; Almeida, M.; Arumugam, M.;
Batto, J.-M.; Kennedy, S.; et al. Richness of human gut microbiome correlates with metabolic markers. Nature
2013, 500, 541–546. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

194. Sokol, H.; Pigneur, B.; Watterlot, L.; Lakhdari, O.; Bermúdez-Humarán, L.G.; Gratadoux, J.-J.; Blugeon, S.;
Bridonneau, C.; Furet, J.-P.; Corthier, G.; et al. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-inﬂammatory commensal
bacterium identiﬁed by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2008,
105, 16731–16736. [CrossRef]

195. Hall, A.B.; Yassour, M.; Sauk, J.; Garner, A.; Jiang, X.; Arthur, T.; Lagoudas, G.K.; Vatanen, T.; Fornelos, N.;
Wilson, R.; et al. A novel Ruminococcus gnavus clade enriched in inﬂammatory bowel disease patients.
Genome Med. 2017, 9, 103. [CrossRef]

196. Swidsinski, A.; Weber, J.; Loening-Baucke, V.; Hale, L.P.; Lochs, H. Spatial organization and composition
of the mucosal ﬂora in patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease. J. Clin. Microbiol. 2005, 43, 3380–3389.
[CrossRef]

197. Joossens, M.; Huys, G.; Cnockaert, M.; De Preter, V.; Verbeke, K.; Rutgeerts, P.; Vandamme, P.; Vermeire, S.
Dysbiosis of the faecal microbiota in patients with Crohn’s disease and their unaﬀected relatives. Gut 2011,
60, 631–637. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

198. Rea, M.C.; O’Sullivan, O.; Shanahan, F.; O’Toole, P.W.; Stanton, C.; Ross, R.P.; Hill, C. Clostridium diﬃcile
carriage in elderly subjects and associated changes in the intestinal microbiota. J. Clin. Microbiol. 2012, 50,
867–875. [CrossRef]

199. Zhang, L.; Dong, D.; Jiang, C.; Wang, X.; Peng, Y. Insight into alteration of gut microbiota in Clostridium

diﬃcile infection and asymptomatic C. diﬃcile colonisation. Anaerobe 2015, 34, 1–7. [CrossRef]

200. Antharam, V.C.; Li, E.C.; Ishmael, A.; Sharma, A.; Mai, V.; Rand, K.H.; Wang, G.P. Intestinal dysbiosis and
depletion of butyrogenic bacteria in Clostridium diﬃcile infection and nosocomial diarrhoea. J. Clin. Microbiol.
2013, 51, 2884–2892. [CrossRef]

201. Gu, S.; Chen, Y.; Lu, H.; Lv, T.; Shen, P.; Lv, L.; Zheng, B.; Jiang, X.; Li, L. Identiﬁcation of key taxa that favour
intestinal colonisation of Clostridium diﬃcile in an adult Chinese population. Microbes Infect. 2016, 18, 30–38.
[CrossRef]

202. Zhao, J.; Nian, L.; Kwok, L.Y.; Sun, T. Reduction in faecal microbiota diversity and short-chain fatty acid
producers in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infected individuals as revealed by PacBio single
molecule, real-time sequencing technology. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 2017, 38, 1463–1472.

203. Dinleyici, E.C.; Martínez-Martínez, D.; Kara, A.; Karbuz, A.; Dalgic, N.; Metin, Ö.; Yazar, A.S.; Guven, S.;
Kurugol, Z.; Türel, O.; et al. Time series analysis of the microbiota of children suﬀering from acute infectious
diarrhea and their recovery after treatment. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 1230. [CrossRef]

204. Inoue, T.; Nakayama, J.; Moriya, K.; Kawaratani, H.; Momoda, R.; Ito, K.; Iio, E.; Nojiri, S.; Fujiwara, K.;
Yoneda, M.; et al. Gut dysbiosis associated with hepatitis C infection. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2018. [CrossRef]
205. Nowak, P.; Troseid, M.; Avershina, E.; Barqasho, B.; Neogi, U.; Holm, K.; Hov, J.R.; Noyan, K.; Vesterbacka, J.;
Svärd, J.; et al. Gut microbiota diversity predicts immune status in HIV-1 infection. AIDS 2015, 29, 2409–2418.
[CrossRef]

206. Livanos, A.E.; Snider, E.J.; Whittier, S.; Chong, D.H.; Wang, T.C.; Abrams, J.A.; Freedberg, D.E. Rapid
gastrointestinal loss of Clostridial Clusters IV and XIVa in the ICU associates with an expansion of gut
pathogens. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0200322. [CrossRef]

207. Borriello, S.P.; Barclay, F.E. An in-vitro model of colonisation resistance to Clostridium diﬃcile infection.

J. Med. Microbiol. 1986, 21, 299–309. [CrossRef]

208. Greathouse, K.L.; Harris, C.C.; Bultman, S.J. Dysfunctional families: Clostridium scindens and secondary bile

acids inhibit the growth of Clostridium diﬃcile. Cell Metab. 2014, 21, 9–10. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

37 of 45

209. Amrane, S.; Bachar, D.; Lagier, J.C.; Raoult, D. Clostridium scindens is present in the gut microbiota during
Clostridium diﬃcile infection: A metagenomic and culturomic analysis. J. Clin. Microbiol. 2018, 56, e01663-17.
[CrossRef]

210. Sonnenburg, J.L.; Xu, J.; Leip, D.D.; Chen, C.-H.; Westover, B.P.; Weatherford, J.; Buhler, J.D.; Gordon, J.I.
Glycan foraging in vivo by an intestine-adapted bacterial symbiont. Science 2005, 307, 1955–1959. [CrossRef]
211. Wenzel, U.A.; Magnusson, M.K.; Rydström, A.; Jonstrand, C.; Hengst, J.; Johansson, M.E.V.; Velcich, A.;
Öhman, L.; Strid, H.; Sjövall, H.; et al. Spontaneous colitis in Muc2-deﬁcient mice reﬂects clinical and cellular
features of active ulcerative colitis. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e100217. [CrossRef]

212. Johansson, M.E.; Gustafsson, J.K.; Holmén-Larsson, J.; Jabbar, K.S.; Xia, L.; Xu, H.; Ghishan, F.K.;
Carvalho, F.A.; Gerwitz, A.T.; Sjövall, H.; et al. Bacteria penetrate the normally impenetrable inner
colon mucus layer in both murine and colitis models and patients with ulcerative colitis. Gut 2014, 63,
281–289. [CrossRef]

213. Desai, M.S.; Seekatz, A.M.; Koropatkin, N.M.; Kamada, N.; Hickey, C.A.; Wolter, M.; Pudlo, N.A.; Kitamoto, S.;
Terrapon, N.; Muller, A.; et al. A dietary ﬁbre-deprived gut microbiota enhances pathogen susceptibility.
Cell 2016, 167, 1339–1353. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

214. Schroeder, B.O.; Birchenough, G.M.H.; Ståhlman, M.; Arike, L.; Johansson, M.E.V.; Hannson, G.C.; Bäckhed, F.
Biﬁdobacteria or ﬁber protects against diet-induced microbiota-mediated colonic mucus deterioration.
Cell Host Microbe 2018, 23, 27–40. [CrossRef]

215. Eggers, S.; Malecki, K.M.C.; Peppard, P.; Mares, J.; Shirley, D.; Shukla, S.K.; Poulsen, K.; Gangnon, R.;
Duster, M.; Kates, A.; et al. Wisconsin microbiome study, a cross-sectional investigation of dietary ﬁbre,
microbiome composition and antibiotic resistant organisms: Rationale and methods. BMJ Open 2018, 8,
e019450. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

216. WHO. World Health Organisation Fact Sheet on Obesity and Overweight. 2018. Available online: http:
//www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight (accessed on 10 December 2018).
217. Bhaskaran, K.; Dos-Santos-Silva, I.; Leon, D.A.; Douglas, I.J.; Smeeth, L. Association of BMI with overall and
cause-speciﬁc mortality: A population-based cohort study of 3·6 million adults in the UK. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2018, 6, 944–953. [CrossRef]

218. Sonnenburg, J.L.; Bäckhed, F. Diet–microbiota interactions as moderators of human metabolism. Nature 2016,

535, 56–64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

219. WHO. 2016 World Health Organisation Global Report on Diabetes.

Available online:

http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/204871/9789241565257_eng.pdf;jsessionid=
68EC705ECA04F21E7EB83B493FC19FFD?sequence=1 (accessed on 10 December 2018).

220. Mooradian, A.D. Dyslipidemia in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 2009, 5, 150–159. [CrossRef]

[PubMed]

221. Magkos, F.; Yannakoulia, M.; Chan, J.L.; Mantzoros, C.S. Management of the metabolic syndrome and type 2

diabetes through lifestyle modiﬁcation. Annu. Nutr. 2009, 29, 223–256. [CrossRef]

222. Bäckhed, F.; Manchester, J.K.; Semenkovich, C.F.; Gordon, J.I. Mechanisms underlying the resistance to

diet-induced obesity in germ-free mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2007, 104, 979–984. [CrossRef]

223. Bäckhed, F.; Ding, H.; Wang, T.; Hooper, L.V.; Koh, G.Y.; Nagy, A.; Semenkovich, C.F.; Gordon, J.I. The gut
microbiota as an environmental factor that regulates fat storage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2004, 101,
15718–15723. [CrossRef]

224. Rabot, S.; Membrez, M.; Bruneau, A.; Harach, T.; Moser, M.; Raymond, F.; Mansourian, R.; Chou, C.J.;
Gerard, P. Germ-free C57BL/6J mice are resistant to high-fat-diet-induced insulin resistance and have altered
cholesterol metabolism. FASEB J. 2010, 24, 4948–4959. [CrossRef]

225. Ding, S.; Chi, M.M.; Scull, B.P.; Rigby, R.; Schwerbrock, N.M.J.; Magness, S.; Jobin, C.; Lund, P.K. High-fat
diet: Bacteria interactions promote intestinal inﬂammation which precedes and correlates with obesity and
insulin resistance in mouse. PLoS ONE 2010, 5, e12191. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

226. Ley, R.E.; Bäckhed, F.; Turnbaugh, P.; Lozupone, C.A.; Knight, R.D.; Gordon, J.I. Obesity alters gut microbial

ecology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2005, 102, 11070–11075. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

227. Turnbaugh, P.J.; Ley, R.E.; Mahowald, M.A.; Magrini, V.; Mardis, E.R.; Gordon, J.I. An obesity-associated gut
microbiome with increased capacity for energy harvest. Nature 2006, 444, 1027–1031. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
228. Ley, R.E.; Turnbaugh, P.J.; Klein, S.; Gordon, J.I. Microbial ecology: Human gut microbes associated with

obesity. Nature 2006, 444, 1022–1023. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

38 of 45

229. Turnbaugh, P.J.; Hamady, M.; Yatsunenko, T.; Cantarel, B.L.; Duncan, A.; Ley, R.E.; Sogin, M.L.; Jones, W.J.;
Roe, B.A.; Aﬀourtit, J.P.; et al. A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins. Nature 2009, 457, 480–484.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

230. Schwiertz, A.; Taras, D.; Schafer, K.; Beijer, S.; Bos, N.A.; Donus, C.; Hardt, P.D. Microbiota and SCFA in lean

and overweight healthy subjects. Obesity 2010, 18, 190–195. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

231. Fernandes, J.; Su, W.; Rahat-Rozenbloom, S.; Wolever, T.M.S.; Comelli, E.M. Adiposity, gut microbiota and

faecal short chain fatty acids are linked in adult humans. Nutr. Diabetes 2014, 4, e121. [CrossRef]

232. Teixeira, T.F.S.; Grze´skowiak, L.; Franceschini, S.C.C.; Bressan, J.; Ferreira, C.L.L.F.; Peluzio, M.C.G. Higher
level of faecal SCFA in women correlates with metabolic syndrome risk factors. Br. J. Nutr. 2013, 109, 914–919.
[CrossRef]

233. Murugesan, S.; Ulloa-Martínez, M.; Martinez-Rojano, H.; Galván-Rodríguez, F.M.; Miranda-Brito, C.;
Romano, M.C.; Piña-Escobedo, A.; Pizano-Zárate, M.L.; Hoyo-Vadillo, C.; García-Mena, J. Study of the
diversity and short-chain fatty acids production by the bacterial community in overweight and obese Mexican
children. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 2015, 34, 1337–1346. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

234. Van den Munckhof, I.C.L.; Kurilshikov, A.; Ter Horst, R.; Riksen, N.P.; Joosten, L.A.B.; Zhernakova, A.; Fu, J.;
Keating, S.T.; Netea, M.G.; de Graaf, J.; et al. Role of gut microbiota in chronic low-grade inﬂammation as
potential driver for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: A systematic review of human studies. Obes. Rev.
2018. [CrossRef]

235. Karlsson, F.H.; Tremaroli, V.; Nookaew, I.; Bergström, G.; Behre, C.J.; Fagerberg, B.; Nielsen, J.; Bäckhed, F.
Gut metagenome in European women with normal, impaired and diabetic glucose control. Nature 2013, 498,
99–103. [CrossRef]

236. Qin, J.; Li, Y.; Cai, Z.; Li, S.; Zhu, J.; Zhang, F.; Liang, S.; Zhang, W.; Guan, Y.; Shen, D.; et al. A
metagenome-wide association study of gut microbiota in type 2 diabetes. Nature 2012, 490, 55–60. [CrossRef]
237. Kashtanova, D.A.; Tkacheva, O.N.; Doudinskaya, E.N.; Strazhesko, I.D.; Kotovskaya, Y.V.; Popenko, A.S.;
Tyakht, A.V.; Alexeev, D.G. Gut microbiota in patients with diﬀerent metabolic statuses: Moscow study.
Microorganisms 2018, 6, 98. [CrossRef]

238. Brial, F.; Le Lay, A.; Dumas, M.-E.; Gauguier, D. Implication of gut microbiota metabolites in cardiovascular

and metabolic diseases. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2018, 75, 3977–3990. [CrossRef]

239. Canfora, E.E.; Jocken, J.W.; Blaak, E.E. Short-chain fatty acids in control of body weight and insulin sensitivity.

Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 2015, 11, 577–591. [CrossRef]

240. Velasquez, M.T.; Ramezani, A.; Manal, A.; Raj, D.S.; Vanholder, R. Trimethylamine N-Oxide: The good, the

bad and the unknown. Toxins 2016, 8, 326. [CrossRef]

241. Koeth, R.A.; Wang, Z.; Levison, B.S.; Buﬀa, J.A.; Org, E.; Sheehy, B.T.; Britt, E.B.; Fu, X.; Wu, Y.; Li, L.; et al.
Intestinal microbiota metabolism of L-carnitine, a nutrient in red meat, promotes atherosclerosis. Nat. Med.
2013, 19, 576–585. [CrossRef]

242. Zhu, Y.; Jameson, E.; Crosatti, M.; Schäfer, H.; Rajakumar, K.; Bugg, T.D.H.; Chen, Y. Carnitine metabolism to
trimethylamine by an unusual Rieske-type oxygenase from human microbiota. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2014, 111, 4268–4273. [CrossRef]

243. Craciun, S.; Balskus, E.P. Microbial conversion of choline to trimethylamine requires a glycyl radical enzyme.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012, 109, 21307–21312. [CrossRef]

244. Bennett, B.J.; Vallim, T.Q.D.A.; Wang, Z.; Shih, D.M.; Meng, Y.; Gregory, J.; Allayee, H.; Lee, R.; Graham, M.;
Crooke, R.; et al. Trimethylamine-N-Oxide, a metabolite associated with atherosclerosis, exhibits complex
genetic and dietary regulation. Cell Metab. 2013, 17, 49–60. [CrossRef]

245. Wang, Z.; Klipfell, E.; Bennett, B.J.; Koeth, R.; Levison, B.S.; DuGar, B.; Feldstein, A.E.; Britt, E.B.; Fu, X.;
Chung, Y.M.; et al. Gut ﬂora metabolism of phosphotidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease. Nature
2011, 472, 57–63. [CrossRef]

246. Kühn, T.; Rohrmann, S.; Sookthai, D.; Johnson, T.; Katzke, V.; Kaaks, R.; von Eckardstein, A.; Müller, D.
Intra-individual variation of plasma trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO), betaine and choline over 1 year.
Clin. Chem. Lab. Med. (CCLM) 2016, 55, 150–158. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

247. Seldin, M.M.; Meng, Y.; Qi, H.; Zhu, W.; Wang, Z.; Hazen, S.L.; Lusis, A.J.; Shih, D.M. Trimethylamine
N-oxide promotes vascular inﬂammation through signaling of mitogen-activated protein kinase and nuclear
factor-kappaB. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2016, 5, e002767. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

39 of 45

248. Chen, M.L.; Zhu, X.H.; Ran, L.; Lang, H.D.; Yi, L.; Mi, M.T. Trimethylamine-N-oxide induces vascular
inﬂammation by activating the NLRP3 inﬂammasome through the SIRT3-SOD2-mtROS signaling pathway.
J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2017. [CrossRef]

249. Tang, W.W.; Wang, Z.; Levison, B.S.; Koeth, R.A.; Britt, E.B.; Fu, X.; Wu, Y.; Hazen, S.L. Intestinal microbial
metabolism of phosphatidylcholine and cardiovascular risk. N. Engl. J. Med. 2013, 368, 1575–1584. [CrossRef]
250. Trøseid, M.; Ueland, T.; Hov, J.R.; Svardal, A.; Gregersen, I.; Dahl, C.P.; Aakhus, S.; Gude, E.; Bjørndal, B.;
Halvorsen, B.; et al. Microbiota-dependent metabolite trimethylamine-N-oxide is associated with disease
severity and survival of patients with chronic heart failure. J. Intern. Med. 2014, 277, 717–726. [CrossRef]

251. Zhu, W.; Zeneng, W.; Tang, W.H.W.; Hazen, S.L.; Wang, Z. Gut microbe-generated TMAO from dietary

choline is prothrombotic in subjects. Circulation 2017, 135, 1671–1673. [CrossRef]

252. Heianza, Y.; Ma, W.; Manson, J.E.; Rexrode, K.M.; Qi, L. Gut microbiota metabolites and risk of major adverse
cardiovascular disease events and death: A systematic review and meta analysis of prospective studies.
J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2017, 6, e004947. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

253. Dambrova, M.; Latkovskis, G.; Kuka, J.; Strele, I.; Konrade, I.; Grinberga, S.; Hartmane, D.; Pugovics, O.;
Erglis, A.; Liepinsh, E. Diabetes is associated with higher trimethylamine N-oxide plasma levels. Exp. Clin.
Endocrinol. Diabetes 2016, 124, 251–256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

254. Wang, Z.; Roberts, A.B.; Buﬀa, J.A.; Levison, B.S.; Zhu, W.; Org, E.; Gu, X.; Huang, Y.; Zamanian-Daryoush, M.;
Culley, M.K.; et al. Non-lethal inhibition of gut microbial trimethylamine production for the treatment of
atherosclerosis. Cell 2015, 163, 1585–1595. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

255. Saito, Y.; Sato, T.; Nomoto, K.; Tsuji, H. Identiﬁcation of phenol- and p-cresol-producing intestinal bacteria
by using media supplemented with tyrosine and its metabolites. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 2018, 94, ﬁy125.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

256. Gryp, T.; Vanholder, R.; Vaneechoutte, M.; Glorieux, G. P-Cresol sulfate. Toxins 2017, 9, 52. [CrossRef]
257. Ramakrishna, B.S.; Gee, D.; Weiss, A.; Pannall, P.; Roberts-Thomson, I.C.; Roediger, W.E. Estimation of

phenolic conjugation by colonic mucosa. J. Clin. Pathol. 1989, 42, 620–623. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

258. Schepers, E.; Glorieux, G.; Vanholder, R. The gut: The forgotten organ in uremia? Blood Purif. 2010, 29,

130–136. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

259. Liu, M.; Li, X.-C.; Lu, L.; Cao, Y.; Sun, R.-R.; Chen, S.; Zhang, P.-Y. Cardiovascular disease and its relationship

with chronic kidney disease. Eur. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 2014, 18, 2918–2926.

260. Tanaka, S.; Yano, S.; Sheikh, A.M.; Nagai, A.; Sugimoto, T. Eﬀects of uremic toxin p-Cresol on proliferation,
apoptosis, diﬀerentiation, and glucose uptake in 3T3-L1 cells. Artif. Organs 2014, 38, 566–571. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

261. Schepers, E.; Meert, N.; Glorieux, G.; Goeman, J.; Van der Eycken, J.; Vanholder, R. P cresylsulphate, the
main in vivo metabolite of p-cresol, activates leucocyte free radical production. Nephrol. Dial. Transplant.
2007, 22, 592–596. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

262. Meijers, B.K.; Van Kerckhoven, S.; Verbeke, K.; Dehaen, W.; Vanrenterghem, Y.; Hoylaerts, M.F.; Evenepoel, P.
The uremic retention solute p-cresyl sulfate and markers of endothelial damage. Am. J. Kidney Dis. 2009, 54,
891–901. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

263. Gross, P.; Massy, Z.A.; Hénaut, L.; Boudot, C.; Cagnard, J.; March, C.; Kamel, S.; Drüeke, T.B.; Six, I. Para-cresyl
sulfate acutely impairs vascular reactivity and induces vascular remodeling. J. Cell. Physiol. 2015, 230,
2927–2935. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

264. Han, H.; Zhu, J.; Zhu, Z.; Ni, J.; Du, R.; Dai, Y.; Chen, Y.; Wu, Z.; Lu, L.; Zhang, R. p-Cresyl sulfate aggravates
cardiac dysfunction associated with chronic kidney disease by enhancing apoptosis of cardiomyocytes. J. Am.
Heart Assoc. 2015, 4, e001852. [CrossRef]

265. Poesen, R.; Viaene, L.; Verbele, K.; Augustijns, P.; Bammens, B.; Claes, K.; Kuypers, D.; Evenpoel, P.; Meijers, B.
Cardiovascular disease relates to intestinal uptake of p-cresol in patients with chronic kidney disease.
BMC Nephrol. 2014, 15, 87. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

266. Li, G.; Young, K.D. Indole production by the tryptophanase TnaA in Escherichia coli is determined by the

amount of exogenous tryptophan. Microbiology 2013, 159, 402–410. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

267. Barreto, F.C.; Barreto, D.V.; Liabeuf, S.; Meert, N.; Glorieux, G.; Temmar, M.; Choukroun, G.; Vanholder, R.;
Massy, Z.A.; European Uremic Toxin Work Group (EUTox). Serum indoxyl sulfate is associated with vascular
disease and mortality in chronic kidney disease patients. Clin. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2009, 4, 1551–1558.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

40 of 45

268. Gao, H.; Liu, S. Role of uremic toxin indoxyl sulphate in the progression of cardiovascular disease. Life Sci.

269. Meyer, T.W.; Hostetter, T.H. Uremic solutes from colon microbes. Kidney Int. 2012, 81, 949–954. [CrossRef]

2017, 185, 23–29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

[PubMed]

270. Poesen, R.; Claes, K.; Evenepoel, P.; De Loor, H.; Augustijns, P.; Kuypers, D.; Meijers, B. Microbiota-derived
phenylacetylglutamine associates with overall mortality and cardiovascular disease in patients with CKD.
J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2016, 27, 3479–3487. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

271. Nie, C.; He, T.; Zhang, W.; Zhang, G.; Ma, X. Branched chain amino acids: Beyond nutrition metabolism.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 954. [CrossRef]

272. Gill, S.R.; Pop, M.; DeBoy, R.T.; Eckburg, P.B.; Turnbaugh, P.J.; Samuel, B.S.; Gordon, J.I.; Relman, D.A.;
Fraser-Liggett, C.M.; Nelson, K.E. Metagenomic analysis of the human distal gut microbiome. Science 2006,
312, 1355–1359. [CrossRef]

273. Pedersen, H.K.; Gudmundsdottir, V.; Nielsen, H.B.; Hyotylainen, T.; Nielsen, T.; Jensen, B.A.H.; Forslund, K.;
Hildebrand, F.; Prifti, E.; Falony, G.; et al. Human gut microbes impact host serum metabolome and insulin
sensitivity. Nature 2016, 535, 376–381. [CrossRef]

274. Newgard, C.B.; An, J.; Bain, J.R.; Muehlbauer, M.J.; Stevens, R.D.; Lien, L.F.; Haqq, A.M.; Shah, S.H.;
Arlotto, M.; Slentz, C.A.; et al. A branched-chain amino acid-related metabolic signature that diﬀerentiates
obese and lean humans and contributes to insulin resistance. Cell Metab. 2009, 9, 565–566. [CrossRef]
275. Zhao, X.; Han, Q.; Liu, Y.; Sun, C.; Gang, X.; Wang, G. The relationship between branched-chain amino acid
related metabolomic signature and insulin resistance: A systematic review. J. Diabetes Res. 2016, 2794591.
[CrossRef]

276. Lotta, L.A.; Scott, R.A.; Sharp, S.J.; Burgess, S.; Luan, J.; Tillin, T.; Schmidt, A.F.; Imamura, F.; Stewart, I.D.;
Perry, J.R.; et al. Genetic predisposition to an impaired metabolism of the branched-chain amino acids and
Risk of type 2 diabetes: A Mendelian randomisation analysis. PLoS Med. 2016, 13, e1002179. [CrossRef]
277. Del Chierico, F.; Vernocchi, P.; Dallapiccola, B.; Putignani, L. Mediterranean diet and health: Food eﬀects on

gut microbiota and disease control. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2014, 15, 11678–11699. [CrossRef]

278. Tosti, V.; Bertozzi, B.; Fontana, L. Health beneﬁts of the Mediterranean diet: Metabolic and molecular

mechanisms. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 2018, 73, 318–326. [CrossRef]

279. Haro, C.; Montes-Borrego, M.; Rangel-Zúñiga, O.A.; Alcala-Diaz, J.F.; Gomez-Delgado, F.; Perez-Martinez, P.;
Delgado-Lista, J.; Quintana-Navarro, G.M.; Tinahones, F.J.; Landa, B.B.; et al. Two healthy diets modulate
gut microbial community improving insulin sensitivity in a human obese population. J. Clin. Endocrinol.
Metab. 2016, 101, 233–242. [CrossRef]

280. Tamanai-Shacoori, Z.; Smida, I.; Bousarghin, L.; Loreal, O.; Meuric, V.; Fong, S.B.; Bonnaure-Mallet, M.;
Jolivet-Gougeon, A. Roseburia spp.: A marker of health. Future Microbiol. 2017, 12, 157–170. [CrossRef]
281. Konikoﬀ, T.; Gophna, U. Oscillospira: A Central, Enigmatic Component of the Human Gut Microbiota.

Trends Microbiol. 2016, 24, 523–524. [CrossRef]

282. Koh, G.Y.; Kane, A.; Lee, K.; Xu, Q.; Wu, X.; Roper, J.; Mason, J.B.; Crott, J.W. Parabacteroides distasonis
attenuates toll-like receptor 4 signaling and Akt activation and blocks colon tumor formation in high-fat
diet-fed azoxymethane-treated mice. Int. J. Cancer 2018, 143, 1797–1805. [CrossRef]

283. Haro, C.; García-Carpintero, S.; Rangel-Zúñiga, O.A.; Alcalá-Díaz, J.F.; Landa, B.B.; Clemente, J.C.;
Pérez-Martínez, P.; López-Miranda, J.; Pérez-Jiménez, F.; Camargo, A.; et al. Consumption of two healthy
dietary patterns restored microbiota dysbiosis in obese patients with metabolic dysfunction. Mol. Nutr.
Food Res. 2017, 61, 1700300. [CrossRef]

284. De Filippis, F.; Pellegrini, N.; Vannini, L.; Jeﬀery, I.B.; La Storia, A.; Laghi, L.; Serrazanetti, D.I.; Di Cagno, R.;
Ferrocino, I.; Lazzi, C.; et al. High-level adherence to a Mediterranean diet beneﬁcially impacts the gut
microbiota and associated metabolome. Gut 2016, 65, 1812–1821. [CrossRef]

285. Martinez-Medina, M.; Denizot, J.; Dreux, N.; Robin, F.; Billard, E.; Bonnet, R.; Darfeuille-Michaud, A.;
Barnich, N. Western diet induces dysbiosis with increased E. coli in CEABAC10 mice, alters host barrier
function favouring AIEC colonisation. Gut 2014, 63, 116–124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

286. Gutiérrez-Díaz,

I.; Fernández-Navarro, T.; Salazar, N.; Bartolomé, B.; Moreno-Arribas, M.V.;
de Andres-Galiana, E.J.; Fernández-Martínez, J.L.; de los Reyes-Gavilaán, C.G.; Gueimonde, M.; Gonzaález, S.
Adherence to a Mediterranean diet inﬂuences the faecal metabolic proﬁle of microbial-derived phenolics in a
Spanish cohort of middle-age and older people. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2016, 65, 586–595. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

41 of 45

287. Louis, P.; Flint, H.J. Diversity, metabolism and microbial ecology of butyrate-producing bacteria from the

human large intestine. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2009, 294, 1–8. [CrossRef]

288. Kitahara, M.; Takamine, F.; Imamura, T.; Benno, Y. Assignment of Eubacterium sp. VPI 12708 and related
strains with high bile acid 7alpha-dehydroxylating activity to Clostridium scindens and proposal of Clostridium
hylemonae sp. nov., isolated from human faeces. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 2000, 50, 971–978. [CrossRef]

289. Atarashi, K.; Tanoue, T.; Oshima, K.; Suda, W.; Nagano, Y.; Nishikawa, H.; Fukuda, S.; Saito, T.; Narushima, S.;
Hase, K.; et al. Treg induction by a rationally selected mixture of Clostridia strains from the human microbiota.
Nature 2013, 500, 232–236. [CrossRef]

290. Mitsou, E.K.; Kakali, A.; Antonopoulou, S.; Mountzouris, K.C.; Yannakoulia, M.; Panagiotakos, D.B.;
Kyriacou, A. Adherence to the Mediterranean diet is associated with the gut microbiota pattern and
gastrointestinal characteristics in an adult population. Br. J. Nutr. 2017, 117, 1645–1655. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
291. De Palma, G.; Nadal, I.; Collado, M.C.; Sanz, Y. Eﬀects of a gluten-free diet on gut microbiota and immune

function in healthy adult human subjects. Br. J. Nutr. 2009, 102, 1154–1160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

292. Bonder, M.J.; Tigchelaar, E.F.; Cai, X.; Trynka, G.; Cenit, M.C.; Hrdlickova, B.; Zhong, H.; Vatanen, T.;
Gevers, D.; Wijmenga, C.; et al. The inﬂuence of a short-term gluten-free diet on the human gut microbiome.
Genome Med. 2016, 8, 45. [CrossRef]

293. Institute of Medicine. Dietary reference intakes: energy, carbohydrates, ﬁber, fat, fatty acids, cholesterol,

protein and amino acids. National Academies Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2005.

294. McRorie, J.W. Evidence-based approach to ﬁber supplements and clinically meaningful health beneﬁts, Part
2: What to look for and how to recommend an eﬀective ﬁber therapy. Nutr. Today 2015, 50, 90–97. [CrossRef]
295. Forouhi, N.G.; Krauss, R.M.; Taubes, G.; Willett, W. Dietary fat and cardiometabolic health: Evidence,

controversies, and consensus for guidelines. BMJ 2018, 361, k2139. [CrossRef]

296. Agans, R.; Gordon, A.; Kramer, D.L.; Perez-Burillo, S.; Ruﬁán-Henares, J.A.; Paliy, O. Dietary fatty acids

sustain the growth of the human gut microbiota. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2018, 84. [CrossRef]

297. Saulnier, D.M.; Riehle, K.; Mistretta, T.; Diaz, M.; Mandal, D.; Raza, S.; Weidler, E.M.; Qin, X.; Coarfa, C.;
Milosavljevic, A.; et al. Gastrointestinal microbiome signatures of pediatric patients with irritable bowel
syndrome. Gastroenterology 2011, 141, 1782–1791. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

298. Jiang, H.; Ling, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Mao, H.; Ma, Z.; Yin, Y.; Wang, W.; Tang, W.; Tan, Z.; Shi, J.; et al. Altered faecal
microbiota composition in patients with major depressive disorder. Brain Behav. Immun. 2015, 48, 186–194.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

299. Williams, K.P.; Gillespie, J.J.; Sobral, B.W.S.; Nordberg, E.K.; Snyder, E.E.; Shallom, J.M.; Dickerman, A.W.

Phylogeny of Gammaproteobacteria. J. Bacteriol. 2010, 192, 2305–2314. [CrossRef]

300. Murphy, E.F.; Cotter, P.D.; Healy, S.; Marques, T.M.; O’Sullivan, O.; Fouhy, F.; Clarke, S.; O’Toole, P.W.;
Quigley, E.M.; Stanton, C.; et al. Composition and energy harvesting capacity of the gut microbiota:
Relationship to diet, obesity and time in mouse models. Gut 2010, 59, 1635–1642. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
301. Daniel, H.; Gholami, A.M.; Berry, D.; Desmarchelier, C.; Hahne, H.; Loh, G.; Mondot, S.; Lepage, P.;
Rothballer, M.; Walker, A.; et al. High-fat diet alters gut microbiota physiology in mice. ISME J. 2014, 8,
295–308. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

302. Vaughn, A.C.; Cooper, E.M.; DiLorenzo, P.M.; O’Loughlin, L.J.; Konkel, M.E.; Peters, J.H.; Hajnal, A.; Sen, T.;
Lee, S.H.; de la Serre, C.B.; et al. Energy-dense diet triggers changes in gut microbiota, reorganisation of
gut-brain vagal communication and increased body fat accumulation. Acta Neurobiol. Exp. (Wars) 2017, 77,
18–30. [PubMed]

303. Iqbal, M.P. Trans fatty acids—A risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Pak. J. Med. Sci. 2014, 30, 194–197.

[CrossRef]

304. De Wit, N.; Derrien, M.; Bosch-Vermeulen, H.; Oosterink, E.; Keshtkar, S.; Duval, C.; de Vogel-van den
Bosch, J.; Kleerebezem, M.; Müller, M.; van der Meer, R. Saturated fat stimulates obesity and hepatic steatosis
and aﬀects gut microbiota composition by an enhanced overﬂow of dietary fat to the distal intestine. Am. J.
Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 2012, 303, G589–G599. [CrossRef]

305. Huang, E.Y.; Leone, V.A.; Devkota, S.; Wang, Y.; Brady, M.J.; Chang, E.B. Composition of dietary fat source
shapes gut microbiota architecture and alters host inﬂammatory mediators in mouse adipose tissue. J. Parenter.
Enter. Nutr. 2013, 37, 746–754. [CrossRef]

306. Patterson, E.; Wall, R.; Fitzgerald, G.F.; Ross, R.P.; Stanton, C.; Ross, R. Health implications of high dietary

omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids. J. Nutr. Metab. 2012, 2012, 1–16. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

42 of 45

307. Nagalingam, N.A.; Kao, J.Y.; Young, V.B. Microbial ecology of the murine gut associated with the development
of dextran sodium sulfate-induced colitis. Inﬂamm. Bowel Dis. 2010, 17, 917–926. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
308. Hajishengallis, G.; Darveau, R.P.; Curtis, M.A. The keystone-pathogen hypothesis. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2012,

10, 717–725. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

309. Hidalgo, M.; Prieto, I.; Abriouel, H.; Cobo, A.; Benomar, N.; Gálvez, A.; Martínez-Canamero, M. Eﬀect of
virgin and reﬁned olive oil composition on gut microbiota. Comparison to butter. Food Res. Int. 2014, 64,
553–559. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

310. Prieto, I.; Hidalgo, M.; Segarra, A.B.; Martínez-Rodríguez, A.M.; Cobo, A.; Ramírez, M.; Abriouel, H.;
Gálvez, A.; Martínez-Canamero, M. Inﬂuence of a diet enriched with virgin olive oil or butter on mouse gut
microbiota and its correlation to physiological and biochemical parameters related to metabolic syndrome.
PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0190368. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

311. Kovatcheva-Datchary, P.; Nilsson, A.; Akrami, R.; Lee, Y.S.; De Vadder, F.; Arora, T.; Hallen, A.; Martens, E.;
Björck, I.; Bäckhed, F. Dietary ﬁbre-induced improvement in glucose metabolism is associated with increased
abundance of Prevotella. Cell Metab. 2015, 22, 971–982. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

312. Lam, Y.Y.; Ha, C.W.; Hoﬀmann, J.M.; Oscarsson, J.; Dinudom, A.; Mather, T.J.; Cook, D.I.; Hunt, N.H.;
Caterson, I.D.; Holmes, A.J.; et al. Eﬀects of dietary fat proﬁle on gut permeability and microbiota and their
relationships with metabolic changes in mice. Obesity 2015, 23, 1429–1439. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

313. Shen, W.; Wolf, P.G.; Carbonero, D.F.; Zhong, W.; Reid, T.; Gaskins, H.R.; McIntosh, M.K. Intestinal
and systemic inﬂammatory responses are positively associated with sulﬁdogenic bacteria abundance in
high-fat-fed male C57BL/6J mice. J. Nutr. 2014, 144, 1181–1187. [CrossRef]

314. Fava, F.; Gitau, R.; Griﬃn, B.A.; Gibson, G.R.; Tuohy, K.M.; Lovegrove, J.A. The type and quantity of dietary
fat and carbohydrate can alter faecal microbiome and short chain fatty acid excretion in a metabolic syndrome
‘at-risk’ population. Int. J. Obes. (Lond.) 2013, 37, 216–223. [CrossRef]

315. Bidu, C.; Escoula, Q.; Bellenger, S.; Spor, A.; Galan, M.; Geissler, A.; Bouchot, A.; Dardevet, D.; Morio, B.;
Cani, P.D.; et al. The transplantation of ω3 PUFA–Altered Gut microbiota of FAT-1 mice to wild-type
littermates prevents obesity and associated metabolic disorders. Diabetes 2018, 67, 1512–1523. [CrossRef]

316. Mozaﬀarian, D.; Katan, M.B.; Ascherio, A.; Stampfer, M.J.; Willett, W.C. Trans fatty acids and cardiovascular

disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 2006, 354, 1601–1613. [CrossRef]

317. Salmerón, J.; Hu, F.B.; Manson, J.E.; Stampfer, M.J.; Colditz, G.A.; Rimm, E.B.; Willett, W.C. Dietary fat intake

and risk of type 2 diabetes in women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2001, 73, 1019–1026. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

318. Morris, M.C.; Evans, D.A.; Bienias, J.L.; Tangney, C.C.; Bennett, D.A.; Aggarwal, N.; Schneider, J.; Wilson, R.S.
Dietary Fats and the risk of incident Alzheimer disease. Arch. Neurol. 2003, 60, 194–200. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
319. Carvalho, G.C.B.C.; Moura, C.S.; Roquetto, A.R.; Barrera-Arellano, D.; Yamada, Á.T.; Dos Santos, A.;
Saad, M.J.A.; Amaya-Farfán, J. Impact of trans-fats on heat-shock protein expression and the gut microbiota
proﬁle of mice. J. Food Sci. 2018, 83, 489–498. [CrossRef]

320. O’ Quinn, P.R.; Nelssen, J.L.; Goodband, R.D.; Tokach, M.D. Conjugated linoleic acid. Anim. Health Res. Rev.

2000, 1, 35–46. [CrossRef]

321. Yang, B.; Chen, H.; Stanton, C.; Ross, R.P.; Zhang, H.; Chen, Y.Q.; Chen, W.; Ross, R. Review of the roles of

conjugated linoleic acid in health and disease. J. Funct. Foods 2015, 15, 314–325. [CrossRef]

322. Marques, T.M.; Wall, R.; O’Sullivan, O.; Fitzgerald, G.F.; Shanahan, F.; Quigley, E.M.; Cotter, P.D.; Cryan, J.F.;
Dinan, T.G.; Ross, R.P.; et al. Dietary trans-10, cis-12-conjugated linoleic acid alters fatty acid metabolism and
microbiota composition in mice. Br. J. Nutr. 2015, 113, 728–738. [CrossRef]

323. Henao-Mejia, J.; Elinav, E.; Jin, C.; Hao, L.; Mehal, W.Z.; Strowig, T.; Thaiss, C.A.; Kau, A.L.; Eisenbarth, S.C.;
Jurczak, M.J.; et al. Inﬂammasome-mediated dysbiosis regulates progression of NAFLD and obesity. Nature
2012, 482, 179–185. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

324. Rinella, M.; Charlton, M. The globalization of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease - Prevalence and impact on

world health. Hepatology 2016, 64, 19–22. [CrossRef]

325. Bajaj, J.S.; Ridlon, J.M.; Hylemon, P.B.; Thacker, L.R.; Heuman, D.M.; Smith, S.; Sikaroodi, M.; Gillevet, P.M.
Linkage of gut microbiome with cognition in hepatic encephalopathy. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.
2011, 302, G168–G175. [CrossRef]

326. Reeves, A.E.; Koenigsknecht, M.J.; Bergin, I.L.; Young, V.B. Suppression of Clostridium diﬃcile in the
gastrointestinal tracts of germfree mice inoculated with a murine isolate from the family Lachnospiraceae.
Infect. Immun. 2012, 80, 3786–3794. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

43 of 45

327. Flemer, B.; Warren, R.D.; Barrett, M.P.; Cisek, K.; Das, A.; Jeﬀery, I.B.; Hurley, E.; O’ Riordain, M.; Shanahan, F.;
O’ Toole, P.W. The oral microbiota in colorectal cancer is distinctive and predictive. Gut 2018, 67, 1454–1463.
[CrossRef]

328. Zhang, C.; Zhang, M.; Wang, S.; Han, R.; Cao, Y.; Hua, W.; Mao, Y.; Zhang, X.; Pang, X.; Wei, C.; et al.
Interactions between gut microbiota, host genetics and diet relevant to development of metabolic syndromes
in mice. ISME J. 2010, 4, 312–313. [CrossRef]

329. Cândido, F.G.; Valente, F.X.; Grze´skowiak, Ł.M.; Moreira, A.P.B.; Rocha, D.M.U.P.; Alfenas, R.C.G. Impact of
dietary fat on gut microbiota and low-grade systemic inﬂammation: Mechanisms and clinical implications
on obesity. Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 2018, 69, 125–143. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

330. Barañano, K.W.; Hartman, A.L. The ketogenic diet: Uses in epilepsy and other neurologic illnesses.

Options Neurol. 2008, 10, 410–419. [CrossRef]

331. Ma, D.; Wang, A.C.; Parikh, I.; Green, S.J.; Hoﬀman, J.D.; Chlipala, G.; Murphy, M.P.; Sokola, B.S.; Bauer, B.;
Hartz, A.M.S.; et al. Ketogenic diet enhances neurovascular function with altered gut microbiome in young
healthy mice. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 6670. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

332. Olson, C.A.; Vuong, H.E.; Yano, J.M.; Liang, Q.Y.; Nusbaum, D.J.; Hsiao, E.Y. The gut microbiota mediates

the anti-seizure eﬀects of the ketogenic diet. Cell 2018, 173, 1728–1741. [CrossRef]

333. McFarland, B.; Dees, K.; Melo, N.; Fehling, S.; Gibson, S.; Yan, Z.; Kumar, R.; Morrow, C.; Benveniste, E.
EXTH-30. Therapeutic beneﬁt of a ketogenic diet through altered gut microbiota in a mouse model of Glioma.
Neuro-Oncology 2017, 19, vi78. [CrossRef]

334. Stafstrom, C.E.; Bough, K.J. The ketogenic diet for the treatment of epilepsy: A challenge for nutritional

neuroscientists. Nutr. Neurosci. 2003, 6, 67–79. [CrossRef]

335. Gibson, J.A.; Sladen, G.E.; Dawson, A.M. Protein absorption and ammonia production: The eﬀects of dietary

protein and removal of the colon. Br. J. Nutr. 1976, 35, 61–65. [CrossRef]

336. Wrong, O. Bacterial metabolism of protein and endogenous nitrogen compounds. In Role of the Gut Flora in

Toxicity and Cancer; Rowland, I.R., Ed.; Academic Press: New York, NY, USA, 1988; pp. 227–262.

337. Macfarlane, G.T.; Macfarlane, S. Bacteria, Colonic fermentation, and gastrointestinal health. J. AOAC Int.

2012, 95, 50–60. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

338. Mu, C.; Yang, Y.; Luo, Z.; Guan, L.; Zhu, W. The colonic microbiome and epithelial transcriptome are altered
in rats fed a high-protein diet compared with a normal-protein diet. J. Nutr. 2016, 146, 474–483. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

339. Holmes, E.; Li, J.V.; Athanasiou, T.; Ashraﬁan, H.; Nicholson, J.K. Understanding the role of gut
microbiome–host metabolic signal disruption in health and disease. Trends Microbiol. 2011, 19, 349–359.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

340. Til, H.; Falke, H.; Prinsen, M.; Willems, M. Acute and subacute toxicity of tyramine, spermidine, spermine,

putrescine and cadaverine in rats. Food Chem. Toxicol. 1997, 35, 337–348. [CrossRef]

341. Neef, A.; Sanz, Y. Future for probiotic science in functional food and dietary supplement development.

Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 2013, 16, 679–687. [CrossRef]

342. Santacruz, A.; Collado, M.C.; García-Valdés, L.; Segura, M.T.; Martín-Lagos, J.A.; Anjos, T.; Martí-Romero, M.;
Lopez, R.M.; Florido, J.; Campoy, C.; et al. Gut microbiota composition is associated with body weight,
weight gain and biochemical parameters in pregnant women. Br. J. Nutr. 2010, 104, 83–92. [CrossRef]
343. Karlsson, C.L.; Önnerfält, J.; Xu, J.; Molin, G.; Ahrné, S.; Thorngren-Jerneck, K. The microbiota of the gut
in preschool children with normal and excessive body weight. Obesity 2012, 20, 2257–2261. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

344. Collado, M.C.; Isolauri, E.; Laitinen, K.; Salminen, S. Distinct composition of gut microbiota during pregnancy

in overweight and normal-weight women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2008, 88, 894–899. [CrossRef]

345. Everard, A.; Lazarevic, V.; Derrien, M.; Girard, M.; Muccioli, G.M.; Possemiers, S.; Van Holle, A.; François, P.;
Schrenzel, J.; Muccioli, G.G.; et al. Responses of gut microbiota and glucose and lipid metabolism to prebiotics
in genetic obese and diet-induced leptin-resistant mice. Diabetes 2011, 60, 2775–2786. [CrossRef]

346. Hansen, C.H.F.; Krych, L.; Nielsen, D.S.; Vogensen, F.; Hansen, L.H.; Sørensen, S.; Buschard, K.; Hansen, A.K.
Early life treatment with vancomycin propagates Akkermansia muciniphila and reduces diabetes incidence in
the NOD mouse. Diabetologia 2012, 55, 2285–2294. [CrossRef]

347. Zhao, F.; Zhou, G.; Xu, X.; Huang, Z.; Li, H. Dietary proteins rapidly altered the microbial composition in rat

caecum. Curr. Microbiol. 2017, 74, 1447–1452. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

44 of 45

348. Zhu, Y.; Lin, X.; Zhao, F.; Shi, X.; Li, H.; Li, Y.; Zhu, W.; Xu, X.; Lu, C.; Zhou, G. Meat, dairy and plant proteins

alter bacterial composition of rat gut bacteria. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 15220. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

349. Reichardt, N.; Duncan, S.H.; Young, P.; Belenguer, A.; Leitch, C.M.; Scott, K.P.; Flint, H.J.; Louis, P. Phylogenetic
distribution of three pathways for propionate production within the human gut microbiota. ISME J. 2014, 8,
1323–1335. [CrossRef]

350. Butteiger, D.N.; Hibbered, A.A.; McGraw, N.J.; Napawan, N.; Hall-Porter, J.M.; Krul, E.S. Soy protein
compared with milk protein in a Western diet increases gut microbial diversity and reduces serum lipids in
golden Syrian hamsters. J. Nutr. 2016, 146, 697–705. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

351. Lopetuso, L.R.; Scaldaferri, F.; Petito, V.; Gasbarrini, A. Commensal Clostridia: Leading players in the

maintenance of gut homeostasis. Gut Pathog. 2013, 5, 23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

352. Spencer, M.D.; Hamp, T.J.; Reid, R.W.; Fischer, L.M.; Zeisel, S.H.; Fodor, A.A. Association between
composition of the human gastrointestinal microbiome and development of fatty liver with choline deﬁciency.
Gastroenterology 2011, 140, 976–986. [CrossRef]

353. Martínez, I.; Perdicaro, D.J.; Brown, A.W.; Hammons, S.; Carden, T.J.; Carr, T.P.; Eskridge, K.M.; Walter, J.
Diet-induced alterations of host cholesterol metabolism are likely to aﬀect the gut microbiota composition in
hamsters. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2013, 79, 516–524. [CrossRef]

354. Watanabe, K.; Igarashi, M.; Li, X.; Nakatani, A.; Miyamoto, J.; Inaba, Y.; Sutou, A.; Saito, T.; Sato, T.;
Tachibana, N.; et al. Dietary soybean protein ameliorates high-fat diet-induced obesity by modifying the gut
microbiota-dependent biotransformation of bile acids. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0202083. [CrossRef]

355. Zhou, X.-L.; Yan, B.-B.; Xiao, Y.; Zhou, Y.-M.; Liu, T.-Y. Tartary buckwheat protein prevented dyslipidemia
in high-fat diet-fed mice associated with gut microbiota changes. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2018, 119, 296–301.
[CrossRef]

356. Nakatani, A.; Li, X.; Miyamoto, J.; Igarashi, M.; Watanabe, H.; Sutou, A.; Watanabe, K.; Motoyama, T.;
Tachibana, N.; Kohno, M.; et al. Dietary mung bean protein reduces high-fat diet-induced weight gain by
modulating host bile acid metabolism in a gut microbiota-dependent manner. Biochem. Biophys. Commun.
2018, 501, 955–961. [CrossRef]

357. Labbé, A.; Ganopolsky, J.G.; Martoni, C.J.; Prakash, S.; Jones, M. Bacterial bile metabolising gene abundance
in Crohn’s, ulcerative colitis and type 2 diabetes metagenomes. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e115175. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

358. Meddah, A.T.T.; Yazourh, A.; Desmet, I.; Risbourg, B.; Verstraete, W.; Romond, M. The regulatory eﬀects
of whey retentate from biﬁdobacteria fermented milk on the microbiota of the Simulator of the Human
Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem (SHIME). J. Appl. Microbiol. 2001, 91, 1110–1117. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
359. Romond, M.-B.; Ais, A.; Guillemot, F.; Bounouader, R.; Cortot, A.; Romond, C. Cell-free whey from milk
fermented with Bifidobacterium breve C50 used to modify the colonic microflora of healthy subjects. J. Dairy Sci.
1998, 81, 1229–1235. [CrossRef]
´
Swi ˛atecka, D.; Narbad, A.; Ridgway, K.P.; Kostyra, H. The study on the impact of glycated pea proteins on
human intestinal bacteria. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2011, 145, 267–272. [PubMed]

360.

361. Beaumont, M.; Portune, K.J.; Steuer, N.; Cerrudo, V.; Dumont, F.; Mancano, G.; Khodorova, N.;
Andriamihaja, M.; Airinei, G.; Benamouzig, R.; et al. Quantity and source of dietary protein inﬂuence
metabolite production by gut microbiota and rectal mucosa gene expression: A randomized, parallel,
double-blind trial in overweight humans. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2017, 106, 1005–1019. [CrossRef]

362. Black, A.P.; Anjos, J.S.; Cardozo, L.; Carmo, F.L.; Dolenga, C.J.; Nakao, L.S.; de Carvalho Ferreira, D.;
Rosado, A.; Carraro Eduardo, J.C.; Marfa, D. Does low-protein diet inﬂuence the uremic toxin serum levels
from the gut microbiota in nondialysis chronic kidney disease patients? J. Ren. Nutr. 2018, 28, 208–214.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

363. Blachier, F.; Beaumont, M.; Portune, K.J.; Steuer, N.; Lan, A.; Audebert, M.; Khodorova, N.; Andriamihaja, M.;
Airinei, G.; Benamouzig, R.; et al. High-protein diets for weight management: Interactions with the intestinal
microbiota and consequences for gut health. A position paper by the My New Gut Study group. Clin. Nutr.
2018. [CrossRef]

364. Cummings, J.H.; Englyst, H.N. What is dietary ﬁbre? Trends Food Sci. Technol. 1991, 2, 99–103. [CrossRef]
365. De Filippo, C.; Di Paolo, M.; Ramazotti, M.; Albanese, D.; Pieracccini, G.; Banci, E.; Miglietta, F.; Cavalieri, D.;
Lionetti, P. Diet, environments, and gut microbiota. A preliminary investigation in children living in rural
and urban Burkina Faso and Italy. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1979. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

45 of 45

366. Lin, A.; Dethlefsen, L.; Haque, R.; Singh, U.; Costello, E.K.; Relman, D.A.; Bik, E.M. Distinct distal gut
microbiome diversity and composition in healthy children from Bangladesh and the United States. PLoS ONE
2013, 8, e53838. [CrossRef]

367. Nakayama, J.; Yamamoto, A.; Palermo-Conde, L.A.; Higashi, K.; Sonomoto, K.; Tan, J.; Lee, Y.-K. Impact of

Westernized diet on gut microbiota in children on Leyte Island. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 174. [CrossRef]
368. Shankar, V.; Gouda, M.; Moncivaiz, J.; Gordon, A.; Reo, N.V.; Hussein, L.; Paliy, O. Diﬀerences in gut
metabolites and microbial composition and functions between Egyptian and U.S. children are consistent
with their diets. mSystems 2017, 2, e00169-16. [CrossRef]

369. Makki, K.; Deehan, E.C.; Walter, J.; Bäckhed, F. The impact of dietary ﬁber on gut microbiota in host health

and disease. Cell Host Microbe 2018, 23, 705–715. [CrossRef]

370. Scott, K.P.; Gratz, S.W.; Sheridan, P.O.; Flint, H.J.; Duncan, S.H. The inﬂuence of diet on the gut microbiota.

371. Englyst, H.N.; Kingman, S.M.; Cummings, J.H. Classiﬁcation and measurement of nutritionally important

372. Flint, H.J.; Scott, K.P.; Duncan, S.H.; Louis, P.; Forano, E. Microbial degradation of complex carbohydrates in

Pharmacol. Res. 2013, 69, 52–60. [CrossRef]

starch fractions. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 1992, 46, S33–S50.

the gut. Gut Microbes 2012, 3, 289–306. [CrossRef]

373. Salyers, A.A.; West, S.E.; Vercellotti, J.R.; Wilkins, T.D. Fermentation of mucins and plant polysaccharides by

anaerobic bacteria from the human colon. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1977, 34, 529–533.

374. Ramsay, A.G.; Scott, K.P.; Martin, C.J.; Rincon, M.T.; Flint, H.J. Cell-associated α-amylases of
butyrate-producing Firmicute bacteria from the human colon. Microbiology 2006, 152, 3281–3290. [CrossRef]
375. Louis, P.; Young, P.; Holtrop, G.; Flint, H.J. Diversity of human colonic butyrate-producing bacteria revealed by
analysis of the butyryl-CoA: Acetate CoA-transferase gene. Environ. Microbiol. 2010, 12, 304–314. [CrossRef]
376. Martínez, I.; Kim, J.; Duﬀy, P.R.; Schlegel, V.L.; Walter, J. Resistant starches types 2 and 4 have diﬀerential
eﬀects on the composition of the faecal microbiota in human subjects. PLoS ONE 2010, 5, e15046. [CrossRef]
377. Venkataraman, A.; Sieber, J.R.; Schmidt, A.W.; Waldron, C.; Theis, K.R.; Schmidt, T.M.; Schmidt, T. Variable
responses of human microbiomes to dietary supplementation with resistant starch. Microbiome 2016, 4, 242.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

378. Vital, M.; Howe, A.; Bergeron, N.; Kraus, R.M.; Jansson, J.K.; Tiedje, J.M. Metagenomic insights into resistant
starch degradation by the human gut microbiota. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2018, 83, e01562-18. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

379. Adamberg, K.; Kolk, K.; Jaagura, M.; Vilu, R.; Adamberg, S. The composition and metabolism of faecal
microbiota is speciﬁcally modulated by diﬀerent dietary polysaccharides and mucin: An isothermal
microcalorimetry study. Benef. Microbes 2018, 9, 21–34. [CrossRef]

380. Chung, W.S.F.; Walker, A.W.; Vermeiren, J.; O’ Sheridan, P.; Bosscher, D.; Garcia-Campayo, V.; Parkhill, J.;
Flint, H.J.; Duncan, S.H. Impact of carbohydrate substrate complexity on the diversity of the human colonic
microbiota. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 2018. [CrossRef]

381. Sen, T.; Cawthon, C.R.; Ihde, B.T.; Hajnal, A.; DiLorenzo, P.M.; De La Serre, C.B.; Czaja, K. Diet-driven
microbiota dysbiosis is associated with vagal remodeling and obesity. Physiol. Behav. 2017, 173, 305–317.
[CrossRef]

382. Magnusson, K.; Hauck, L.; Jeﬀrey, B.; Elías, V.; Humphrey, A.; Nath, R.; Perrone, A.; Bermudez, L.
Relationships between diet-related changes in the gut microbiome and cognitive ﬂexibility. Neuroscience
2015, 300, 128–140. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

383. Di Luccia, B.; Crescenzo, R.; Mazzoli, A.; Cigliano, L.; Venditti, P.; Walser, J.C.; Widmer, A.; Baccigalupi, L.;
Ricca, E.; Iossa, S. Rescue of fructose-induced metabolic syndrome by antibiotics or faecal transplantation in
a rat model of obesity. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0134893. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

