Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

2 of 49

is diet, an element which we can control. Indeed, humans not only feed themselves but also feed
their gut microbiota. These two factors alone (host genetics and diet) largely account for the huge
variability in microbiome composition and functionality which exists among individuals. Indeed,
such is the inter-individual variability that scientists still grapple with what constitutes a “healthy”
microbiota. One feature of a poorly functioning microbiota that is incapable of serving its host to its
full potential is low microbial diversity. Indeed, in Part I of this review we discussed the implications
of low microbial diversity in terms of infection and inﬂammation, the latter of which is associated with
several non-communicable diseases in its chronic form including cardiovascular diseases, diabetes,
allergies and arthritis as examples. Improving microbial diversity can be achieved through healthy
eating and consuming the recommended daily intake for ﬁbre (25 g/day for women and 38 g/day
for men [3]). In Part I of this review we discussed the role of diet in shaping the microbiome with a
particular focus on the Mediterranean diet. Long-term consumption of this diet not only improved
the microbial proﬁle and actions of the gut inhabitants in obese men but also generated physiological
improvements in terms of metabolism [4,5]. In terms of feeding our gut microbiota “long-term” healthy
dietary patterns appear to be the key since short term dietary interventions of this nature have minimal,
if any, impact on microbiota diversity levels [6,7].

Interventions involving probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and dietary ﬁbre also oﬀer opportunities
to “fertilize” our microbiota. Probiotics are deﬁned as ‘live microorganisms, which when administered
in adequate numbers confer a health beneﬁt on the host’ [8]. The following genera represent the
most commonly used probiotics for which health claims have been demonstrated, and within these,
the beneﬁts tend to be strain speciﬁc: Biﬁdobacterium, Lactobacillus, Saccharomyces, Streptococcus,
Enterococcus, Leuconostoc, Pediococcus, Escherichia coli and Bacillus [9]. However, the prerequisite for ‘live
microorganisms’ is subject to some debate, given that a pasteurised derivative of a beneﬁcial strain
exhibited enhanced eﬀects in obese and diabetic mice [10]. The prebiotic deﬁnition has been recently
updated/broadened to “a substrate that is selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring a health
beneﬁt” by the International Scientiﬁc Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics [11]. By modulating the
intestinal microbiota with a high or low level of speciﬁcity and increasing the abundance of beneﬁcial
bacteria, prebiotics can improve host metabolic and physiological parameters. Synbiotics describe the
combination of probiotics and prebiotics which act synergistically. Dietary ﬁbre has been deﬁned as
“the edible part of plants or their extracts, or analogous carbohydrates, that are resistant to digestion in
the human small intestine, and undergoes complete or partial fermentation in the large intestine” [12],
or more simply as “any dietary component that reaches the colon without being absorbed in a healthy
gut” [13].

In this review, we examine initially the consequences of diﬀerent life stages or situations on the
gut microbiota of humans and examine the eﬃcacy of probiotics and prebiotics with a focus on gut
microbiota modulation and/or improvement of symptom(s). We then investigate the potential of
probiotics, prebiotics and dietary ﬁbre to aid in the management of two forms of malnutrition which
are prevalent in both developed and developing countries, namely, overnutrition and undernutrition,
reporting changes conveyed to the gut microbiota and hence host physiology based on data from
human studies. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that an individual’s baseline microbiota
and genetic make-up can inﬂuence the eﬃcacy of such interventions and scientists are beginning to
unravel the discrepancies which exist between human ‘responders’ and ‘non-responders.’ This is
perhaps one of the core elements of precision nutrition through the microbiome whereby it can serve
as a biomarker to predict responsiveness to dietary components and interventions. As an example,
the gut microbiota of an individual can be used to predict postprandial glycemic responses (PPGRs)
to food [14] enabling the design of a precision-tailored individualised diet that helps prevent the
development of metabolic syndrome and its comorbidities, a study which is discussed in more detail
in Section 5. This level of data paves the way for new opportunities in terms of interventions and
microbiome testing at an individual level. Microbiome testing is currently available; thus, we discuss
its feasibility at this moment in time and how it can be streamlined to generate more scientiﬁcally

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

3 of 49

meaningful results. Finally, we propose guidelines for evaluating the scientiﬁc validity of evidence for
providing personalised microbiome-based dietary advice.

2. Impact of Environment and Life Stage on Gut Microbiota and Health and Opportunities for
Optimising Health through Diet, Probiotics and Prebiotics

As science continues to delineate the composition and functionality of life stage-speciﬁc gut
microbiota and deviations from what is considered “normal” or “healthy,” opportunities arise for
dietary and therapeutic interventions which can beneﬁcially modulate the microbiota and result in
translational beneﬁts to host physiology and overall health. In this section, we consider diﬀerent
life stages/situations and the impact of each on the gut microbiota including pregnancy, infancy and
the elderly, especially focusing on those in long-stay care facilities, physical activity, and times of
psychological stress. Dietary recommendations exist for these particular life junctures, but we also
summarise a number of studies which have investigated the potential of probiotics and prebiotics to
beneﬁcially inﬂuence the gut microbiota and ultimately human health.

2.1. Pregnancy

The female body undergoes several changes during pregnancy including an increase in body fat
in early pregnancy which is followed by a decrease in insulin sensitivity later on [15]. The change
in insulin sensitivity has been linked to immunity changes which are proposed to induce metabolic
inﬂammation that is normally associated with obesity [16]. However, during pregnancy these changes
support the growth of the foetus and prepare the mother’s body for lactation [17–19]. Speciﬁc
nutritional recommendations exist for pregnancy, but these can diﬀer depending on eating tradition
and nutritional status of the population [20]. However, the gut microbiota of the pregnant mother has
received increasing attention given that it can inﬂuence the health of both mother and child.

In a study involving 91 pregnant mothers of varying body mass index (BMI) and gestational diabetes,
Koren et al. [21] reported that the gut microbiota changes dramatically from the first trimester (T1) to
the third trimester (T3) even though the diets and energy intake of participants did not change between
sampling times. From T1 to T3, Proteobacteria significantly increased in 69.5% of women and Actinobacteria
increased in 57% of women. As women progressed from T1 to T3, the number of operational
taxonomic units (OTUs) became signiﬁcantly reduced and T1 samples had greater within-sample alpha
phylogenetic diversity than T3 samples irrespective of pre-pregnancy BMI and health status. It has
been suggested that the reduced alpha diversity in T3 may not be due to loss of species but rather
lower relative abundance levels below the sequencing level of detection [22]. The over-represented
OTUs in T1 mainly belonged to the Clostridiales order of the Firmicutes and included butyrate
producers such as Facalibacterium and Eubacterium [21]. Members of the Enterobacteriaceae family and
the Streptococcus genus were over-represented in T3 samples. It is speculated that the increase in
butyrate-producing microorganisms in T1 could increase immunoregulatory T regulatory (T-reg) cells
which may be involved in reducing maternal rejection of the foetal allograft [22]. Interestingly, no
correlations were found between the speciﬁc OTU abundance and the use of antibiotics, probiotics,
diet, previous pregnancies or health markers [21]. The results revealed that T1 microbial diversity is
similar to the microbial diversity observed in non-pregnant women while T3 microbial diversity is
aberrant and persists for one month postpartum. In T3 and just before transmission of the microbiota
to the newborn, each mother has a “purely personal” microbiota which is suggested to have been
selected at the level of each host lineage to ensure maximum development of the developing foetus
and newborn [22]. Transferring T3 microbiota to germ-free mice resulted in increased adiposity and
reduced insulin sensitivity compared to T1 microbiota [21]. The study indicates that the microbial
changes which occur during pregnancy inﬂuence host metabolism and are beneﬁcial for that stage
in life. It is suggested that such changes are driven by the immunological and hormonal changes
which occur during pregnancy [22]. However, a follow-up study conducted in 2015 investigating
temporal and spatial variation of the human microbiota at four body sites (distal gut, vagina, saliva

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

4 of 49

and tooth/gum) did not observe changes in the gut microbiota taxonomic composition and diversity
over the course of pregnancy, reporting relative stability for all four sites [23]. The authors suggest
that the diﬀerences in study ﬁndings may be due to the fact that many mothers in the Koren et al.,
study were in receipt of a dietary intervention between T1 and T3. Further studies investigating the
gut microbiota composition and functionality before, during and post pregnancy in larger cohorts and
from diﬀerent demographics and geographical locations are required.

It is known that excessive weight gain in pregnancy gives way to decreased glucose tolerance
and potentially gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) [24,25]. GDM is associated with adverse
pregnancy outcomes including stillbirth, fetal macrosomia, neonatal metabolic disturbances and
related issues [26,27]. Furthermore, oﬀspring of mothers with GDM are at greater risk of obesity
and diabetes [28]. Medical nutritional therapy is the ﬁrst-line approach but up to 50% of women
fail to regain metabolic control by this means and must avail of insulin treatment or hypoglycemic
drugs [29,30]. Collado et al. [31] investigated the gut microbiota during pregnancy in overweight
and normal weight women and reported that Bacteroides and Staphylococcus were signiﬁcantly higher
in overweight women, and mother’s weight and BMI before pregnancy correlated with higher
levels of Bacteroides, Staphylococcus and Clostridium. In both normal weight and overweight women,
bacterial counts increased from T1 to T3. In another study, overweight or obese mothers presented
gut microbiota with lower alpha diversity compared to lean mothers four days after delivery [32].
Most of the taxa that diﬀerentiated the two groups were higher in the lean mothers and included
Parabacteroides, Lachnospira, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Christensenellaceae family members, Rumincoccus
and Biﬁdobacterium, all of which have shown consistent associations with leanness. These maternal gut
microbiota characteristics were not associated with overall diﬀerences in the infant gut microbiota
over the ﬁrst two years of life but the authors state that the presence of speciﬁc OTUs in the maternal
gut microbiota at the time of delivery increased the chances of being present in the infant gut at
4–10 days old which included some lean-associated taxa. Further research is required to determine the
degree to which these maternal microbial diﬀerences inﬂuence the health of the infant over time. More
recently, Crusell et al. [33] reported that the gut microbiota of pregnant women with GDM diﬀered
substantially from normoglycaemic pregnant women in T3. At phylum level, Actinobacteria was
observed to be more abundant in GDM women, while at genus level Collinsella, Rothia and Desulfovibrio
were more abundant. The normoglycaemic pregnant women showed enrichment of Faecalibacterium,
Anaerotruncus and depletion of Clostridium (sensu stricto) and Veillonella. Regardless of metabolic
status, OTU richness and Shannon index decreased from late pregnancy to postpartum, reﬂecting an
observation of Koren et al. [21]. Christensenella OTUs were associated with higher fasting plasma glucose
concentration, while OTUs assigned to Akkermansia were associated with lower insulin sensitivity.
Eight months after delivery, the microbiota of women with GDM during pregnancy was still aberrant
in terms of composition resembling the aberrant microbiota composition of non-pregnant individuals
with type 2 diabetes. Further studies are required to determine if such microbiota disruption places
these individuals at increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes.

This topic has been further reviewed by Ponzo et al. [29] who also reviewed the potential of
the microbiota as a therapeutic target in GDM and concluded that certain microbiota-accessible
carbohydrates (MACs) could beneﬁcially modulate the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism
in GDM patients. For example, reduced abundance of Bacteriodes by the end of pregnancy was
reported for women with GDM who consumed higher intakes of oligosaccharides and ﬁbre [34].
This is of signiﬁcance given that the genus is associated with overweight in pregnancy [31]. In a
randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial involving 52 pregnant women in T3, consumption of a
synbiotic composed of Lactobacillus sporogenes and a prebiotic mixture daily for nine weeks resulted in
signiﬁcantly decreased serum insulin levels and beneﬁcially impacted other insulin actions but did not
aﬀect fasting plasma glucose levels and serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein [35]. More recently,
a synbiotic composed of fructooligosaccharide (FOS) and a mixture of probiotic lactobacilli did not

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

5 of 49

inﬂuence fasting plasma glucose and insulin resistance/sensitivity indices in women with GDM but
proved eﬀective in reducing blood pressure [36].

Interventions involving probiotics alone have generated conﬂicting results. For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003) [37]. However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes [38]. It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism.
More recently, probiotic supplementation (L. rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium animalis ssp. lactis)
from T2 of pregnancy to week 28 in overweight and obese women did not prevent GDM [39]. These
contradictory results could be due to a number of factors including diﬀerences in probiotics and doses
used, timing and duration of supplementation as well as diﬀerences in host demographics, genetics
and baseline gut microbiota of each individual.

Probiotic intervention during pregnancy has been shown to be beneﬁcial for reducing the risk of
preeclampsia, a serious condition associated with hypertension and proteinuria that can result in poor
pregnancy outcome and is reported to be one of the leading causes of maternal death globally [40,41].
In 2011, a study conducted in Norway reported that regular consumption of milk-based probiotics
could be linked with lower risk of preeclampsia in ﬁrst-time expectant women [40]. A follow-on
observational cohort study involving a large sample number of women from both urban and rural
regions of Norway of varying ages and socioeconomic status reported that probiotic milk intake in
late pregnancy was signiﬁcantly associated with lower risk of preeclampsia [42]. In the same study,
probiotic milk intake during early pregnancy (but not before or during late pregnancy) was signiﬁcantly
associated with lower risk of preterm delivery. However, in the case of both observations, causality
could not be established.

Probiotic administration during pregnancy has also generated promising results in terms of
treating bacterial vaginosis (as reviewed by Sohn and Underwood, [43]), and infectious mastitis [44,45]
and the positive eﬀects of probiotic consumption during pregnancy rendered to the oﬀspring,
including prevention of atopic dermatitis [46], eczema and rhinoconjunctivitis [47], have been
conﬁrmed in meta-analysis (17 studies, 4,755 children) and a large population-based cohort study
(40,614 children), respectively.

Given such promising results, the impact of maternal probiotic supplementation on breast
milk composition and the infant microbiome is an important area of research. Breast milk has its
own microbiota dominated by members of the staphylococcal and streptococcal genera, but also
harbors lactic acid bacteria, biﬁdobacteria and members of Propionibacterium [48]. These microbes
originate from the mother’s skin, gut and the infant’s oral mucosa [49]. The transfer of maternal
gut microbiota to breast milk is proposed to occur through an entero-mammary route via dendritic
cells and macrophages which selectively traﬃc commensal microorganisms [49–51]. Despite this,
maternal probiotic supplementation with a fermented milk containing L. rhamnosus GG, Lactobacillus
acidophilus La-5 and Bif. animalis ssp.
lactis Bb-12 four weeks before the expected due date until
three months after birth while breastfeeding resulted in the presence of these bacteria in breast milk
of only a small subgroup of women and, thus, breastfeeding by probiotic supplemented women is
unlikely to be a source of these probiotics in infants [49]. However, a previous study using the same
strains reported that probiotic supplementation of pregnant women from 36 weeks of gestation to
three months postnatally during breastfeeding reduced the cumulative incidence of atopic dermatitis by
almost 40% among oﬀspring at two years of age [52]. Interestingly, a higher prevalence of L. rhamnosus
GG was found in stool samples of these infants up to three months of age [53]. Simpson et al. [49]
suggest that since breastfeeding does not appear responsible for ongoing transfer of L. rhamnosus
GG to infants, early transfer of L. rhamnosus GG may be suﬃcient to ensure stable colonization in
the infant or alternatively children are receiving continued transfer of L. rhamnosus GG from their

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

6 of 49

mother via a diﬀerent route. However, infants from mothers who had consumed the probiotic milk
and who did not develop atopic dermatitis during the two years follow-up had reduced T helper
(Th) 22 cells at three months of age which may help explain the preventative eﬀects of maternal
probiotic supplementation on atopic dermatitis [54]. Consumption of a multistrain probiotic product
(VSL#3) by women during late pregnancy and lactation resulted in a signiﬁcant increase in both
lactobacilli and biﬁdobacteria in colostrum and mature milk in women who underwent vaginal delivery
compared with the placebo group, however, analsysis of the bacterial strains and species revealed
that the probiotic microorganisms did not pass from the maternal gut to the mammary gland [55].
No signiﬁcant diﬀerences in biﬁdobacteria and Lactobacillus numbers were observed in colostrum
and mature milk from mothers who underwent caesarian section from either the probiotic or placebo
groups. The authors suggest that a systemic eﬀect may be responsible for the probiotic-dependent
modulation of breask milk microbiota in vaginally delivering women.

Interestingly, Kuitunen et al. [56] reported that probiotic supplementation of mothers from week 36
of gestation until delivery altered the immunologic composition of breast milk by signiﬁcantly increasing
IL-10 and signiﬁcantly decreasing casein IgA antibodies, however, no strong and consistent associations
were observed between breast milk antibodies and cytokines and allergy development in children up to
the age of ﬁve. Baldassarre et al. [57] also reported that high-dose probiotic supplementation during late
pregnancy and lactation inﬂuenced breast milk cytokine patterns, signiﬁcantly increasing IL-6 levels in
colostrum and IL-10 and TGF-β1 levels in mature breast milk. Furthermore, sIgA levels were higher in
newborns whose mothers consumed the high-dose probiotic. A recent study reported that infants
born to mothers with depressive symptoms had lower levels of faecal sIgA which could presdispose
such infants to higher risk for allergic disease [58]. Thus, probiotic supplementation to mothers
during pregnancy could circumvent such low IgA levels in newborns. In contrast, Quin et al. [59]
reported that maternal probiotic administration during breastfeeding (from birth to introduction of
solid food) did not alter breast milk immune markers. In the same study infants whose mothers
were self-administering probiotics also received probiotics directly which resulted in an increase in
infant faecal sIgA levels. However, the probiotic group had higher incidences of mucosal-associated
illnesses as toddlers. As a consequence the authors caution against probiotic supplementation during
infancy until rigorous controlled follow-up studies on their safety and eﬃcacy have been performed
although the study itself has a number of limitations including the fact that varying brands and doses
of probiotics were consumed by participants.

Studies investigating the impact of prebiotics and synbiotics on breast milk composition and
subsequently the infant microbiome are limited. However, Kubota et al. [60] reported that FOS intake
(4 g, twice daily) by pregnant and lactating women increased levels of the cytokine IL-27 in breast milk.
The consequence of this phenomenon for the onset of allergic disorders in children requires further
investigation. A synbiotic consisting of diﬀerent probiotic strains and FOS administered to lactating
mothers for 30 days signiﬁcantly increased breast milk IgA and TGF-β2 levels and the incidence
of diarrhoea in infants whose mother’s were consuming synbiotic was signiﬁcantly decreased [61].
Synbiotic supplementation to lactating mothers for 30 days was also reported to positively impact
mineral levels in breast milk (zinc, copper, iron, magnesium and calcium) which were shown to
decrease signiﬁcantly in the placebo group and the synbiotic also positively impacted infant growth
(weight for age Z score and height for age Z score) [62]. Selenium (Se) is an essential trace elemnent for
infants and is found in breast milk although its levels can vary depending on the mother’s geographical
location due to diﬀerences in soil content and hence its accumulation in cereals which are eaten by
humans and animals [63]. Taghipour et al. [64] investigated if synbiotic supplementation consisting of
FOS and diﬀerent probiotic strains could increase breast milk Se levels. However, 30 days of synbiotic
consumption had no impact on Se levels in breast milk.

Further studies are warranted to fully understand the impact of probiotic/prebiotic/synbiotic
supplementation on breast milk composition at the microbiological, immunological and bioactive

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

7 of 49

molecule levels, and to determine the consequence of these changes for both mother and infant in the
long term.

2.2. Infants

The infant gut microbiota plays an essential role in establishing the gut mucosal barrier, education
of the immune system and in preventing enteric pathogen infection [65]. In Part I of this review, we
described the development of the infant gut microbiota from birth onwards and while several factors
have been shown to inﬂuence its composition (host genetics, gestational age, birth mode, feeding
regime, antibiotic exposure), the gut microbiota of full-term, vaginally-delivered, exclusively breast-fed
infants is generally recognised as representing the healthy microbiota [66,67]. Indeed, owing to its
complex mixtures of bioactive components, which change in concentration, structure and function
over lactation, human milk is considered the “gold standard” for early life nutrition [68].

In the case of preterm infants, bacterial exposure occurs earlier than normal and antibiotics are
frequently administered. Very preterm infants (<32 weeks) and extremely preterm infants (<28 weeks)
are at signiﬁcant risk of sepsis, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), feeding intolerance and mortality [69,70].
The preterm infant microbiota has been shown to be lacking in the health-promoting Biﬁdobacterium
species and as a consequence of antibiotic administration can be dominated by Enterobacteriaceae,
Enterococcus and Staphylococcus [71]. It is also characterised by a lack of microbial diversity [72] and has
an increased abundance of Proteobacteria [67]. In a study investigating the distortions in intestinal
microbiota development and late onset sepsis in preterm infants, Mai et al. [73] reported that distortions
rather than enrichment of potential pathogens were associated with late-onset sepsis. Likewise, no
speciﬁc pathogen has been identiﬁed as responsible for NEC but inappropriate colonisation of the
preterm gut has been deemed the causative factor [74]. Preterm infants with NEC have been reported
to harbour increased relative abundances of Proteobacteria and decreased relative abundance of
Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes prior to the onset of NEC [75,76].

In a recent article, Athalye-Jape and Patole [69] reported that over 25 systematic reviews and
meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials involving ~12,000 participants revealed that probiotics
signiﬁcantly reduce the risk of all-cause mortality, NEC ≥ Stage II, late onset sepsis and feeding
intolerance in preterm infants and suggest providing probiotics as a standard prophylaxis for preterm
infants. In order to gain widespread acceptance, Aceti et al. [77] have pointed out ongoing gaps in the
literature and potential directions for future research in relation to probiotic use in preterm infants
which include an understanding of the impact of feeding (formula, mother’s milk, donor’s milk) on
the relationship between probiotic supplementation and clinical outcome, eﬃcacy of multi-strain
probiotics versus single-strain probiotics, safety issues and long-term consequences for such a vulnerable
population. However, given the evidence to date it could be argued that it “may be unethical not to
treat” with probiotics to reduce the risk of NEC in preterm infants.

Prebiotics have also proven eﬃcacious for preventing adverse health outcomes in preterm infants.
A meta-analysis involving 18 randomized controlled trials consisting of 1322 participants revealed that
those in receipt of prebiotics showed signiﬁcant decreases in incidence of mortality, sepsis, hospital
stay duration and time to full enteral feeding; however, there were no diﬀerences between control and
intervention groups in relation to the morbidity rate of NEC and feeding intolerance [78]. A small
number of studies have investigated the eﬃcacy of synbiotics in relation to NEC in preterm infants [79].
In a study involving 400 very low birth weight infants, the rate of NEC was reduced by 2% in the
group receiving the probiotic Bif. lactis, but was reduced by 4% in the group receiving Bif. lactis plus
the prebiotic inulin compared to a rate of 12% in the prebiotic group and 18% in the control group [80].
The prebiotic FOS in combination with a probiotic mixture consisting of L. acidophilus, Biﬁdobacterium
longum, Biﬁdobacterium biﬁdum, and Streptococcus thermophilus signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of
NEC in preterm infants fed breast milk (2 incidences out of 100) compared to the control group who
received breast milk alone (10 incidences out of 100) [81]. In the same study the incidences of Stage
II and Stage III (severe) NEC were nil in the test group compared to 5 and 2 cases in the control

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

8 of 49

group, respectively. The incidence of sepsis was also signiﬁcantly lower in the test group. Likewise,
Nandhini et al. [82] reported a 50% reduction in the incidence of NEC of all stages in preterm infants
in receipt of a synbiotic consisting of a mix of biﬁdobacteria and lactobacilli and FOS, however, the
severity of NEC, sepsis and mortality were not inﬂuenced by synbiotic administration. Despite the
apparent success of synbiotics in this small number of studies, a drawback of synbiotics is the diﬃculty
predicting selectivity and speciﬁcity and the subsequent mechanisms of action; thus, future studies
should focus on unravelling how each component in the mixture, and the mixture as a whole, exerts its
(cooperative) eﬀects [79].

Caesarean section has been shown to inﬂuence the development and composition of the gut
microbiota. In a study involving 192 breast-fed infants, Hill et al. [67] reported that the gut microbiota
of the full-term caesarean section infant has a signiﬁcantly increased faecal abundance of Firmicutes
and signiﬁcantly lower abundance of Actinobacteria compared to the full-term, vaginally delivered
infant after the ﬁrst week of life. A decreased abundance of biﬁdobacteria has also been reported for
six week old infants born by caesarean section [83]. However, the latter study also revealed that this
disturbance could be partially restored by exclusive breastfeeding. Likewise, Hill et al. [67] reported
that breastfeeding had a beneﬁcial impact on the gut microbiota of infants delivered by caesarean
section. With this in mind, it is not surprising that probiotic supplementation to expectant mothers
and their infants (for three months) born by caesarean section or receiving antibiotics “beneﬁted” only
breast-fed infants in terms of increasing biﬁdobacteria and reducing Proteobacteria and Clostridia [84].
Probiotic-supplemented infant formula has been on the market in Europe and Asia for over two
decades [85]. Such formulae have been shown to result in infant faecal microbiota proﬁles closer to
breast-fed infants [86]. A systematic review of randomized controlled trials up to September 2016
concluded that probiotic-supplemented formulae do not raise safety concerns for healthy infants with
regard to growth and adverse eﬀects, however, while some beneﬁcial eﬀects are possible (reduction in
number of episodes of gastrointestinal infection, diarrhoea and respiratory symptoms, lower frequency
of colic or irritability and better growth) the review concluded there was a lack of robust clinical
evidence to recommend their routine use albeit this could be due to the small amount of data on
speciﬁc probiotic strain(s) and their outcomes rather than an authentic lack of an eﬀect [87]. With this
in mind, a meta-analysis conducted in 2018 investigated the eﬃcacy of a single probiotic strain, namely
Lactobacillus reuteri DSM17398 to treat infant colic [88]. Four double-blind trials with 345 colic infants
were included. The study concluded that the probiotic strain in question is eﬀective for treating
colic but only in breast-fed infants. With regard to formula-fed infants, the intervention eﬀects were
insigniﬁcant, however, the authors state that there were insuﬃcient data to make conclusions and thus
there is a critical need for more rigorous randomized controlled trials with this strain in formula-fed
infants suﬀering from colic.

The most common prebiotics used in infant formulae include a 9:1 mixture of short chain
galactooligosaccharides (GOS) and long chain FOS [89]. A systematic review of 41 randomized controlled
clinical trials concluded that feeding prebiotic-supplemented infant formulae to healthy infants is safe in
terms of adverse effects and growth [89]. The primary beneficial effect was stool softening but no robust
evidence exists to recommend prebiotic-supplemented formulae. As in the case of probiotics, the lack of
sufficient data on specific prebiotics was possibly responsible for this conclusion.

A systematic review involving three randomized controlled clinical trials (n = 475) on the
eﬃcacy of synbiotic-supplemented formulae in 2012 concluded that while synbiotics increased stool
frequency they had no impact on stool consistency, colic, spitting up/regurgitation, crying, vomiting
or restlessness [90]. However, a recent study showed that amino acid-based formula supplemented
with Biﬁdobacterium breve M-16V and FOS over 26 weeks was capable of signiﬁcantly increasing faecal
percentages of biﬁdobacteria and reducing the Eubacterium/Clostridium coccoides group in infants with
non-IgE-mediated cow’s milk allergy (n = 35) [91]. Interestingly, reported ear infections and use of
dermatological medication were also signiﬁcantly lower in the synbiotic group. A synbiotic starter
lactis and FOS fed to 280 infants of age 0.89 months over a three-month
formula containing Bif.

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

9 of 49

period signiﬁcantly reduced infantile crying and colic, functional constipation and daily regurgitation
compared to the reported median prevalence for a similar age according to the literature [92]. Feeding
a synbiotic-supplemented formula to infants who had been completely weaned from breast milk
to infant formula at 28 days of age until 12 months of age resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction in the
cumulative incidence of lower respiratory tract infections compared to the prebiotic group but as the
conﬁdence interval of the estimate was wide, the authors suggest uncertainty with regards to this
result [93]. The synbiotic in this case consisted of FOS, GOS and Lactobacillus paracasei ssp. paracasei
F19. Feeding caesarean-born infants formula supplemented with Bif. breve M-16V and FOS and GOS
from birth until week 16 generated a biﬁdogenic eﬀect that lasted until week 8, thus emulating the
gut physiological environment of vaginally-delivered infants, and reduced Enterobacteriaceae until
week 12 [94].

These studies suggest that probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics have a beneﬁcial role to play in
infant nutrition, and particularly in vulnerable infants including preterm and those born by caesarean
section or for those for who breast milk is not an option. However, in order to incite greater conﬁdence
in both the medical profession and the public in general there is a need for large cohort, possibly
multi-centre randomized controlled trials that focus on speciﬁc prebiotics, probiotics and synbiotics
which assess their impacts and modes of action on the gut microbiota, infant health and wellness and
the long-term outcomes for these parameters.

2.3. Elderly in Nursing Homes

In Part I of this review we discussed the elderly (> 65 years) microbiota which is generally
characterised by a reduction in microbial diversity, a decrease in species associated with short chain
fatty acid (SCFA) production, especially butyrate, an increase in opportunistic pathogens [95,96] and
even greater inter-individual variation than observed in adults [97]. The gut microbiota of those
in long-stay residential care facilities is signiﬁcantly less diverse than individuals of the same age
group who reside within the community and the increased frailty observed in long-stay care residents
correlates with loss of community-associated microbiota [98]. In the same study, the distinct microbiota
groups identiﬁed as a result of residence location also overlapped with diet where individuals in long
stay care facilities tended to consume high fat, low ﬁbre diets versus the low fat, high ﬁbre diet of
community dwellers. Furthermore, scientists are hypothesizing that the gut microbiota may inﬂuence
sarcopenia through a gut-muscle axis, a syndrome which aﬀects older individuals (recently reviewed
by Ticinesi et al. [99,100]). Sarcopenia is described as depletion of muscle mass and reduction of muscle
performance which both result from anabolic resistance or boosted protein catabolism [101]. It is
distinct from frailty although the two may overlap [102]. To date, there have been no studies in humans
investigating the microbiome of sarcopenic individuals; however, Siddharth et al. [103] identiﬁed
a distinct faecal microbiota composition associated with age-related muscle wasting in rats which
revealed a reduction in several taxa reported to have pro-anabolic and anti-inﬂammatory properties.
Interestingly, the SCFA butyrate was shown to have beneﬁcial eﬀects on muscle mass in ageing mice,
partially or wholly protecting them from muscle atrophy [104], and the human commensal L. reuteri
inhibited muscle wasting in mice [105].

Osteosarcopenic obesity describes an impairment in muscle, bone and adipose tissue which occurs
in elderly individuals in conjunction with an altered gut microbiota, especially in those in long-term
care facilities [106]. The increased adiposity associated with osteosarcopenic obesity can manifest
as overt clinical overweight/obesity, redistribution of fat around visceral organs or the inﬁltration of
fat into muscle and bone tissues, thus impairing their function [106]. It is more prevalent in older
women than older men and women with osteosarcopenic obesity have decreased strength, balance
and mobility compared to those with obesity, osteoporotic obesity and sarcopenic obesity alone [107].
The gut microbiota has been shown to regulate bone mass in mice [108] and the probiotic L. reuteri was
reported to protect menopausal ovariectomized mice from bone loss [109].

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

10 of 49

In Part I of this review, we discussed the obese gut microbiota and the link between the gut
microbiota and energy storage in the body [2]. Given the reported links between the gut microbiota,
muscle, bone, and adipose tissues, such studies suggest that the gut microbiota could be a therapeutic
target in the treatment of sarcopenia and osteosarcopenic obesity and aid in the prevention of associated
outcomes such as increased risk for falls, fractures, long-term frailty and immobility [106]. This is
an exciting area in microbiome research and may have profound implications for the ageing process.
The gut-muscle axis is further discussed in Section 2.4 (Physical Activity).

While the nutritional needs of the elderly do not vary signiﬁcantly from younger adults with
similar caloric expenditure and anthropometric and physiological features, elderly individuals are at
greater risk of malnutrition [110,111] owing to a number of factors outlined in Part I of this review [2].
Indeed, it has been reported that approximately 30% of individuals over 50 years of age do not consume
the RDA for protein [110,112]. Other nutrients which fall short in this demographic include ﬁbre, iron,
vitamins D, B6 and B12 and folic acid [110,113].

Salazar et al. [110] suggest that nutritional strategies for the elderly should not just focus on
nutritional deﬁciencies but also consider the intestinal microbiota and immune function. With this is
mind, the following have been considered relevant targets for interventions in this age group: (1) reduced
microbial diversity, (2) low-levels of butyrate-producing bacteria, (3) imbalanced proportions and
reduced levels of SCFA, (4) increased incidence of Clostridium diﬃcile infection, (5) higher levels of
lactate, (6) methane, and (7) branched chain fatty acids (valeric, isovaleric, isobutyric and caproic
acids) [95,97,110,111,114–118]. For the purpose of this review, we have focused on the impact of
interventions in this age group involving ﬁbre, prebiotics, probiotics and synbiotics.

Bahgurst et al. [119] investigated the long-term (12-month) effects of moderate fibre supplementation
(an increase in fibre intake of ~70%) in a nursing home population, of mean age 83 years, with an emphasis
on bowel function, body weight and mineral status. As well as improving bowel function, the ﬁbre
supplementation improved nutrient density of the diet without increasing body weight. In a more
recent study, potato intake in 32 institutionalised elderly subjects (aged between 76 and 95 years) was
directly associated with faecal SCFA concentrations, and apple intake was directly associated with
propionate concentration [120]. In the same study, cellulose intake was associated with acetate and
butyrate concentrations. While the sample size was low, the approach provides an opportunity to
generate improved diets with an emphasis on increasing speciﬁc or total SCFAs.

Probiotic consumption in the elderly cohort has been shown to improve certain immune parameters
as well as beneﬁcially modulating the intestinal microbiota. The immuno-stimulating probiotic Bif.
lactis HN019 enhanced immunity in elderly subjects aged 68 to 84 years following consumption of
either 5 × 1010 microorganisms/day or 5 × 109 microorganisms/day for three weeks [121]. Daily
consumption of a probiotic mixture composed of Lactobacillus gasseri KS-13, Bif. biﬁdum G9-1 and Bif.
longum MM-2 for three weeks by elderly participants (70 ± 1 year) increased IL-10 concentrations
compared to the placebo [122]. In addition, 48% of participants in the probiotic group had increased
faecal biﬁdobacteria compared to 30% in the placebo which was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (P < 0.05).
Moreover, 55% of participants in the probiotic group had increased lactic acid bacteria and 52% had
decreased E. coli compared to 43% and 27% in the placebo group, respectively, representing signiﬁcant
diﬀerences (P < 0.05). Bacterial groups matching the butyrate producer F. prausnitzii were also more
abundant in stool samples from the probiotic group. The overall changes resembled those observed in
healthy younger populations. Gao et al. [123] reported a similar ﬁnding in relation to F. prausnitzii levels
following long-term probiotic consumption by an elderly cohort. While consumption of a probiotic
cheese containing L. rhamnosus HN001 and L. acidophilus NCFM by an elderly population increased the
numbers of said probiotics in faeces, there was no eﬀect on faecal immune markers [124]. However,
the probiotic cheese was associated with a trend towards lower C. diﬃcile counts, an eﬀect which was
statistically signiﬁcant in the subpopulation that were found to harbor C. diﬃcile at the beginning of the
study. Likewise, consumption of one probiotic-containing biscuit (Bif. longum Bar33 and Lactobacillus
helveticus Bar13) per day for one month was found to revert the age-related increase in the following

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

11 of 49

opportunistic pathogens, C. diﬃcile, Clostridium cluster XI, Clostridium perfringens, Enterococcus faecium,
and the enteropathogenic genus Campylobacter in elderly volunteers [125]. Consumption of a fermented
oat drink containing Bif. longum 46 and Bif. longum 2C by elderly nursing home residents for six months
signiﬁcantly increased faecal biﬁdobacteria levels [126]. In an attempt to understand how probiotic
consumption in the elderly promotes health, Eloe-Fadrosh et al. [127] reported the impact of a single
probiotic strain (L. rhamnosus GG) on the structure and functional dynamics of the gut microbiota in
healthy elderly individuals following consumption of 1010 colony forming units (cfu) twice daily for
28 days. The probiotic modulated the gut microbiota transcriptome. In particular, Biﬁdobacterium genes
involved in ﬂagellar motility, chemotaxis and adhesion were increased following probiotic consumption,
and gene expression in the butyrate producers Ruminococcus and Eubacterium was also increased.
This suggests that this single probiotic strain has the potential to promote anti-inﬂammatory pathways.
Prebiotic supplementation in the elderly has generated promising results in terms of beneﬁcial
alterations to the gut microbiota and also frailty syndrome. Daily consumption of 8 g of short chain FOS
for four weeks by healthy elderly individuals led to increases in faecal biﬁdobacteria counts [128]. Daily
doses of GOS at 5.5 g for four weeks in an elderly group resulted in signiﬁcant increases in biﬁdobacteria
and bacteroides and immune alterations which included lower IL-1β levels and higher C-reactive
protein, IL-10, IL-8 and natural killer cell activity [129]. Most recently, prebiotic supplementation
which involved a mix of prebiotics at 20 g/day for 26 weeks to frail elderly subjects did not induce
global changes in gut microbiota alpha and beta diversity but the abundance of certain bacterial
taxa increased including Ruminococcaceae and the levels of the chemokine CXCL11 were signiﬁcantly
reduced [130]. This particular chemokine is produced in response to microbial antigens [131]; although
the authors state that the health/clinical beneﬁts are not clear. Buiges et al. [132] investigated the impact
of prebiotic supplementation on frailty syndrome in elderly individuals in a randomized, double-blind
clinical trial. In this case, the prebiotic in question, Darmocare Pre
which is a mix of inulin and
FOS did not signiﬁcantly modify the overall rate of frailty but did signiﬁcantly improve two frailty
criteria, exhaustion and handgrip, following 13 weeks of daily consumption. The authors suggest that
therapeutics aimed at the gut microbiota–muscle–brain axis should be considered for the treatment
of frailty syndrome. More recently, the same prebiotic was tested in nursing home residents and
of the 28 participants in the intervention group, 25 revealed reduced frailty index levels where the
moderately/severe frail participants showed the greatest reduction [133].

®

In a prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized single centre study involving
40 healthy elderly subjects (aged between 60–80 years), intake of a synbiotic combination of soluble
corn ﬁbre with L. rhamnosus GG for three weeks tended to promote innate immunity in elderly women
and 70- to 80-year-old volunteers (male and female) by increasing natural killer cell activity [134].
Interestingly, the pilus-deﬁcient version of L. rhamnosus GG, termed L. rhamnosus GG-PB12, with the
soluble corn ﬁbre increased natural killer cell activity in older volunteers compared to soluble corn ﬁbre
alone. The combination of L. rhamnosus GG-PB12 with the corn ﬁbre also decreased C-reactive protein,
an indicator of inﬂammation in the body. Total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol was also reduced in
individuals who had presented with elevated levels following intake of L. rhamnosus GG with the
soluble corn ﬁbre. The genus Parabacteroides was signiﬁcantly increased as a result of either strain
with the corn ﬁbre. Soluble corn ﬁbre alone and soluble corn ﬁbre with L. rhamnosus GG increased
levels of Ruminococcaceae incertae sedis. Decreases in the levels of Ruminococcaceae and Parabacteroides
have been pinpointed as the main microbial shifts associated with ageing in mice [135,136]. Slight
reductions were observed in Oscillospira (positively associated with leanness and health [137]) and
the sulphate-reducing Desulfovibrio following L. rhamnosus GG with soluble corn ﬁbre consumption,
whereas only Desulfovibrio decreased following intake of L. rhamnosus GG PB12 with corn ﬁbre.

These studies indicate that dietary interventions involving ﬁbre, prebiotics and probiotics in the
elderly, and especially those in residential care, can induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota with
potential to improve immune function and gut homeostasis. The gut microbiota of healthy younger
adults is considered a suitable reference for the elderly microbiota assuming the younger population

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

12 of 49

shares the same geographical location, historical past and social habits/lifestyle etc. [111,138]. Thus,
further studies are required for this cohort to ﬁnd interventions which can improve the relevant targets
of the intestinal microbiota and immune function and generate meaningful physiological changes
which translate to improved general health and well-being (e.g., frailty reduction, improved mobility,
reduced risk of fracture and falls, improved sleep and overall energy levels etc).

2.4. Physical Activity

The impact of exercise on the gut microbiota has only begun to be studied in recent years. In a
ﬁrst study of its kind, Clarke et al. [139] reported increased microbial diversity in a professional rugby
team of a preseason camp compared to age-matched and BMI-matched controls. The gut microbiota
diﬀerences observed in these athletes correlated with protein consumption and creatine kinase, a
marker of extreme exercise. In fact, protein accounted for 22% of the total energy intake of athletes
compared to 16% in the low BMI control group and 15% in the high BMI control group. A follow-on
study investigating the metabolic activity of the gut microbiota of these athletes revealed several
diﬀerences compared to the control groups [140]. Pathways involved in amino acid biosynthesis,
carbohydrate metabolism and antibiotic biosynthesis were increased in athletes. SCFA levels were
also increased in the athletic group. Of note, athletes also excreted higher levels of the uremic toxin,
trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO), which has been discussed in Part 1 of this review [2] as it has been
proposed as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease in humans. However, the authors state that the
implications of this result are limited and require further study. As expected, the athletes consumed
more calories and macronutrients than the control groups. Fibre intake was also higher in the athletic
group compared to the high BMI control group.

In order to better understand the impact of exercise on the gut microbiota, Estaki et al. [141]
analysed the microbiota of healthy individuals with varying levels of ﬁtness and reported that
cardiorespiratory ﬁtness correlated with increased microbial diversity in healthy humans. Six weeks of
endurance exercise by overweight women was reported to alter the gut metagenome with an increase in
the health-promoting Akkermansia and a decrease in Proteobacteria [142]. Notably, diets did not change
during the six weeks control period before the exercise intervention or during the six-week exercise
period. Despite the changes to the gut microbiota, systemic metabolites and body composition were not
greatly aﬀected. Likewise, ﬁve-weeks of endurance exercise by elderly men was found to signiﬁcantly
decrease the relative abundance of C. diﬃcile and signiﬁcantly increase Oscillospira which correlated with
beneﬁcial changes in several cardiometabolic risk factors [143]. Changes in food intake did not diﬀer
between control and exercise periods. Allen et al. [144] reported that six weeks of endurance exercise
increased faecal SCFA concentrations in lean but not obese participants and the metabolic changes
were associated with changes in bacterial taxa and genes capable of producing SCFAs. Interestingly,
the exercise-induced changes were reversed when exercise ceased. While these studies demonstrate
the beneﬁcial impacts of exercise on the gut microbiota, exercising to the point of exhaustion may
induce detrimental changes [99]. For example, intense military training undertaken by soldiers for
four days resulted in increased intestinal permeability and changes in microbiota composition which
included increased alpha diversity and an increase in the abundance levels of potentially pathogenic
taxa (e.g., Staphylococcus, Peptostreptococcus, Peptoniphilus, Acidaminococcus, and Fusobacterium) at the
expense of several taxa thought to protect against pathogen invasion (e.g., Bacteroides, Faecalibacterium,
Collinsella, and Roseburia) [145]. Thus, as suggested by Ticinesi et al. [99], the impact of exercise on the
gut microbiota may depend on the intensity and duration, however other confounders should also
be considered including diet, nutrient intake and body composition parameters, a topic that requires
further investigation.

We have already mentioned the gut–muscle axis hypothesis in Section 2.3 (Elderly in Nursing
Homes) and indeed it has been proposed that the gut-microbiota axis may be two-way with exercise
inﬂuencing the microbiota and the microbiota inﬂuencing muscle [99], the latter of which was observed
in the case of muscle-wasting in rats [103]. Ticinesi et al. [99] provided a list of hypothesised pathways

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

13 of 49

linking gut microbiota modulation to muscle function and include (1) bioavailability of dietary proteins
and speciﬁc amino acids, (2) vitamin synthesis such as folate, B12 and riboﬂavin, (3) biotransformation
of nutrients such as polyphenols and ellagitannins, (4) intestinal mucosa permeability, (5) bile acid
biotransformation, (6) SCFA synthesis. In the case of intestinal dysbiosis, changes in these pathways
may have negative consequences for skeletal muscle function. The interaction between the gut
microbiota and the immune system is also another factor in the gut–muscle axis hypothesis [99]
given the purported links between inﬂammation and age-related muscle wastage [146]. Further
studies in this ﬁeld are clearly warranted to understand the complex relationships between all
these factors. Ultimately, this should help in the design of strategic exercise programmes, diets and
probiotic/prebiotic interventions which are optimised for life stage ensuring a healthy gut microbiota
for optimal skeletal-muscle function and host health.

Nowadays probiotic supplementation is common practice for many athletes involved in diﬀerent
sports and is generally taken to reduce incidence of infection, especially upper respiratory tract infections
and gastrointestinal problems. Upper respiratory illness is reported to account for 35%–65% of illness
presentations to sports medicine clinics [147]. These infections are generally caused by common
respiratory viruses, allergic responses to aeroallergens and exercise-related trauma to respiratory
epithelial membrane integrity [147]. Gastrointestinal disorders in athletes can occur during or after
intense physical activity and include bloating, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, and blood in the stool
and may be caused by inadequate blood supply to the digestive tract during exercise [148,149].
Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease (GERD) can also be exacerbated by intense exercise [150].

Interestingly, probiotic supplementation in the form of Lactobacillus casei Shirota to men and women
(n = 32) involved in endurance-based physical activities for four months of the winter signiﬁcantly
reduced the incidence of upper respiratory tract infections compared to the placebo group and the
proportion of placebo subjects who experienced one or more weeks with upper respiratory tract
infection symptoms was 36% higher than those taking the probiotic [151]. Salivary IgA was also
signiﬁcantly higher in the probiotic group, an eﬀect which was not evident at baseline. In a later
study with the same probiotic strain, ﬁve months of supplementation to university athletes and game
players (n = 243) had no impact on upper respiratory tract infection symptoms which the authors state
could be attributable to the low incidence of such symptoms during the study [152]. The probiotic
was associated with plasma cytomegalovirus and Epstein Barr virus antibody titres which could be
interpreted as an improvement in immune status. Consumption of heat-killed Lactococcus lactis JCM
805, also known as LC-Plasma, for 13 days was shown to relieve the morbidity and symptoms of
upper respiratory tract infections in male athletes performing high-intensity exercise [153]. This was
achieved by activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) which are known to play a signiﬁcant role
in viral infection. Furthermore, the bacterial strain decreased fatigue accumulation during consecutive
high intensity exercise. A later study in mice showed that LC-Plasma-activation of pDC in turn
attenuates the concentration of fatigue controlled cytokine TGF-β and muscle degenerative genes [154].
Consumption of a probiotic powder containing L. rhamnosus GG and Bif. animalis ssp. lactis BB12
reduced the duration and severity of upper respiratory tract infections in college students and fewer
school days were missed [155].

®

Administration of Lactobacillus fermentum (PCC

) to male (n = 64) and female (n = 35) competitive
cyclists for 11 weeks generated mixed results in terms of gastrointestinal illness and lower respiratory
illness symptoms [156]. Males experienced a reduction in the severity of gastrointestinal illness
which became more pronounced as training load increased. The load of lower respiratory illness
symptoms was also reduced in males compared with the placebo but actually increased in females on
the probiotic. Probiotic numbers increased 7.7-fold more in males compared to an unclear 2.2-fold
increase in females. Thus it was concluded that L. fermentum could be a useful nutritional adjunct for
exercising males. Consumption of Lactobacillus salivarius for four months in the spring by both men
and women (n = 66 in total) participating in endurance-based physical activities had no impact on
incidence of upper respiratory tract infections or mucosal immune markers [157]. While probiotic

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

14 of 49

supplementation for one month did not have any eﬀect on severity of upper respiratory tract infections
or gastrointestinal episodes in 30 elite rugby union players, it did signiﬁcantly reduce the number of
participants experiencing such symptoms and tended to reduce the number of illness days compared to
placebo [158]. Consumption of a multispecies probiotic for three months in the winter by trained athletes
(n = 33) reduced the incidence of upper respiratory tract infections compared to the placebo and reduced
exercise-induced tryptophan-degradation rates [159]. Despite this, probiotic supplementation did not
improve athlete performance. The probiotic L. helveticus Lafti L10 signiﬁcantly reduced the duration of
upper respiratory tract infection episodes in 39 elite athletes during 14 weeks of supplementation in
the winter but did not inﬂuence severity of symptoms or incidence [160]. A follow-on study indicated
that the probiotic modulated mucosal and humoral immunity in elite athletes [161]. The probiotic
was also shown to exert certain antioxidant potential in elite athletes following three months of
supplementation but further research is warranted to conﬁrm this eﬀect [162]. Interestingly, based
on the results of a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials comparing probiotics with placebo
to prevent acute upper respiratory tract infections in children, adults and older people (n = 3720),
Hao et al. [163] concluded that probiotics were better than placebo for reducing the incidence of such
episodes, the duration of episodes as well as cold-related school absence and antibiotic use. A recent
systematic review of the eﬀects of probiotic supplementation on physically active individuals (n = 1680,
athletes and non-athletes) concluded that positive eﬀects were reported for several outcomes including
respiratory tract infection, markers of immunity and gastrointestinal symptoms; however, the study
failed to identify standardised supplementation protocols owing to the distinct protocols employed
across the studies, as well as diﬀerent measured outcomes and small sample size [164].

In terms of performance, supplementation with certain probiotics has been shown to have a beneficial
effect by presumably influencing host and nutrient metabolism. For example, taking Lactobacillus plantarum
TWK10 for six weeks resulted in significantly higher endurance performance and glucose content in
a maximal running treadmill test in eight adults compared to the placebo group (n = 8) such that the
authors suggest it could have potential as an aerobic exercise supplement [165]. L. plantarum PS128 was
reported to have beneficial effects on high-intensity, exercise-induced oxidative stress, inflammation and
performance in a study involving triathletes [166].

Very few studies have investigated the impact of prebiotics on athletes. A multi-strain probiotic/
prebiotic antioxidant intervention for 12 weeks in recreational athletes prior to a long-distance
triathlon was shown to reduce plasma endotoxin unit levels and maintain intestinal permeability [167].
Gastrointestinal symptoms such as cramping, diarrhoea, nausea and abdominal pain etc. were also
signiﬁcantly lower in the test group compared with the placebo during the intervention.

In eﬀorts to generate probiotic and prebiotic supplements for physically active individuals, the
type and intensity of exercise performed should be taken into account considering that exercise exerts
its own eﬀects on the gut microbiota and may even inﬂuence the eﬃcacy of the intervention, although
this has yet to be investigated. Furthermore, marketing of such supplements should make clear
the intended beneﬁcial eﬀects which range from improved immunity against particular illnesses
to improved performance. In this regard, double-blind, randomized controlled, multi-centre trials
involving larger cohorts of participants with standardised supplementation protocols are required.

In terms of diet, athletes tend to consume more protein than the average population and an
early research review in 1984 examining the importance of protein for athletes concluded that athletic
individuals should consume 1.8 to 2.0 g of protein/kg of body weight/day which is approximately
twice that recommended for sedentary individuals [168]. However, the studies reviewed in Part I of
this review [2] in relation to the impact of protein on the gut microbiota clearly showed that dietary
source is a critical factor with animal- and plant-derived protein sources generating heterogeneous
responses in terms of gut microbiota composition and functionality. Further research is warranted
to fully comprehend the consequences of these alterations but Blachier et al. [169] concluded that
some caution should be exercised around high protein diets given their eﬀects on the gut microbiota

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

15 of 49

following a review of the topic. In this regard, probiotic supplements geared at the sports industry
should be investigated with respect to typical dietary extremes undertaken by athletic individuals.

2.5. Stress

In a recent report by a UK charity called the Mental Health Foundation, stress is deﬁned as the
“body’s response to pressures from a situation or life event” [170]. According to this report almost 74%
of people surveyed from a total of 4169 adults felt stressed to the point of being overwhelmed or unable
to cope at some point of 2018. Stress can be caused by a variety of events and life situations. Some
common stress triggers include workplace related stress, exam stress, and illness. Exam stress can be
a major issue for students, negatively aﬀecting sleep patterns and academic performance [171,172].
With regard to work-related stress, a report compiled by the UK Health and Safety Executive stated
that over half a million people suﬀer from work-induced stress, depression or anxiety, resulting in a
loss of 15.4 million working days over 2017 and 2018 [173]. Workplace stress is also the major source of
stress for adults in the USA [174]. Implementation of work-place policies and procedures is critical in
tackling these issues. However, we now know that quality of diet, speciﬁc dietary components and
supplements can aid in the treatment or prevention of depression, anxiety and stress symptoms [175].
Opie et al. [176] compiled a number of dietary recommendations for the prevention of depression
based on current available evidence which included increased consumption of fruits, vegetables,
wholegrain cereals, legumes, nuts and seeds, high consumption of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids, limited intake of processed foods and replacement of unhealthy foods with nutritious wholesome
foods. In addition, the study recommended following traditional dietary patterns such as the Japanese,
Norweigan or Mediterranean diet, the latter of which has been discussed in detail in Part I of this
review in terms of its beneﬁcial impacts on the gut microbiota and host health [2]. Thus, the impact
of diet on the gut microbiota undoubtedly inﬂuences our emotional state. Even in adults without
diagnosed mood disorder, gut microbes have been shown to be connected to mood (depression, anxiety
and stress) and these relationships diﬀer by sex and are inﬂuenced by dietary ﬁbre intake [177]. It is
now known that the gut microbiota communicates with the brain along the brain–gut–microbiota axis
as evidenced from preclinical and some clinical studies [178]. In Part I of this review [2], we discussed
the ability of the gut microbiota to produce neurochemicals including gamma amino butyric acid
(GABA), a major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain [179], as well as its involvement in serotonin
biosynthesis [180] and tryptophan metabolism [181].

The impact of psychological stress on the gut microbiota has been reviewed recently by Karl et al. [182].
To date, most studies have focused on rodent models, many of which have demonstrated a reduction in
Lactobacillus following exposure to stress [183–187]. Interestingly, exam stress in humans has been shown
to reduce gut lactic acid bacteria [188] and Taylor et al. [177] reported an inverse relationship between
Anxiety scale scores and Biﬁdobacterium in females, while in males an inverse relationship was observed
between depression-scale scores and Lactobacillus. Thus probiotic and prebiotic interventions have the
potential to impact the gut-brain axis with beneﬁcial consequences for mood and stress behaviours.

Chronic fatigue syndrome is characterised by persistent and relapsing tiredness and 97% of
patients report neurological disturbances resulting in a variety of emotional symptoms of which
anxiety and depression are the most common [189,190]. In a pilot study involving 39 chronic fatigue
syndrome patients intake of L. casei strain Shirota for two months resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in
anxiety symptoms compared with the control group (P = 0.01) [189]. Lactobacillus and biﬁdobacteria
counts were also signiﬁcantly increased as a result of probiotic administration. A probiotic mix
consisting of L. helveticus R0052 and Bif. longum R0175 was found to relieve psychological distress
signiﬁcantly in healthy human volunteers (n = 55) participating in the clinical trial as measured by
the Hopkins Symptom Checklist, the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, the Coping Checklist
and urinary free cortisol [191]. Black Depression Inventory scores were reduced in volunteers (n = 20)
with major depressive disorder following eight weeks of supplementation with a probiotic mixture
consisting of L. acidophilus, L. casei and Bif. biﬁdum [192]. Several metabolic parameters were also

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

16 of 49

improved including serum insulin levels and homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance.
Interestingly, probiotic administration has also proven beneﬁcial in the case of postpartum symptoms of
depression. In this case, 423 women participated in the trial at 14–16 weeks of gestation and consumed
L. rhamnosus HN001 daily until six months postpartum [193]. Mothers in the probiotic group reported
signiﬁcantly lower depression scores and anxiety scores compared to mothers in the placebo group in
the postpartum period.

In terms of exam stress, consumption of fermented milk containing L. casei Shirota for eight weeks
by healthy medical students (n = 24) until the day before examination resulted in signiﬁcantly reduced
salivary cortisol levels and plasma tryptophan levels compared with the placebo group (n = 23)
and two weeks after the examination the probiotic group had signiﬁcantly higher faecal serotonin
levels [194]. Furthermore, during the pre-examination period at 5–6 weeks, the rate of subjects
experiencing common abdominal and cold symptoms and total number of days experiencing such
symptoms was signiﬁcantly lower in the probiotic group. In rats exposed to water avoidance stress
(WAS), the same strain signiﬁcantly suppressed WAS-induced increases in plasma corticosterone and
signiﬁcantly reduced the number of corticotropin releasing factor–expressing cells in the paraventricular
nucleus [195]. In the same study, intragastric administration of the strain, in a dose-dependent manner,
stimulated gastric vagal aﬀerent activity.

Modulation of the gut microbiota with prebiotics has also generated promising results in terms
of emotional symptoms. For example, consumption of the prebiotic trans-GOS for 12 weeks at
7 g/day (but not 3.5 g/day) signiﬁcantly improved anxiety scores in individuals suﬀering from irritable
bowel syndrome (IBS) compared with the placebo group [196]. Faecal biﬁdobacteria were signiﬁcantly
increased in the prebiotic group at 3.5 g/day (P < 0.005) and 7 g/day (P < 0.001). Intake of Bimuno
-GOS
for three weeks signiﬁcantly reduced salivary cortisol awakening response in healthy volunteers [197].
In the same study, this particular prebiotic resulted in decreased attentional vigilance to negative
versus positive information in a dot-probe task. Consumption of short-chain FOS at 5 g/day for
4 weeks signiﬁcantly increased faecal biﬁdobacteria in IBS patients and signiﬁcantly reduced anxiety
scores [198].

®

While these studies highlight the beneﬁts of particular probiotics, prebiotics and their combinations
(summarized in Table 1), the beneﬁcial eﬀects rarely impacted every subject in a test group, albeit
they impacted enough to generate statistical signiﬁcance in most cases. One possible reason is the
quality and quantity of an individual’s baseline microbiota. In the following sections, this becomes
very apparent whereby studies have begun to disentangle the disparities between responders and
non-responders in terms of gut microbiota composition and behaviour, particularly in response to
ﬁbre. Moving forward, it is possible that future interventions will have to be individually-tailored
following a comprehensive analysis of an individual’s gut microbiome through microbiome testing,
the feasibility of which is discussed in Section 6.

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

17 of 49

Table 1. Potential beneﬁts of probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and ﬁbre on diﬀerent life stages.

Life Stage

Probiotics

Prebiotics/Oligosaccharides

Synbiotics

Fibre

Pregnancy/Lactating Mother

— Reduce incidence of aGDM [37]
— Reduce risk of preeclampsia [40–42]
— Lower risk of preterm delivery [42]
— Prevent infectious mastitis [44]
— Reduce incidence of bacterial vaginosis [43]
— Alter immunologic composition of breast milk [56,57]

— Reduce abundance of faecal

— Decrease serum insulin levels and positively

Bacteroides in women with
GDM [34]

— Alter immunologic composition of

breast milk [60]

inﬂuence other insulin actions [35]

— Reduce blood pressure in women with GDM [36]
— Alter immunologic composition of breast milk [61]
— Positively impact mineral levels in breast milk [62]

— Reduce abundance of

faecal Bacteroides in
women with
GDM [34]

Infant

— Reduce risk of all-cause mortality, bNEC ≥ Stage II, late
onset sepsis and feeding intolerance in preterm
infant [69]

— Increase faecal biﬁdobacteria, reduce Proteobacteria and
Clostridia in breast-fed caesarean born infants [84]

— Treat infant colic in breast fed infants [88]

— Decrease incidence of mortality,

sepsis, hospital stay duration and
time to full enteral feeding in
preterm infant [78]

— Soften infant stool in formula-fed

healthy infants [89]

Adult–Physical Activity

reduce number of illness days [158]

— Improve immunity [147,151,153,161,164]
— Reduce incidence of dURTI [147,151,159,164]
— Relieve morbidity and symptoms of URTI [153]
— Reduce severity of gastrointestinal illness and reduce

load of lower respiratory illness symptoms in male
competitive cyclists [156]

— Reduce number of athletes experiencing URTI and

— Reduce duration of URTI [160]
— Decrease fatigue accumulation during consecutive high

— Reduce exercise-induced tryptophan degradation

intensity exercise [153]

rates [159]

— Improve endurance performance [165]
— Alleviate oxidative stress, increase plasma-branched
amino acids and elevate exercise performance [166]

— Reduce incidence of NEC in preterm infant [80–82]
— Reduce incidence of sepsis in preterm infants [81]
— Increase stool frequency in formula-fed infants [90]
— Beneﬁcially modulate gut microbiota, reduce
incidence of ear infections and use of
dermatological medication in infants with
non-cIgE-mediated cow’s milk allergy on amino
acid based formula [91]

— Reduce infantile crying and colic, functional

constipation and daily regurgitation in infants on
starter formula [92]

— Reduce cumulative incidence of lower respiratory

tract infections in weaned infants [93]

— Beneﬁcially modulate gut microbiota in caesarean

born infants [94]

— Reduce plasma endotoxin unit levels, maintain
intestinal permeability, reduce gastrointestinal
symptoms [167] Note: Study used
probiotic/prebiotic antioxidant intervention.

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

18 of 49

Life Stage

Probiotics

Synbiotics

Fibre

Adult–Stress

— Decrease anxiety symptoms in eCFS patients [189]
— Relieve psychological stress in healthy volunteers [191]
— Reduce Black Depression Inventory scores in individuals

with major depressive disorder [192]

— Reduce postpartum depression symptoms [193]
— Reduce salivary cortisol and plasma tryptophan levels in
healthy medical students at examination time and
increase faecal serotonin levels after exams [194]
— Reduce rate of subjects experiencing abdominal and cold

symptoms and number of days of such symptoms in
pre-exam period [194]

— Beneﬁcially modulate gut microbiota [189]

Elderly

— Improve immunity [121,122]
— Beneﬁcially modulate gut microbiota [122–127]

Table 1. Cont.

Prebiotics/Oligosaccharides

— Improve anxiety scores in

individuals with fIBS [196,198]

— Beneﬁcially modulate gut
microbiota [196,198]

— Reduce salivary cortisol awakening
response in healthy volunteers [197]

— Decrease attentional vigilance to
negative versus positive
information in a dot-probe
task [197]

— Beneﬁcially modulate gut
microbiota [128,129]
— Immunomodulation [129]
— Improve exhaustion and

handgrip [132]

— Reduce frailty index levels [133]

aGDM, gestational diabetes mellitus; bNEC, necrotizing enterocolitis; cIgE, immunoglobulin E; dURTI, upper respiratory tract infection; eCFS, chronic fatigue syndrome; fIBS, irritable
bowel syndrome; gLDL, low density lipoprotein.

— Beneﬁcially modulate gut microbiota, improve

innate immunity and reduce total and
gLDL-cholesterol [134]

— Improve bowel

function, improve
nutrient density of
diet [119]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

19 of 49

3. Modifying the Microbiota as A Target for Preventing Over/Undernutrition—Potential of
Probiotics, Prebiotics and Dietary Fibre

Undernutrition and overnutrition represent forms of malnutrition which manifest due to
imbalances in energy and/or nutrient intake [199]. Symptoms of undernutrition include wasting
(low weight-for-height), stunting (low height-for-age) and underweight (low weight-for-age) [199].
Overnutrition results from overfeeding, deﬁned as the supply of energy containing nutrients in excess
of requirements resulting in fat storage and other undesirable outcomes as discussed in Part I of this
review [2]. Overweight and obesity can coexist with undernutrition, a phenomenon described as
the “double burden” of malnutrition by the WHO. Thirteen percent of the world’s population aged
18 years and over are obese [200]. According to the WHO, 462 million adults are underweight and
around 45% of deaths among children under ﬁve years of age are linked to undernutrition [199]. Given
the link between the gut microbiota and energy regulation in the body, probiotics, prebiotics or ﬁbre
may provide eﬀective dietary strategies to restore energy homeostasis through strategic manipulation
of the gut microbiota.

3.1. Probiotics

Several clinical trials have investigated the impact of probiotics on overnutrition in humans.

The studies are discussed in this section and are summarized in Table 2.

Table 2. Impact of probiotics on overnutrition in human intervention studies.

Probiotic

Subject Information

Duration

Eﬀect

Reference

Bif. breve B-3

Adult volunteers, aBMI 24
to 30 kg/m2

12 weeks

Bif. breve B-3

Pre-obese adults (25 ≤ BMI
< 30 kg/m2)

12 weeks

Bif. animalis ssp.
lactis

Overweight and obese
adults

6 months

— Lowered fat mass
— Improved some blood

parameters related to liver
function and inﬂammation

— Lowered body fat mass and

percent body fat

— Decreased triglyceride levels
and improved bHDL
cholesterol from baseline

— Controlled body fat mass and
reduced weight circumference
and food intake
— Lowered circulating
zonulin levels

[201]

[202]

[203]

[204]

L. gasseri
BNR17

Systematic review of
human studies

-

— Reduced weight gain

aBMI, body mass index; bHDL, high density lipoprotein.

The bacterium Bif. breve B-3 was used in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving adult volunteers with BMI ranging from 24 to 30 kg/m2 [201]. According to the WHO, BMI
values from 25.0 to 29.9 represent a pre-obesity nutritional status, while a BMI of 30 falls into class
I obesity [205]. In the trial, participants received either placebo (n = 25) or a B-3 capsule (n = 19)
(approximately 5 × 1010 cfu/day) for 12 weeks [201]. Consumption of the B-3 capsule signiﬁcantly
lowered fat mass by week 12. Improvements in some blood parameters related to liver function and
inﬂammation were observed and signiﬁcant correlations could be made between these and the changed
fat mass indicating that Bif. breve B-3 has the potential to improve metabolic disorders. Since some of
the participants in this trial were receiving medication for diabetes, hypertension or hyperlipidemia,
another randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was recently performed with B-3 involving
80 pre-obese adults (25 ≤ BMI < 30) without any disorders [202]. While fat area signiﬁcantly increased
in the placebo group at weeks 4 and 8, no changes were observed in the B-3 group. Indeed, body fat
mass and percent body fat were signiﬁcantly lower in the B-3 group at weeks 8 and 12. The probiotic

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

20 of 49

strain slightly decreased triglyceride levels and improved HDL cholesterol from baseline suggesting
potential for the strain to reduce body fat in healthy, pre-obese individuals. In overweight and obese
adults, six months consumption of Bif. animalis ssp. lactis 420 (1010 cfu/day) was shown to control body
fat mass and reduce weight circumference and food intake [203]. Interestingly, circulating zonulin,
a potential marker of intestinal permeability, remained consistently lower in the probiotic group,
and changes in zonulin signiﬁcantly correlated with changes in body fat mass. In addition, changes
in high-sensitivity C-reactive protein resembled those of zonulin. Thus, the authors speculate that
the probiotic strain exerted its control on body fat mass via circulating zonulin levels and hence gut
permeability and by attenuating low-grade inﬂammation.

Certain probiotic strains have been shown to enhance weight gain to such an extent that they have
gained popularity as alternatives to antibiotic growth promoters in animal feed where they are often
referred to as direct fed microbials (DFMs) [206]. The mechanisms responsible for this eﬀect include
promotion of a favourable gut microbiota, enhanced digestion and absorption of nutrients, altered
gene expression in pathogenic microorganisms, and the various mechanistic actions associated with
colonisation resistance including immunomodulation [206]. A comparative meta-analysis on the eﬀects
of Lactobacillus species on weight gain in humans and animals involving 17 randomized clinical trials in
humans, 51 studies on farm animals and 14 experimental models concluded that diﬀerent Lactobacillus
species exert diﬀerent eﬀects on weight change and these eﬀects are host-speciﬁc, however, L. acidophilus
administration results in signiﬁcant weight gain in humans and animals [207]. A more recent systematic
review assessing the potential of probiotic diets to signiﬁcantly inﬂuence weight change in obese and
non-obese individuals revealed that the eﬀects were species and strain-speciﬁc [204]. For example,
while L. gasseri BNR17 reduced weight gain, L. gasseri L66-5 promoted it. A systematic review on the
eﬀects of probiotics on child growth involving 12 studies, 10 of which were randomized controlled
trials, revealed that probiotics have the potential to improve child growth in children in developing
countries and in under-nourished children [208].

Kwashiorkar is a form of severe acute malnutrition (SAM) resulting from inadequate nutrient
intake coupled with additional environmental insults [209]. By studying Malawian twin pairs during
the ﬁrst three years of life, of which half of the twin pairs remained well-nourished, 43% became
discordant and 7% manifested concordance for acute malnutrition, Smith et al. [209] revealed the
gut microbiota as a causative factor since the kwashiorkor microbiome with Malawian diet induced
marked weight loss when transplanted to mice. Million et al. [210] reported a dramatic depletion of
obligate anaerobes in SAM. Indeed, while Enterococcus faecalis, E. coli and Staphylococcus aureus were
consistently enriched in cases of SAM, several species of the following families were consistently
depleted: Bacteroidaceae, Eubacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae, and Ruminococcaceae, along with dramatic
depletion of Methanobrevibacter smithii. Overall, total bacterial number was decreased and faecal redox
potential increased. Such microbes have been termed the healthy mature anaerobic gut microbiota
(HMAGM) [211]. Indeed, the ﬁrst step in gut microbiota alterations associated with SAM is early
depletion of the pathogen inhibitor Bif. longum, followed later on by absence of the HMAGM resulting
in deﬁcient energy harvest, immune protection and vitamin biosynthesis which are associated with
malabsorption, systemic pathogen invasion and diarrhoea [211]. In this regard, Alou et al. [212] used a
combination of culturomics and metagenomics to analyse the stool samples of healthy children and
kwashiorkor patients to identify potential probiotics to treat SAM. This resulted in the identiﬁcation
of 12 species in healthy children which were absent in kwashiorkor patients. These 12 potential
probiotics represent an array of possible functions including antibacterial potential, polysaccharide
fermentation, butyrate production, antioxidant potential or simply common members of the gut
microbiota from healthy humans and healthy breast-fed infants. The authors propose that this cocktail
of probiotics oﬀers a deﬁned, reproducible, safe and convenient alternative to faecal transplantations
for the treatment of SAM in children.

Furthermore, it is important to mention that probiotic-mediated beneﬁcial eﬀects may not require
live cells. Indeed, Plovier et al. [10] reported that a puriﬁed membrane protein from Akkermansia

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

21 of 49

muciniphila, or the pasteurised bacterium, improved metabolism in diabetic and obese mice. Indeed,
pasteurisation enhanced its capacity to reduce dyslipidemia, fat mass development and insulin
resistance. This ﬁnding suggests that the beneﬁcial eﬀects of diﬃcult-to-cultivate microorganisms may
still be harnessed for therapeutic use by using dead or injured cells.

3.2. Prebiotics

Parnell and Reimer [213] investigated the impact of daily oligofructose supplementation (21 g/day)
in healthy adults with BMI > 25 for 12 weeks in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Compared
to the control group, which experienced an increase in weight gain (0.45 ± 0.31 kg), the prebiotic
group experienced a 1.03 ± 0.43 kg loss in body weight. Glucose regulation was also improved
in the prebiotic group who self-reported a reduction in caloric intake. The authors suggest that
the suppression in ghrelin expression and enhanced peptide YY (PYY) expression observed in the
prebiotic group partly contributes to the reduction in energy intake. In overweight/obese children,
aged 7–12 years, daily consumption of 8 g oligofructose-enriched inulin for 16 weeks signiﬁcantly
reduced body weight z-score (reduced by 3.1%), percent body fat (2.4% reduction), and percent trunk
fat (3.8% reduction) compared to children who received the placebo who experienced a slight increase
in all 3 parameters [214]. The prebiotic group also showed a signiﬁcant decrease in IL-6 levels from
baseline (15% lower), while the placebo group showed an increase (by 25%). Serum triglycerides were
also signiﬁcantly reduced (by 19%) in the prebiotic group. Gut microbiota analysis revealed signiﬁcant
increases in Biﬁdobacterium species and decreases in Bacteroides vulgatus in the prebiotic group. Levels
of primary bile acids increased in the placebo group but remained unchanged in the prebiotic group
over the 16-week period. However, twelve weeks of oligofructose consumption at the same quantity
in obese and overweight children, aged 7–11 years (8 g prebiotic/day) and aged 12–18 years (15 g/day)
in a double-blind placebo-controlled trial had no impact on body weight and body fat [215].

Consumption of inulin-type fructans by obese women at 16 g/day for 3 months led to gut
microbiota changes which included an increase in Biﬁdobacterium and F. prausnitzii, both of which
negatively correlated with serum lipopolysaccharides [216] The prebiotic also decreased Bacteroides
intestinalis, Bac. vulgatus and Propionibacterium which was associated with a slight decrease in fat mass
and with phosphatidylcholine and plasma lactate levels. The authors suggest that the modest changes
in host metabolism indicate a role for inulin-type fructans to support dietary advice with regards obesity
and related metabolic disorders. In a later randomized, double-blind, parallel, placebo controlled trial,
obese women consuming the same prebiotic at the same concentration for three months had signiﬁcantly
lower total SCFAs, acetate and propionate (that positively correlated with BMI), as well as signiﬁcantly
lower fasting insulinemia and homeostasis model assessment (indicator of insulin resistance) compared
to the placebo group [217]. The following species were signiﬁcantly increased in the prebiotic group
at the end of the three months, Biﬁdobacterium adolescentis, Biﬁdobacterium pseudocatenulatum and Bif.
longum, the latter of which negatively correlated with serum lipopolysaccharide and endotoxin.

Synbiotics have shown some promise towards improving growth outcomes in healthy and
malnourished children, although there is a paucity of clinical trials in this area. For example,
Malawian children, aged 5 to 168 months, suffering from SAM who received ready-to-use-therapeutic-food
(RUTF) with a synbiotic for approximately 33 days (median) in a double-blind efficacy randomized
controlled trial showed a trend towards reduced outpatient mortality when compared to those who
received RUTF alone (P = 0.06) [218]. Despite this, the study showed no differences between both groups
in terms of nutritional cure, weight gain, time to cure, and prevalence of clinical symptoms including
respiratory issues, fever and diarrhoea. One year consumption of a probiotic- (Bif. lactis, 1.9 × 1010 cfu/day)
and prebiotic-fortified milk by Indian preschool healthy and stunted children resulted in increased
weight gain (0.13 kg/year, P = 0.02) and reduced risk of being anemic and iron deficient (P = 0.01)
compared to children receiving control milk [219]. A synbiotic consisting of Bif. longum, L. rhamnosus
and inulin and FOS fed to healthy 12-month-old toddlers in milk for one year significantly improved
weight gain compared to those receiving control milk (difference of 0.93 g/day) [220]. The weight

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

22 of 49

gain resulted in a change in z-score weight-for-age closer to the WHO Child Growth Standard. Fecal
lactobacilli and enterococcal counts were also significantly increased in the synbiotic group between 12
and 16 months. A six-month synbiotic supplementation to children with failure to thrive, a common
problem in children in underdeveloped countries, resulted in a significant increase in weight gain
compared to control children [221]. Indeed, by the end of the six-month trial, the mean weight of the
control group was 11.760 ± 0.17 kg which increased from 10.75 ± 0.16 kg initially, while the mean weight
of the synbiotic group was 12.280 ± 0.190 kg, increasing from 10.25 ± 0.2 kg initially. More clinical trials
investigating the impact of combinations of probiotics and prebiotics on undernutrition are required.
An emphasis on gut microbiota changes should help to delineate mode of action and identify the most
suitable formulations for specific conditions. The studies discussed in this section are summarized in
Table 3.

Table 3. Impact of prebiotics and synbiotics on overnutrition and undernutrition in human intervention studies.

Prebiotic/Synbiotic

Subject Information

Duration

Eﬀect

Reference

Oligofructose

Healthy adults,
aBMI > 25 kg/m2

12 weeks

Oligofructose-enriched
inulin

Overweight/obese children,
7–12 years

16 weeks

Oligofructose

Obese/overweight children,
7–11 years and 12–18 years

12 weeks

No eﬀect

Inulin-type fructans

Obese women

3 months

— Reduced weight gain
— Improved glucose regulation
— Reduced caloric intake
— Suppressed ghrelin expression
— Enhanced bPYY expression

— Modulated gut microbiota
— Reduced body weight z-score,

percent body fat and percent
trunk fat

— Decreased cIL-6 levels
— Reduced serum triglycerides

— Modulated gut microbiota
— Slight decrease in fat mass and
phosphatidylcholine and
plasma lactate levels

— Modulated gut microbiota
— Lowered total dSCFAs, acetate

and propionate

— Lowered fasting insulinemia

and homeostasis
model assessment

Inulin-type fructans

Obese women

3 months

Synbiotic in eRUTF

Children with fSAM,
5–168 months

33 days

— Reduced outpatient mortality

Prebiotic-probiotic
fortiﬁed milk

Preschool healthy and
stunted children

Synbiotic (probiotic
mix + inulin and
gFOS)

Healthy toddlers,
12 months

Synbiotic

Children with failure to
thrive

1 year

1 year

— Increased weight gain
— Reduced risk of anemia and

iron deﬁciency

— Modulated gut microbiota
— Improved weight gain

6 months

— Increased weight gain

aBMI, body mass index; bPYY, peptide YY; cIL-6, interleukin-6; dSCFAs, short chain fatty acids; eRUTF, ready to use
therapeutic food; fSAM, severe acute malnutrition; gFOS, fructooligosaccharide.

3.3. Fibre

In order to fully appreciate the impact of ﬁbre on the gut microbiota it is important to be aware of
the diﬀerent types and their properties and in this respect several classiﬁcation systems have been
proposed. That proposed by Ha et al. [13] classiﬁes ﬁbres into those that are “microbially degradable”

[213]

[214]

[215]

[216]

[217]

[218]

[219]

[220]

[221]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

23 of 49

and those that are “microbially undegradable.” Combining microbial degradability with the other
main properties of ﬁbre, including viscosity and water solubility, Bozzetto et al. [222] presented four
main groups based on the concepts of McRorie et al. [223]: (1) non-viscous, insoluble, non-fermentable
ﬁbre, e.g., bran, cellulose, hemicelluloses, lignin; (2) non-viscous, soluble, fermentable ﬁbre, e.g., inulin,
dextrin, oligosaccharides, resistant starch; (3) viscous, soluble, fermentable ﬁbre, e.g., pectin, β-glucan,
guar gum and glucomannan; (4) viscous, soluble, non-fermentable ﬁbre, e.g., psyllium, methylcellulose.
Diﬀerent ﬁbres can exert diﬀerent eﬀects on the gut microbiota and hence have diﬀerent physiological
consequences for the host (Table 4).

Table 4. Impact of ﬁbre on overnutrition in human intervention studies.

Fibre

Subject Information

Duration

Eﬀect

Reference

Oat β-glucan

Overweight obese adults,
aBMI = 25 to 45 kg/m2

12 weeks

— Reduced bLDL cholesterol,
total cholesterol and
non-cHDL cholesterol
— Reduced weight circumference

Whole grain
wheat bread

Whole grain
wheat

BMI ≥ 23 kg/m2

12 weeks

— Reduced visceral fat area

Post-menopausal women

12 weeks

— Reduced body fat percentage
— Controlled serum total and

LDL cholesterol

Recommended
intake of
dietary ﬁbre

Obese and overweight
pregnant women
(BMI = 30.7 kg/m2)

Study began in
early pregnancy
(≤17 weeks)

— Modulated gut microbiota
— Lowered maternal

inﬂammatory status

aBMI, body mass index; bLDL, low density lipoprotein; cHDL, high density lipoprotein.

[224]

[225]

[226]

[227]

In humans, increased ﬁbre intake has been shown to improve certain metabolic parameters
associated with obesity and its co-morbidities, such as serum cholesterol levels, particularly in
conjunction with energy-controlled dietary regimes. For example, in overweight and obese adults
(BMI = 25 to 45), daily consumption of two portions of whole-grain ready-to-eat oat cereal (3 g/day
oat β-glucan) as part of a reduced energy dietary programme (~500 kcal/day deﬁcit) with regular
physical activity for 12 weeks proved more eﬀective than an energy-matched low ﬁbre diet for
reducing LDL cholesterol levels (P = 0.005), total cholesterol (P = 0.038), and non-HDL cholesterol
(P = 0.046) [224]. While weight loss did not diﬀer between groups, there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in waist circumference as a result of eating the high ﬁbre diet, resulting in a loss of ~3.3 cm versus
only ~1.9 cm on the low ﬁbre diet (P = 0.012). Daily consumption of whole grain wheat bread by
Japanese subjects (BMI ≥ 23) for 12 weeks resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction in visceral fat area (−4 cm2)
which was not observed in subjects consuming reﬁned white bread [225]. Similarly, whole grain wheat
consumption in conjunction with an energy restricted diet for 12 weeks by post-menopausal women
resulted in a greater reduction in body fat percentage (−3.0%) compared to consumption of reﬁned
wheat (−2.1%) [226]. While serum total and LDL cholesterol increased by ~5% in the reﬁned wheat
group (P < 0.01), they did not change in the whole wheat group. Body weight decreased signiﬁcantly
for both groups but did not diﬀer between groups. Consumption of the recommended intake levels
of dietary ﬁbre and fat in obese and overweight (BMI = 30.7) pregnant women positively associated
with gut microbiota richness whereas high fat with low ﬁbre and low carbohydrate consumption
associated with signiﬁcantly lower gut microbiota richness [227]. The richer gut microbiota correlated
with lower maternal inﬂammatory status. In another study involving overweight and obese pregnant
women, low ﬁbre intake was found to increase the genus Collinsella in the gut microbiota, which is
positively associated with circulating insulin [228]. The low ﬁbre diet was also associated with a
gut microbiota favouring lactate fermentation, whereas the high ﬁbre diet was associated with SCFA
producing bacteria.

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

24 of 49

In a study investigating the existence of a correlation between body weight change over time and
gut microbiome composition involving 1632 healthy females from TwinsUK, (national register of adult
twins for studying age-related complex traits and disease), Menni et al. [229] found that gut microbiota
diversity was negatively associated with long-term weight gain, but positively associated with ﬁbre
intake independent of calorie intake or other confounders.

These studies indicate that dietary ﬁbre has a role to play in the control of obesity and its related
comorbidities. Further research is needed in order to fully comprehend the impact of the diﬀerent
dietary ﬁbres on the gut microbiota and to delineate the subsequent consequences for host metabolic
health. However, the human microbiota is characterised by extensive inter-individual variation, with
genetics a signiﬁcant contributing factor, and it is now becoming clear that the composition of an
individual’s microbiota will determine how it responds to dietary components, in particular ﬁbre.
In this regard, understanding what ‘responding’ and ‘non-responding’ microbiota look like is essential
as well as how to convert a ‘non-responder’ into a ‘responder.’

4. The Microbiota Can Be Used as a Biomarker to Predict Responsiveness to Speciﬁc Dietary
Consitituents, For Example, Fibre

We know that diet can directly or indirectly inﬂuence the gut microbiota, and studies have
shown that this response can be rapid with changes observed within 1–3 days [7,230,231] when
the modiﬁcations are “large” [232] such as the all-animal or all-plant products diet [7], or large
increases/decreases in ﬁbre [230,231]. However, inter-individual variance is often much greater than
the variance introduced as a result of diet [233]. Indeed, an individual’s baseline microbiota and health
status at the beginning of an intervention inﬂuences the extent of potential changes to the microbiota
and subsequently the host, and studies are showing that baseline microbiota consisting of responders
and non-responders to dietary interventions as well as eﬀectors of host responses (both of which may
be the same microorganism or a consortia of microorganisms), is generally linked to habitual dietary
trends [6,230,234]. In this regard, an individual’s baseline microbiota harbors predictive potential with
regard to the eﬀect of dietary constituents on the host and this has been proven particularly in case the
of ﬁbre.

Salonen et al. [233] reported that high microbiota diversity before dietary intervention with
resistant starch or non-starch polysaccharides associated to low dietary responsiveness of the microbiota.
Similarly, obese individuals with low microbial gene richness (low microbiota diversity) in their initial
faecal microbiota showed a greater microbiota response in terms of gene richness to a weight loss
diet compared to obese individuals represented by high microbial gene richness in their initial
microbiota [234]. However, individuals with high gene richness showed a more marked improvement
in systemic inﬂammation and adipose tissue following the intervention suggesting that gene richness
could provide a predictive tool towards intervention eﬃcacy in relation to inﬂammatory variables.
Tap et al. [235] also reported that low OTU microbiota richness was associated with a greater microbiota
change over time following a large increase in dietary ﬁbre (40 g/day) in healthy adults for 6 weeks
whereas high OTU microbiota richness at baseline proved more stable upon high dietary ﬁbre
intervention and was associated with high proportions of Prevotella and Coprococcus species and a
higher Prevotella:Bacteroides ratio.

Indeed, a number of studies have reported associations between the abundances or lack of
abundance of speciﬁc species and the responsiveness of the microbiota and the host to dietary
intervention. Two overweight men who failed to ferment signiﬁcant amounts of resistant starch during
a 10-week intervention involving a total of 14 participants showed very low numbers of R-ruminococci
(relatives of Ruminococcus bromii) and were also non-methanogenic [231]. The gut microbiota of
healthy subjects exhibiting improved glucose tolerance following three days of consumption of barley
kernel-based bread was enriched with Prevotella copri and after the intervention exhibited a higher
Prevotella:Bacteroides ratio compared to non-responders [236]. However, in a follow-on study, the
researchers failed to stratify metabolic responders and non-responders based on Prevotella and Bacteroides

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

25 of 49

abundance at baseline, but those with the highest Prevotella:Bacteroides ratio at the beginning of the study
displayed improved appetite sensations (less hunger and less desire to eat), reduced insulin responses
and reduced inﬂammatory markers compared to those with the lowest Prevotella:Bacteroides ratio
independent of the intervention suggesting that the higher Prevotella:Bacteroides ratio is favourable [237].
Oligotyping of 16s rRNA gene sequencing data, which permits resolution to species level and below,
enabled De Filippis et al. [238] to identify distinctive correlation patterns between Prevotella and
Bacteroides oligotypes with dietary components and metabolome using faecal samples from omnivore
and non-omnivore subjects. The authors concluded that an indiscriminate association between a
whole genus and a speciﬁc dietary pattern may result in an oversimpliﬁed vision of correlations
between gut microbiota and diet, failing to take diversity within a genus or even a species into
account. Based on three independent cohorts of obese adults from Finland [239], Belgium [216] and
Britain [231] involved in diﬀerent dietary interventions (ﬁbre/prebiotics/weight loss diet) to improve
metabolic health, Korpela et al. [240] reported that baseline microbiota of non-responders (in terms
of gut microbiota changes) was characterised by average abundances of two Firmicutes species,
Eubacterium ruminantium and Clostridium felsineum, which were present at very low or very high
baseline abundances in responders. Furthermore, the presence of high levels of Clostridium sphenoides,
a common gut inhabitant and Firmicutes member, in the faecal microbiota of obese individuals before
dietary invention was associated with a decrease in cholesterol following intervention while obese
individuals with abnormally low abundance of this species did not beneﬁt in terms of cholesterol
levels. Interestingly, C. sphenoides abundance was not associated with absolute levels of cholesterol
and so may not be directly involved in cholesterol metabolism. Dietary ﬁbres were shown to promote
a select group of SCFA-producing bacteria in patients with type 2 diabetes [241]. However, when
present at greater abundance and diversity, the authors reported an improvement in haemoglobin A1c
levels (glycosylated haemoglobin), partly due to increased glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 production,
and diminution of producers of metabolically detrimental compounds. In a randomized controlled
trial investigating the impact of increased intake of whole grains versus fruits and vegetables on the
gut microbiota in obese and overweight individuals, Kopf et al. [242] reported that both treatments
induced individualised changes but that baseline levels of Clostridiales correlated with the magnitude
of change in lipopolysaccharide binding protein which is indicative of change in inﬂammatory state.
The inﬂuence of long-term dietary habits, in particular habitual ﬁbre intake, on gut microbiota
responsiveness to speciﬁc interventions is now becoming apparent. In a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, cross-over study, Healey et al. [243] classiﬁed participants as either high or low
dietary ﬁbre consumers prior to three weeks of daily supplementation with an inulin-type fructan
prebiotic. The high dietary ﬁbre group revealed signiﬁcant increases in the relative abundances
of Biﬁdobacterium and Faecalibacterium along with signiﬁcant reductions in Coprococcus, Dorea and
Ruminococcus (Lachnospiraceae family). The gut microbiota of the low dietary ﬁbre group was less
responsive showing only an increase in Biﬁdobacterium. Based on an in vitro approach, Brahma et al. [244]
investigated the impact of donor dietary pattern on the fermentation properties of whole grains and
brans. Although the samples were taken from donors with similar energy intakes, they diﬀered in
terms of their intakes of several beneﬁcial nutrients. Samples from G1 subjects were representative
of the superior diet while samples from G2 subjects represented the inferior diet. The G1 microbiota
showed higher diversity and greater abundances of beneﬁcial microbes including Faecalibacterium
and was better equipped to metabolise the complex carbohydrates than the microbiota from G2
subjects, resulting in greater butyrate production, while the microbiota of G2 subjects produced more
acetate and propionate. In another study, Griﬃn et al. [245] reported that Americans consuming
unrestricted diets had less diverse faecal microbiota (termed AMER) compared to the microbiota of
individuals consuming calorie-restricted plant-rich diets (termed CRON) and the AMER microbiota
lacked many bacterial lineages representative of CRON. Interestingly, transplanting AMER microbiota
into gnotobiotic mice and feeding them the CRON diet resulted in community conﬁgurations but
which were weaker than their CRON counterparts. Placing the AMER communities into a model

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

26 of 49

meta-community composed of several CRON communities resulted in the dispersal of microorganisms
between the coprophagic animals which enhanced the reconﬁguration of the AMER microbiota in
response to the CRON diet and resulted in changes in host metabolic features, all driven by an inﬂux of
CRON dietary practice-associated taxa. This artiﬁcial metacommunity model provides an opportunity
to mine multiple human microbiota for microbial reporters of responses to diet as well as eﬀectors
of host response. However, Sonnenburg et al. [246] showed that while microbiota changes in mice
resulting from a low MAC diet could be reversed within a single generation by reintroducing MACs,
the progressive loss in diversity over multiple generations consuming the low MAC diet could not be
reversed with the reintroduction of dietary MACs alone. Importantly, restoration of the microbiota to
its original state required the reintroduction of lost taxa along with dietary MACs.

These studies indicate that the microbiota has the potential to serve as an eﬀective biomarker to
predict responsiveness to speciﬁc dietary constituents with most if not all studies to date focusing
on ﬁbre/complex carbohydrates. The responsiveness of the gut microbiota (including responders
and eﬀectors of host responses) appears to be largely dependent on baseline microbiota diversity
and the speciﬁc microbes present or absent at baseline, the latter of which can have a profound
inﬂuence on the poorly diverse microbiota. Indeed, a highly diverse microbiota as a result of long-term,
healthy dietary practices involving adequate ﬁbre consumption remains stable in the face of ﬁbre
intervention, is rich in both responders and eﬀectors and is capable of reaping the metabolic beneﬁts
for the host. A gut microbiota with low diversity can beneﬁt from dietary intervention but only if
the speciﬁc responder and eﬀector microbes are actually present even at low abundances. Indeed,
Healey et al. [243] showed that lower baseline biﬁdobacteria concentrations in subjects correlated with
a more pronounced biﬁdogenic response following prebiotic intervention. But poor dietary practices
and insuﬃcient dietary ﬁbre intake over a long-term period may actually result in the extinction of
beneﬁcial microbial lineages. In this case, dietary intervention with ﬁbre/prebiotics will fail to mitigate
a beneﬁcial outcome for the host and will presumably require the addition of speciﬁc taxa along with
their corresponding MACs in the form of synbiotics. However, despite the presence of resistant-starch
degrading microorganisms at low abundances in a subset of healthy young adults, the consumption
of resistant starch failed to increase their abundances [247]. Such a phenomenon may be due to
the presence of antagonistic microorganisms to the resistant starch-degrading microbes which the
authors suggest could require targeted removal prior to intervention and could include the presence of
bacteriophages. Another form of dietary ﬁbre may be more suited to the particular microbiota in these
individuals, or the synbiotic approach may be required. Clearly, more studies are required to determine
gut microbiota responses to speciﬁc dietary components, i.e. targeted microbiota dietary intervention,
using a top-down approach of gut microbiota analysis from diversity levels to species and even strains,
to their gene content and functionality (metabolome, transcriptome, proteome), alongside host clinical
and genetic data, for input into machine learning algorithms designed to identify correlations, which
subsequently can be investigated for causal evidence, in order to accurately predict individualised
responses for maximized health (Figure 1). Indeed, machine learning models for predicting disease
from metagenomic datasets have already been developed [248]. Thus, already the potential of the
gut microbiota as a biomarker of responsiveness to diet is tangible with opportunity for precision
microbiomics beginning to emerge. However, ‘causal evidence,’ is a critical factor in this workﬂow
and in Section 7 we provide guidelines for evaluating the scientiﬁc validity of evidence for providing
personalised microbiome-based dietary advice.

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

27 of 49

Figure 1. Diagrammatic representation of the sequence of events involved in accurately predicting
individualised responses to diet and options for converting a non-responder into a responder. (graphic
design for Figure 1 by Chor Hung Tsang, Mad Lemur Design Studio).

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

28 of 49

5. Opportunities for Precision Microbiomics

Understanding how the microbiome responds to dietary constituents and the subsequent clinical
consequences for the host can be used in the design of precision-tailored diets which ensure maximal
nutritional/functional outcome for the host. However, to date only a handful of studies are available
to provide speciﬁc examples of precision microbiomics in nutrition. For example, composition and
functional alterations observed in the faecal metagenome of 145 European women with type 2 diabetes
were integrated into a mathematical model that enabled accurate prediction of type 2 diabetes based
on metagenomic proﬁles [249]. The model was capable of identifying women with a diabetes-like
metabolism among a group with impaired glucose tolerance. However, the model failed to work on a
Chinese cohort revealing that discriminant metagenomic markers for type 2 diabetes diﬀer between
Chinese and European cohorts and should be age- and geography-speciﬁc. Another example is
the direct modulation of colonic microbiota with short-chain GOS to metabolize lactose in lactose
intolerant individuals [250]. In this case, GOS failed to elicit a biﬁdogenic response in three out of
30 participants; however, an increase in biﬁdobacteria was associated with a decrease in pain and
cramping revealing its signiﬁcance in terms of symptoms. Cho et al. [251] reported that high TMAO
producers amongst healthy male adults (≥ 20% increase in urinary TMAO in response to beef and eggs)
had signiﬁcantly more Firmicutes than Bacteroidetes and signiﬁcantly less microbiota diversity. While
the results are based on a short-term feeding study, longer-term feeding trials involving larger cohorts
coupled with microbiome data could enable accurate prediction of a high TMAO-producing microbiota
and subsequent strategies to alter it. Maintaining normal blood glucose levels is critical for the
prevention and control of metabolic syndrome [252] but blood glucose levels are rising at an increased
rate as evidenced by the prevalence of prediabetes and impaired glucose tolerance in the general
population [253]. Food choices that induce normal PPGRs are critical for controlling blood glucose levels
which are in essence controlled by dietary intake. However, until recently, no method existed to predict
PPGRs to food. Over the period of a week Zeevi et al. [14] continuously monitored PPGRs in a cohort of
800 healthy and prediabetic individuals in Israel in response to identical meals and noted high variation.
They also measured physical activity, anthropometrics, blood parameters, gut microbiota composition
and function, as well as self-reported lifestyle behaviours. This multidimensional data was integrated
into a machine learning algorithm that was capable of accurately predicting personalised PPGRs and
was further validated in an independent cohort of 100 people. Interestingly, the highly variable PPGRs
in individuals associated with multiple person-speciﬁc microbiome and clinical factors, and tailored
diets based on predictions from a machine learning algorithm not only signiﬁcantly improved PPGRs
but also resulted in consistent alterations to the gut microbiota. This study was recently replicated
in a diﬀerent population (from the USA) [254]. Based on a randomized cross-over trial involving 20
healthy subjects comparing the eﬀects of consuming either traditionally made sourdough leavened
whole-grain bread or industrially made white bread for one week each, Korem et al. [255] found that
the glycemic response varied signiﬁcantly in response to the diﬀerent bread types and the type of bread
which induced the higher glycemic response in each person could be predicted using microbiome data
recorded just prior to the intervention. However, the exact mechanisms involved in the gut microbiota
and glycemic control remain to be elucidated.

Non-caloriﬁc artiﬁcial sweeteners (NAS) were developed to provide sweet taste to foods without
the high-energy content of calorie-rich sugars. However, Suez et al. [256] reported that long-term
consumption of commonly used NAS in humans signiﬁcantly and positively correlated with several
metabolic syndrome-related clinical parameters including measures of central adiposity, higher
fasting blood glucose, higher haemoglobin A1c%, and higher measures of impaired glucose tolerance.
Moreover, statistically signiﬁcant positive correlations were found between multiple taxonomic entities
and long term NAS consumption including the Enterobacteriaceae family, the Deltaproteobacteria class
and the Actinobacteria phylum. In order to determine if the relationship between blood glucose control
and NAS consumption was causal, Suez et al. [256] followed seven healthy volunteers (who did not
normally consume NAS in any form) who consumed the FDAs maximum acceptable daily intake of

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

29 of 49

saccharin (5 mg/kg body weight) for 5 days. Four of the seven individuals developed signiﬁcantly
poorer glycemic responses 5–7 days after NAS consumption. Interestingly, the microbiome of NAS
responders was distinct from NAS non-responders both before and after NAS consumption and the
microbiome of NAS non-responders featured minimal changes after the NAS intervention in contrast
to the pronounced compositional changes observed in NAS responders. Transferring day 7 stools
from NAS responders into normal germ-free mice induced signiﬁcant glucose intolerance compared to
mice transplanted with day 1 stool (before intervention) from the same NAS responders. Similarly,
day 7 stools from non-NAS responders induced normal glucose tolerance in mice. Furthermore,
germ-free mice transplanted with responders’ day 7 stool replicated some of the dysbiosis observed
in humans including a 20-fold increase in Bacteroides fragilis (order Bacteroides) and Weissella cibaria
(order Lactobacillales) and a 10-fold decrease in Candidatus Arthromitus (order Clostridiales) [256];
this over-representation of Bacteroides and underrepresentation of Clostridiales has been previously
associated with type 2 diabetes in humans [249,257]. Thus, humans exhibit a personalised response to
NAS as a result of their microbiota composition and functionality which as the authors state strongly
suggests that other nutritional responses may be driven by “personalised functional diﬀerences in the
microbiome,” and the resulting opportunity for “personalised nutrition” may lead to “personalised
medical outcome.” Wang et al. [258] recently described the bacteriostatic eﬀect of non-nutritive
sweeteners such as sucralose and stevia in mice.

6. Commercialisation of Microbiome Testing

Gut microbiome testing is currently commercially available and takes advantage of the reduced
costs associated with next-generation sequencing technologies. Table 5 provides a non-exhaustive list
of these companies. While several companies provide doctor-ordered stool tests (e.g., the SmartGut
test provided by Ubiome and Genova Diagnostics, USA, etc.) the majority of the companies listed in
Table 5 provide direct-to-consumer tests.

The sequencing method used to analyse the gut microbiome has a signiﬁcant impact on cost,
given that companies providing 16s rRNA gene sequencing are generally cheaper (approximately
$100/test) than those that use whole genome sequencing and metatranscriptomics (approximately $350
to $400/test). However, the latter two also provide information regarding the metabolic potential of the
gut microbiome, providing insights into microbiota-derived metabolites related to health and disease.
Regulation of commercial microbiome testing in speciﬁc markets remains unclear and the need
for a clear global regulatory direction and guideline is required to advance testing and thus its
impact on human health. Furthermore, some commercial laboratories will often modify/optimise
their sequencing methods which can lead to inconsistencies when comparing results from diﬀerent
companies. Of course, this has potential risks with regards to interpretation and transferability of
results, highlighting the need to develop a set of guidelines to assure consistency in the way diﬀerent
laboratories operate. The Microbiome Quality Control project (MBQC) has been set up to govern such
guidelines (https://www.mbqc.org/).

Many companies provide easy-to-understand, detailed reports regarding gut microbiota diversity,
microbial members including beneﬁcial and pathogenic microorganisms which inﬂuence health and
disease, a comparison of the individual’s gut microbiome to other participants, and personalised dietary,
supplemental and lifestyle advice. Importantly, such tests are not diagnostic given the current level of
evidence that is available regarding the gut microbiome and it is essential that consumers availing
of these tests are aware of this fact and seek medical advice if experiencing symptoms of any kind
rather than self-diagnosing and self-healing via the provided advice which at most can only serve as a
personalised guideline. Indeed, many medical professionals and microbiome experts remain dubious
about the utility of these direct-to-consumer tests due to the lack of concrete evidence linking particular
microbiota signatures to speciﬁc host phenotypes including disease, disease risk and potential treatment
responses. Over-extrapolation of results on the side of the service provider and over-interpretation of
results on the side of the consumer are also risk factors. Indeed, over-interpretation of results on the

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

30 of 49

side of the consumer may lead to unnecessary anxiety and the adaptation of dietary alterations as well
as intake of supplements which may do more harm than good or have no eﬀect at all. In addition,
we have already mentioned that whole genome sequencing is more informative than 16s rRNA gene
sequencing and this is something the consumer should be made aware of. For example, subgroups A,
B and C of F. prausnitzii are not discriminated from each other with 16S rRNA gene sequencing, but are
identiﬁed by metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing.

Table 5. List of companies that oﬀer gut microbiome testing.

Company (Website)

Method (as Indicated on
Website)

Output for Consumer

Biohm
(biohmhealth.com)

Sequences genes of
bacteria and fungi at
genus and species level

Consumer receives a grade of microbiome diversity, a comparison of all six major
bacterial communities and four major fungal communities to normal levels and a
strain by strain analysis of bacterial and fungal communities. Consumer receives
personalized dietary, lifestyle and supplemental recommendations.

American Gut
(americangut.org)

16s rRNA gene
sequencing

DayTwo
(daytwo.com)

Sequences the DNA of
microbiome. Consumer
also provides blood test
results including aHbA1c

THRYVE
(thryveinside.com)

16s rRNA gene
sequencing

UBIOME–Gut Explorer
(ubiome.com)

Patented precision
sequencing process

Microba
(microba.com)

Metagenomic sequencing

AtlasBioMed
(atlasbiomed.com)

eN/A

VIOME
(viome.com)

Metatranscriptomics

OME
(ome.health)

gNGS

A general overview of how the consumer’s microbial proﬁle compares to other
participants. A full list of microorganisms found in the sample and their relative
abundances is provided. Note: American Gut is a crowd-funded microbiome
research project and was started to provide a means to collect a large set of data
surrounding the microbiome.
A scoring system rates thousands of diﬀerent foods and food combinations based
on the consumer’s biometrics, gut microbiome analysis, lifestyle factors and health
questionnaire to yield a unique nutrition proﬁle that enables blood-sugar balance.
The consumer follows the scores to choose the foods which won’t increase blood
sugar levels using the DayTwo personalised nutrition app.

Consumer receives a gut wellness score, gut diversity score, a ‘likelihood analysis’
of symptoms based on deﬁciencies in beneﬁcial bacteria, as well as personalised
dietary recommendations. Examples of symptoms:
‘More likely to feel beset by worries’; ‘More likely to feel fatigued and tired’; ‘More
likely to have poor sleep’; ‘More likely to have itchy and dry skin’; ‘Diﬃculty
maintaining a healthy weight’

Gut Explorer: Consumer receives a comprehensive breakdown of the microbiome,
it’s functioning, and how it compares to others.
SmartGut: In conjunction with general practitioner (who orders the test), consumer
receives a diversity score and breakdown of beneﬁcial and pathogenic
microorganisms associated with gut conditions like bIBS, and cIBD, including
ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease, as well as microorganisms associated with
metabolic conditions including obesity, diabetes and dNAFLD.

Consumer receives a detailed report describing gut microbiota diversity, members
of microbial community including fungi and parasites, metabolic potential (protein,
fat and carbohydrate breakdown, vitamin production), comparison with
microbiome of others and personalised dietary recommendations.

Consumer receives a grade of microbiome diversity, ability of gut to breakdown
ﬁbre, ratios of gut bacteria which inﬂuence disease including obesity, type II
diabetes, heart disease and fIBD, personalised food recommendations.

All living gut microorganisms are analysed including bacteria, fungi, parasites,
viruses, bacteriophages, archaea, yeast etc. Consumer receives a score of gut
microbiome balance, pathway activities and functions, and their integrative impacts
on metabolism, inﬂammation, and other wellness factors. Consumer receives
personalized dietary, lifestyle and supplemental recommendations.

OME Heart Health and OME Weight Loss: Consumer receives score of bacterial
diversity, full genetic bacterial proﬁle, identiﬁcation of beneﬁcial and pathogenic
bacteria. Also available to the consumer is a 12-week Heart Health or Weight Loss
coaching programme with personalised meal plans and progress tracking etc.

BTS Ireland
(btsireland.com)
aHbA1c, haemoglobin A1c; bIBS, irritable bowel syndrome; cIBD, inflammatory bowel disease; dNAFLD„ non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease; eN/A, not available; fIBD, inflammatory bowel disease; gNGS, next-generation sequencing.

Provides a selection of tests based on stool analysis. The Intestinal Colonisation test
screens for the most beneﬁcial and pathogenic bacteria.

N/A

Most commercially available 16S rRNA-based tests report on the relative abundance of F. prausnitzii
with no diﬀerentiation between F. prausnitzii subgroups A, B and C. This may lead to a misleading
interpretation of results as it has recently been found that diﬀerent subgroups produce butyrate at
diﬀerent levels and have been linked to diﬀerent disease states. For example, F. prausnitzii A produces
comparatively lower levels of butyrate and at high levels has been linked to colon cancer, appendicitis
and inﬂammatory conditions. Similarly, F. prausnitzii B also produces comparatively lower levels
of butyrate and at high levels has been linked to atopic dermatitis. Conversely, F. prausnitzii C has

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

31 of 49

been shown to produce the highest level of butyrate of all the three subgroups and also produces
an anti-inﬂammatory protein called MAM. As a result, higher levels of F. prausnitzii C are thought
to be anti-inﬂammatory whereas low levels have been linked to Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis,
colon cancer, type II diabetes and chronic fatigue syndrome [259]. This highlights the importance of
understanding the relative abundance of F. prausnitzii subgroups A, B, and C when drawing conclusions
about butyrate production and association with disease.

Furthermore, in terms of time, the tests can take anything from two to eight weeks before the
consumer receives the results such that gut microbiota changes may have taken place within this time
frame depending on the consumer’s circumstances (e.g., dietary changes, medical treatment, antibiotic
administration, etc) and hence the results may prove meaningless by the time of receipt, a factor the
consumer must be made aware of. Indeed, regular microbiome testing would prove more eﬀective but,
at this moment in time, may prove cost-prohibitive for most consumers. Despite this, some companies
oﬀer discounts for regular microbiome testing and the results of such tests will provide essential data
regarding the impact of personalised nutritional advice (assuming the consumer follows it) on the
gut microbiome along with its long-term eﬀects. While the analysis is capable of providing an insight
into the necessary dietary recommendations to achieve a ‘healthy’ gut microbiome, one must question
the utility of this information at present given that we have yet to deﬁne a universal ‘healthy’ gut
microbiome, which may not be possible given the suspected level of speciﬁcity that can be associated
with an individual’s ‘healthy’ gut. Indeed, a food questionnaire would generate suﬃcient information
to provide personalised dietary recommendations which should subsequently improve the status of
the gut microbiome. However, in its favour, gut microbiome testing represents a useful tool in its
present state to increase awareness of the gut microbiome and its inﬂuence on overall health and the
more tests that are performed, the greater the opportunity to move towards precision microbiomics by
advancing our current knowledge base.

In relation to future testing, it is also important to consider the importance of host genetics/gene
expression, and considering how host genetics can impact the gut microbiome, and be used as proxy
for providing personalised dietary advice. For example, numerous genetic variations have been linked
to inﬂuencing a range of microbiota [260,261] as well as beta-diversity [260]. However, other factors
such as diet may mask the eﬀect of genetics on the microbiome making it diﬃcult to predict changes in
phenotype without assessing an individual’s diet and including this in the interpretation. An example
whereby the assessment of host genetics in a commercial setting shows utility in providing personalised
microbiome-based recommendations is the association between FUT2 genotype/secretor status and
the expression of fucosyllated glycans on host cell surfaces and in secretions [262]. Common FUT2
polymorphisms have been shown to inﬂuence the expression of fucosyltransferase2, an important
enzyme associated with the production of the dominant human milk oligosaccharide, 2’-fucosyllactose
(2’FL), and other fucosyllated oligosaccharides. Lactating mothers who possess the inactive form of the
FUT2 polymorphism (approximately 20% of the Caucasian population) do not contain 2’-FL in their
breast milk. The absence of this gene (non-secretors) has been associated with delayed establishment
of Biﬁdobacterium spp. in the infant gut and increased risk of diabetes, alcohol-induced pancreatitis
and Crohns disease. Interestingly, non-secretor status has also been associated with resistance to
infectious disease such as norovirus and rotavirus infection and Helicobacter pylori colonization. As such,
genotyping for FUT2 secretor status allows for the identiﬁcation of infants and adults that can beneﬁt
from treatment with probiotics, prebiotics and other dietary components. Hence, future commercial
tests may oﬀer genetic testing as a way to help consumers, such as lactating mothers in the case of
FUT2, make better choices and optimise health outcomes.

7. Guidelines for Evaluating the Scientiﬁc Validity of Evidence for Providing Personalised
Microbiome-Based Dietary Advice

As noted in the previous section, there are risks associated with the rapid commercialisation of
microbiome testing including inconsistencies in results between laboratories as well as over-extrapolation of

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

32 of 49

results on the side of the service provider and over-interpretation of results on the side of the consumer. To
mitigate such risks, guidelines for evaluating the scientific validity of evidence for providing personalised
microbiome-based dietary advice need to be developed. A similar set of guidelines has been proposed for
genotype-based dietary advice [263] providing a useful template from which to start.

The guidelines proposed by Grimaldi et al. [263] provide a framework for assessing the strength
of the evidence and scientiﬁc validity of gene(s) × diet interactions which help determine the
‘actionability’ of the interaction. Such guidelines can be modiﬁed and applied to precision nutrition
and the microbiome. These guidelines use the ACCE model (Analytical and Clinical Validity, Clinical
Utility and Ethics) as the starting point according to which a medical genetic test should fulﬁl
requirements regarding:

i.
ii.

Analytical validity—a measure of the accuracy of the genotyping.
Scientiﬁc validity—concerns the strength of the evidence linking a genetic variant with a
speciﬁc outcome.

iii. Clinical utility—the measure of the likelihood that the recommended advice or therapy will lead

to a beneﬁcial outcome beyond the current state of the art.
Ethical, legal and social implications that may arise in the context of using the test.

iv.

For conducting an assessment according to precision nutrition and the microbiome, analytical
validity should be relatively straightforward as projects such as MBQC have been set up to assure
consistency by applying standard operating procedures and best practices in how laboratories operate
in the microbiome testing ﬁeld. Similarly, the requirements for scientiﬁc validity could also be fulﬁlled,
whereby scientiﬁc validity in the context of precision nutrition and the microbiome refers to the strength
of the evidence for an interaction between a speciﬁc microbiome biomarker or a microbial enterotype
and a dietary component or a speciﬁc health outcome, disease or risk factors for disease.

The requirements for clinical utility, on the other hand, may be harder to fulﬁl as it has strict criteria
in the medical sense, demanding strong evidence that a given therapy ‘will lead to an improved health
outcome’ [264,265]. A caveat is that deﬁning an ‘improved health outcome’ due to microbiome-based
advice in a generally healthy person is very hard. Additionally, we are still unsure as to what
constitutes a ’healthy‘ microbiome, making it even harder to deﬁne an ‘improved health outcome’.
With regard to the ethical, legal and social implications, as with personalised nutrition, existing rules
must be developed for microbiome testing to ensure that the fundamental rights of the consumer are
protected and legislation should be put in place to identify direct-to-consumer tests which provide
non-scientiﬁcally validated information and advice [264,265]. Ethical, legal and social implications of
the human microbiome have been discussed elsewhere [266,267]. Therefore, as per the framework
proposed by Grimaldi et al. [263], a guideline that evaluates the scientiﬁc validity and evidence for
providing personalised microbiome-based dietary advice should focus primarily on the assessment of
scientiﬁc validity, an essential requirement before any nutrition advice should be given.

Proposed Framework for Scientiﬁc Evidence Assessment

The scientiﬁc validity assessment criteria for microbiota-based dietary advice within an adapted
framework would include (i) study design and quality, (ii) biological mechanism and plausibility
and (iii) the probability term (Table 6). Whilst the assessment of study design and quality as well as
biological mechanisms and plausibility are commonly used to assess the value of scientiﬁc evidence,
the use of a ‘probability term’ is not as common. The probability term is the overall judgement of the
evidence provided and is based on the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) guidance document
expressing uncertainty in scientiﬁc assessment [268] to help describe the likelihood of an outcome
where ﬁrm conclusions are diﬃcult to draw. A probability term makes it possible for an ‘evidentiary
conclusion based on many papers, each of which may be relatively weak, to be graded as ‘moderate’
[probable] or even ‘strong’ [convincing], if there are multiple small case reports or studies that are all
supportive with no contradictory studies”. For more detail on the deﬁnition and use of each probability

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

33 of 49

term, study design and quality, biological plausibility as well as examples of the type criteria that can
be used to assess gene/microbiome x diet interactions, please refer to Grimaldi et al. [263].

Table 6. Proposed framework for scientiﬁc evidence assessment of microbiota-based dietary advice.

(i) Study Design and Quality
Considerations:
Type of microbe/diet/outcome interaction
•

•

A relatively “simple” interaction with a single strain of bacteria, measuring the outcome (e.g., glucose
response) over a number of weeks can give more conﬁdence of “cause and eﬀect.”
A “complex” study may involve a prebiotic + several strains administered over several weeks or months
to assess the weight management response and is likely to have higher inter-individual variation and
therefore may be harder to establish cause/eﬀect: is it the overall diet, or the microbes, or both, having an
improved eﬀect?

The type of interaction also determines the conﬁdence and the numbers of times a study should be repeated in
order to have a level of conﬁdence. However, there are pros and cons, and all types of studies are required.
A simple or “direct” interaction gives conﬁdence but the overall health beneﬁt (e.g., short-term glucose) will be
limited. A “complex” interaction is harder to give conﬁdence but comes with a better overall health beneﬁt
(e.g., long-term weight management).
Levels of Interaction
•
•

A ‘direct’ interaction could be administration of a bacterial strain aﬀecting glucose response.
An intermediate interaction: speciﬁc prebiotics, ﬁbre etc. with any type of response thus harder to
determine if it is the nutrients or microbe growth, or both.
An indirect interaction is the case where a mechanistic interaction between the microbe variant and the
dietary component on a health biomarker, including disease, is aﬀected to some extent but is also
inﬂuenced by many other possibly unknown processes, and it may take years for symptoms to manifest.
This type of interaction may not be fully explained physiologically or may be only
demonstrated statistically.

•

(ii) Biological Mechanism and Plausibility
Considerations: Biological plausibility is a judgement based on the collected evidence of a microbe x diet
interaction on a phenotype. An example of high biological plausibility could be a single microbial strain
known to have beneﬁts regarding saturated fat metabolism that leads to lower triglycerides and cholesterol.
In this respect, Neville and colleagues recently proposed a variant of Koch’s postulates to provide a framework
to establish causation in the case of a single strain in human microbiota research [269]. On the other hand, a
vegan diet high in ﬁbre aﬀects the gut ﬂora and over time the symptoms of metabolic syndrome improve—this
type of interaction may not be fully explained physiologically or may only be demonstrated statistically.
(iii) Probability Term
Considerations: Assessing the validity of a putative microbe × diet interaction is generally complex, and as
knowledge deepens, assessment of its validity will develop.

Probability terms based on subjective probability range

Probability term

A. Convincing

B. Probable

C. Possible
D. Insuﬃcient

Subjective probability range (%)
> 90

66–90

33–66
< 33

The fundamental requirement of a nutrition test (genetic, metabolites, microbiota), as with any
health-related test, is that the results should indicate clearly a diet-related recommendation that is
beneﬁcial in relation to a concrete aspect of health or performance. Any such advice should fulﬁl all
requirements set out in the framework described here. Inevitably, any assessment of nutrition can
only be semi-quantitative at best. We consider that the approach of this framework has the beneﬁt of
creating a formal and generic model for the assessment of such evidence and will guide more focused
debates on speciﬁc points, which may be judged in diﬀerent ways. Moreover, the framework and
associated resources will allow stakeholders such as dietitians, nutritionists and genetic counsellors to
improve their knowledge of the microbiome and, at the same time, will provide a valuable resource to

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

34 of 49

assess the various tests that are oﬀered. This framework may also encourage a greater standardisation
of research protocols, supporting other initiatives, as well as the reporting of novel and replicated
microbiome-environment interactions in other populations.

8. Conclusions

The ﬁeld of gut microbiota research boasts thousands of studies, the majority of which have
been published in recent years. Many of these are observational, documenting diﬀerences between
healthy and diseased states allowing for correlations to be made between diversity scores, speciﬁc
taxa, disease, disease risk and health status, and have been essential in our understanding of the
signiﬁcance of the gut microbiota to overall health and disease. Interventions have highlighted the
signiﬁcance of inter-individual variation in terms of intervention eﬃcacy and this is most apparent
for ﬁbre, presumably due to the ability to measure the expected outcome i.e. modulation of gut
microbiota composition, increases in SCFAs. Thus, understanding why and how an intervention has
failed at the individual level is as critical as understanding why and how it has succeeded. With this
in mind, it seems the ﬁeld is on the brink of being propelled towards precision microbiomics, where
inter-individual variation is being embraced and correlation studies are beginning to be supported by
causal evidence through thorough experimental validation. This will allow for the design of strategic
interventions and ultimately evidence-based dietary advice at the individual level. Criteria ensuring
scientiﬁc validity for microbiota-based dietary advice are, thus, critical. Such data will not only serve
nutrition counselling but will also prove valuable in the ﬁeld of medicine for the clinical/therapeutic
management of individuals. Furthermore, other members of the microbiota including the phageome,
virome and mycobiome, are likely to contribute to human health as much as the bacterial component
and should be included in analysis in order to gain comprehensive insight. Indeed, precision nutrition
through the microbiome oﬀers individuals huge potential to manage disease risk through diet and
microbiome-modulating interventions and thus improve both quality and longevity of life.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.P.R., C.S., G.J.S., J.A.L. and K.A.G.; writing—original draft
preparation, S.M.; writing—review and editing, R.P.R., C.S., G.J.S., J.A.L., K.A.G. and S.M.; All authors reviewed
the ﬁnal version of the manuscript and approved for ﬁnal publication.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Chor Hung Tsang from Mad Lemur Design Studio (www.mld-studio.
com; chorhung.tsang@gmail.com) for the graphic design of Figure 1.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.

3.

Bäckhed, F.; Ley, R.E.; Sonnenburg, J.L.; Peterson, D.A.; Gordon, J.I. Host-bacterial mutualism in the human
intestine. Science 2005, 307, 1915–1920. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

2. Mills, S.; Stanton, C.; Lane, J.A.; Smith, G.J.; Ross, R.P. Precision nutrition and the microbiome, Part I: Current

state of the science. Nutrients 2019, 11, 923. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes: Energy, Carbohydrates, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein
and Amino Acids; National Academies Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2005.

4. Haro, C.; Montes-Borrego, M.; Rangel-Zúñiga, O.A.; Alcala-Diaz, J.F.; Gomez-Delgado, F.; Perez-Martinez, P.;
Delgado-Lista, J.; Quintana-Navarro, G.M.; Tinahones, F.J.; Landa, B.B.; et al. Two healthy diets modulate gut
microbial community improving insulin sensitivity in a human obese population. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.
2016, 101, 233–242. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

5. Haro, C.; García-Carpintero, S.; Rangel-Zúñiga, O.A.; Alcalá-Díaz, J.F.; Landa, B.B.; Clemente, J.C.;
Pérez-Martínez, P.; López-Miranda, J.; Pérez-Jiménez, F.; Camargo, A.; et al. Consumption of two healthy
dietary patterns restored microbiota dysbiosis in obese patients with metabolic dysfunction. Mol. Nutr.
Food Res. 2017, 61, 1700300. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

35 of 49

6.

7.

8.

9.

Klimenko, N.S.; Tyakht, A.; Popenko, A.S.; Vasiliev, A.S.; Altukhov, I.A.; Ischenko, D.S.; Shashkova, T.I.;
Eﬁmova, D.A.; Nikogosov, D.A.; Osipenko, D.A.; et al. Microbiome responses to an uncontrolled short-term
diet intervention in the frame of the Citizen Science Project. Nutrients 2018, 10, 576. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
David, L.A.; Maurice, C.F.; Carmody, R.N.; Gootenberg, D.B.; Button, J.E.; Wolfe, B.E.; Ling, A.V.; Devlin, A.S.;
Varma, Y.; Fischbach, M.A.; et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature
2014, 505, 559–563. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
FAO/WHO. Food and Agriculture Organization and World Health Organization Expert Consultation.
Evaluation of Health and Nutritional Properties of Powder Milk and Live Lactic Acid Bacteria. Córdoba,
Argentina: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and World Health Organization. 2001.
Available online: http://www.fao.org/tempref/docrep/fao/meeting/009/y6398e.pdf (accessed on 10 June 2019).
Fijan, S. Microorganisms with claimed probiotic properties: An overview of recent literature. Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health 2014, 11, 4745–4767. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

10. Plovier, H.; Everard, A.; Druart, C.; Depommier, C.; Van Hul, M.; Geurts, L.; Chilloux, J.; Ottman, N.; Duparc, T.;
Lichtenstein, L.; et al. A purified membrane protein from Akkermansia muciniphila or the pasteurised bacterium
improves metabolism in obese and diabetic mice. Nat. Med. 2017, 23, 107–113. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

11. Gibson, G.R.; Hutkins, R.; Sanders, M.E.; Prescott, S.L.; Reimer, R.A.; Salminen, S.J.; Scott, K.; Stanton, C.;
Swanson, K.S.; Cani, P.D.; et al. The International Scientiﬁc Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP)
consensus statement on the deﬁnition and scope of prebiotics. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2017, 14,
491–502. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

12. DeVries, J.W. The deﬁnition of dietary ﬁbre. Cereal Foods World 2001, 46, 112–129.
13. Ha, M.-A.; Jarvis, M.C.; Mann, J.I. A deﬁnition for dietary ﬁbre. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2000, 54, 861–864.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

14. Zeevi, D.; Korem, T.; Zmora, N.; Israeli, D.; Rothschild, D.; Weinberger, A.; Ben-Yacov, O.; Lador, D.;
Avnit-Sagi, T.; Lotan-Pompan, M.; et al. Personalized nutrition by prediction of glycemic response. Cell 2015,
163, 1079–1094. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

15. Barbour, L.A.; McCurdy, C.E.; Hernandez, T.L.; Kirwan, J.P.; Catalano, P.M.; Friedman, J.E. Cellular
mechanisms for insulin resistance in normal pregnancy and gestational diabetes. Diabetes Care 2007,
30 (Suppl. 2), S112–S119. [CrossRef]

16. Gregor, M.F.; Hotamisligil, G.S. Inﬂammatory mechanisms in obesity. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2011, 29, 415–445.

17. Di Cianni, G.; Miccoli, R.; Volpe, L.; Lencioni, C.; Del Prato, S. Intermediate metabolism in normal pregnancy

and in gestational diabetes. Diabetes Metab Res. Rev. 2003, 19, 259–270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

18. Lain, K.Y.; Catalano, P.M. Metabolic changes in pregnancy. Clin. Obstet. Gynecol. 2007, 50, 938–948. [CrossRef]

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

[PubMed]

19. Nelson, S.M.; Matthews, P.; Poston, L. Maternal metabolism and obesity: Modiﬁable determinants of

pregnancy outcome. Hum. Reprod. Update 2010, 16, 255–275. [CrossRef]

20. Danielewicz, H.; Myszczyszyn, G.; D˛ebi ´nska, A.; Myszkal, A.; Bozna ´nski, A. Diet in pregnancy—More than

food. Eur. J. Pediatr. 2017, 176, 1573–1579. [CrossRef]

21. Koren, O.; Goodrich, J.K.; Cullender, T.C.; Spor, A.; Laitinen, K.; Bäckhed, H.K.; Gonzalez, A.; Werner, J.J.;
Angenent, L.T.; Knight, R. Host remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes during pregnancy.
Cell 2012, 150, 470–480. [CrossRef]

22. Blaser, M.J.; Dominguez-Bello, M.G. The human microbiome before birth. Cell Host Microbe 2016, 20, 558–560.

[CrossRef]

23. DiGiulio, D.B.; Callahan, B.J.; McMurdie, P.J.; Costello, E.K.; Lyell, D.J.; Robaczewska, A.; Sun, C.L.;
Goltsman, D.S.; Wong, R.J.; Shaw, G. Temporal and spatial variation of the human microbiota during
pregnancy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015, 112, 11060–11065. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

24. Chu, S.Y.; Callaghan, W.M.; Kim, S.Y.; Schmid, C.H.; Lau, J.; England, L.J.; Dietz, P.M. Maternal obesity and
risk of gestational diabetes mellitus: A meta-analysis. Diabetes Care 2007, 30, 2070–2076. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Hedderson, M.M.; Williams, M.A.; Holt, V.L.; Weiss, N.S.; Ferrara, A. Body mass index and weight gain
prior to pregnancy and risk of gestational diabetes mellitus. Am. J. Obs. Gynecol. 2008, 198, 409.e1–409.e7.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

26. Coustan, D.R. Gestational diabetes mellitus. Clin. Chem. 2013, 59, 1310–1321. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

36 of 49

27. Kalliomäki, M.; Kirjavainen, P.; Eerola, E.; Kero, P.; Salminen, S.; Isolauri, E. Distinct patterns of neonatal
gut microﬂora in infants developing or not developing atopy. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2001, 107, 129–134.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

28. Dabelea, D. The predisposition to obesity and diabetes in oﬀspring of diabetic mothers. Diabetes Care. 2007,

30, S169–S174. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

29. Ponzo, V.; Fedele, D.; Goitre, I.; Leone, F.; Lezo, A.; Monzeglio, C.; Finocchiaro, C.; Ghigo, E.; Bo, S. Diet-gut
microbiota interactions and gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Nutrients 2019, 11, 330. [CrossRef]
30. Wong, V.W.; Jalaludin, B. Gestational diabetes mellitus: Who requires insulin therapy? Aust. N. Z. J. Obs.

Gynaecol. 2011, 51, 432–436. [CrossRef]

31. Collado, M.C.; Isolauri, E.; Laitinen, K.; Salminen, S. Distinct composition of gut microbiota during pregnancy

32.

in overweight and normal-weight women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2008, 88, 894–899. [CrossRef]
Stanislawski, M.A.; Dabelea, D.; Wagner, B.D.; Sontag, M.K.; Lozupone, C.A.; Eggesbø, M. Pre-pregnancy
weight, gestational weight gain, and the gut microbiota of mothers and their infants. Microbiome 2017, 5, 113.
[CrossRef]

33. Crusell, M.K.W.; Hansen, T.H.; Nielsen, T.; Højgaard Allin, K.; Rühlemann, M.C.; Damm, P.; Vestergaard, H.;
Rørbye, C.; Jørgensen, N.R.; Christiansen, O.B.; et al. Gestational diabetes is associated with change in
the gut microbiota composition in third trimester of pregnancy and postpartum. Microbiome 2018, 6, 89.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ferrocino, I.; Ponzo, V.; Gambino, R.; Zarovska, A.; Leone, F.; Monzeglio, C.; Goitre, I.; Romano, A.; Grassi, G.;
Broglio, F.; et al. Changes in the gut microbiota composition during pregnancy in patients with gestational
diabetes mellitus (GDM). Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 122216. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

34.

35. Taghizadeh, M.; Asemi, Z. Eﬀects of synbiotic food consumption on glycemic status and serum hs-CRP in
pregnant women: A randomized controlled clinical trial. Hormones 2014, 13, 398–406. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Nabhani, Z.; Hezaveh, S.J.G.; Razmpoosh, E.; Asghari-Jafarabadi, M.; Gargari, B.P. The eﬀects of synbiotic
supplementation on insulin resistance/sensitivity, lipid proﬁle and total antioxidant capacity in women with
gestational diabetes mellitus: A randomized double-blind placebo controlled clinical trial. Diabetes Res.
Clin. Prac. 2018, 138, 149–157. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

37. Luoto, R.; Laitinen, K.; Nermes, M.; Isolauri, E. Impact of maternal probiotic-supplemented dietary
counselling on pregnancy outcome and prenatal and postnatal growth: A double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. Br. J. Nutr. 2010, 103, 1792–1799. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

38. Lindsay, K.L.; Kennelly, M.; Culliton, M.; Smith, T.; Maguire, O.C.; Shanahan, F.; Brennan, L.; McAuliﬀe, F.M.
Probiotics in obese pregnancy do not reduce maternal fasting glucose: A double-blind, placebo-controlled,
randomized trial (Probiotics in Pregnancy Study). Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2014, 99, 1432–1439. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

39. Callaway, L.K.; McIntyre, H.D.; Barrett, H.L.; Foxcroft, K.; Tremellen, A.; Lingwood, B.E.; Tobin, J.M.;
Wilkinson, S.; Kothari, A.; Morrison, M.; et al. Probiotics for the prevention of gestational diabetes mellitus
in overweight and obese women: Findings from the SPRING double-blind randomized control trial.
Diabetes Care 2019, 42, 364–371. [CrossRef]

40. Brantsaeter, A.L.; Myhre, R.; Haugen, M.; Myking, S.; Sengpiel, V.; Magnus, P.; Jacobsson, B.; Meltzer, H.M.
Intake of probiotic food and risk of preeclampsia in primiparous women: The Norwegian Mother and Child
Cohort Study. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2011, 174, 807–815. [CrossRef]
Sibai, B.; Dekker, G.; Kupferminc, M. Pre-eclampsia. Lancet 2005, 365, 785–799. [CrossRef]

41.
42. Nordqvist, M.; Jacobsson, B.; Brantsaeter, A.L.; Myrhe, R.; Nilsson, S.; Sengpiel, V. Timing of probiotic
milk consumption during pregnancy and eﬀects on the incidence of preeclampsia and preterm delivery: A
prospective observational cohort study in Norway. BMJ Open 2018, 8, e018021. [CrossRef]
Sohn, K.; Underwood, M.A. Prenatal and postnatal administration of prebiotics and probiotics. Semin. Fetal
Neonatal. Med. 2017, 22, 284–289. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Fernández, L.; Cárdenas, N.; Arroyo, R.; Manzano, S.; Jiménez, E.; Martín, V.; Rodríguez, J.M. Prevention of
infectious mastitis by oral administration of Lactobacillus salivarius PS2 during late pregnancy. Clin. Infect. Dis.
2016, 62, 568–573. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

43.

44.

45. Angelopoulou, A.; Field, D.; Ryan, C.A.; Stanton, C.; Hill, C.; Ross, R.P. The microbiology and treatment of

human mastitis. Med. Micorbiol. Immunol. 2018. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

37 of 49

46. Zuccotti, G.; Meneghin, F.; Aceti, A.; Barone, G.; Callegari, M.L.; Di Mauro, A.; Fantini, M.P.; Gori, D.; Indrio, F.;
Maggio, L. Probiotics for prevention of atopic diseases in infants: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
Allergy 2015, 70, 1356–1371. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

48.

47. Bertelsen, R.J.; Brantsæter, A.L.; Magnus, M.C.; Haugen, M.; Myhre, R.; Jacobsson, B.; Longnecker, M.P.;
Meltzer, H.M.; London, S.J. Probiotic milk consumption in pregnancy and infancy and subsequent childhood
allergic diseases. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2014, 133, 165–171.e8. [CrossRef]
Fitzstevens, J.L.; Smith, K.C.; Hagadorn, J.I.; Caimano, M.J.; Matson, A.P.; Brownell, E.A. Systematic review
of the human milk microbiota. Nutr. Clin. Prac. 2017, 32, 354–364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Simpson, M.R.; Avershina, E.; Storrø, O.; Johnsen, R.; Rudi, K.; Øien, T. Breastfeeding-associated microbiota
in human milk following supplementation with Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, Lactobacillus acidophilus La-5,
and Biﬁdobacterium animalis ssp. lactis Bb-12. J. Dairy Sci. 2018, 101, 889–899. [CrossRef]

49.

50. Rodríguez, J.M. The origin of human milk bacteria: Is there a bacterial entero-mammary pathway during

late pregnancy and lactation? Adv. Nutr. 2014, 5, 779–784. [CrossRef]

51. Treven, P.; Mrak, V.; Matijaši´c, B.B.; Horvat, S.; Rogelj, I. Administration of probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus
GG and Lactobacillus gasseri K7 during pregnancy and lactation changes mouse mesenteric lymph nodes and
mammary gland microbiota. J. Dairy Sci. 2015, 98, 2114–2128. [CrossRef]

52. Dotterud, C.K.; Storro, O.; Johnsen, R.; Oien, T. Probiotics in pregnant women to prevent allergic disease: A

randomized, double-blind trial. Br. J. Derm. 2010, 163, 616–623. [CrossRef]

53. Dotterud, C.K.; Avershina, E.; Sekelja, M.; Simpson, M.R.; Knut, R.; Storrø, O.; Johnsen, R.; Øien, T.
Does maternal perinatal probiotic supplementation alter the intestinal microbiota of mother and child? A
randomised controlled trial. J. Ped. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2015, 61, 200–207. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

54. Rø, A.D.B.; Simpron, M.R.; Rø, T.B.; Storrø, O.; Johnsen, R.; Videm, V.; Øien, T. Reduced Th22 cell proportion
and prevention of atopic dermatitis in infants following maternal probiotic supplementation. Clin. Exp.
Allergy 2017, 47, 1014–1021. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

55. Mastromarino, P.; Capobianco, D.; Miccheli, A.; Praticò, G.; Campagna, G.; Laforgia, N.; Capursi, T.;
Baldassarre, M.E. Administration of a multistrain probiotic product (VSL#3) to women in the perinatal
period differentially affects breast milk beneficial microbiota in relation to mode of delivery. Pharm. Res. 2015,
95–96, 63–70.

56. Kuitunen, M.; Kukkonen, A.K.; Savilahti, E. Impact of maternal allergy and use of probiotics during
pregnancy on breast milk cytokines and food antibodies and development of allergy in children until 5 years.
Int. Arch. Allergy Immunol. 2012, 159, 162–170. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

57. Baldassarre, M.E.; Di Mauro, A.; Mastromarino, P.; Fanelli, M.; Martinelli, D.; Urbano, F.; Capobianco, D.;
Lagorﬁa, N. Administration of a multi-strain probiotic product to women in the perinatal period diﬀerentially
aﬀects the breast milk cytokine proﬁle and may have beneﬁcial eﬀects on neonatal gastrointestinal functional
symptoms. A randomized clinical trial. Nutrients 2016, 8, 677. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

58. Kang, L.J.; Koleva, P.T.; Field, C.J.; Giesbrecht, G.F.; Wine, E.; Becker, A.B.; Mandhane, P.J.; Turvey, S.E.;
Subbarao, P.; Sears, M.R.; et al. Maternal depressive symptoms linked to reduced faecal Immunoglobulin A
concentrations in infants. Brain Behav. Immun. 2019, 68, 123–131. [CrossRef]

59. Quin, C.; Estaki, M.; Vollman, D.M.; Barnett, J.A.; Gill, S.K.; Gibson, D.L. Probiotic supplementation and
associated infant gut microbiome and health: A cautionary retrospective clinical comparison. Sci. Rep. 2018,
8, 8283. [CrossRef]

60. Kubota, T.; Shimojo, N.; Nonaka, K.; Yamashita, M.; Ohara, O.; Igoshi, Y.; Ozawa, N.; Nakano, T.; Morita, Y.;
Inoue, Y.; et al. Prebiotic consumption in pregnant and lactating women increases IL-27 expression in human
milk. Br. J. Nutr. 2014, 111, 625–632. [CrossRef]

61. Nikniaz, L.; Ostadrahimi, A.; Mahdavi, R.; Hejazi, M.A.; Salekdeh, G.H. Eﬀect of synbiotic supplementation

on breast milk levels of IgA.; TGF-β1, and TGF-β2. J. Hum. Lact. 2013, 29, 591–596. [CrossRef]

62. Mahdavi, R.; Taghipour, S.; Ostadrahimi, A.; Nikniaz, L.; Hezaveh, S.J. A pilot study of synbiotic
supplementation on breast milk mineral concentrations and growth of exclusively breast fed infants.
J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 2015, 30, 25–29. [CrossRef]

63. Zachara, B.A.; Pilecki, A. Selenium concentration in the milk of breast-feeding mother and its geographic

distribution. Environ. Health Perspect. 2000, 108, 1043–1046. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

38 of 49

64. Taghipour, S.; Nikniaz, L.; Mahavi, R.; Ostadrahimi, A.; Nikniaz, Z. Synbiotic supplementation is not eﬀective
on breast milk selemium concentrations and growth of exclusively breast fed infants: A pilot study. Int. J.
Vit. Nutr. Res. 2019. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

65. Bertelsen, R.J.; Jensen, E.T.; Ringel-Kulka, T. Use of probiotics and prebiotics in infant feeding. Best Pract. Res.

Clin. Gastroenterol. 2016, 30, 39–48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

66. Arboleya, S.; Sánchez, B.; Milani, C.; Duranti, S.; Solís, G.; Fernández, N.; Clara, G.; Ventura, M.; Margolles, A.;
Gueimonde, M. Intestinal microbiota development in preterm neonates and eﬀect of perinatal antibiotics.
J. Pediatr. 2015, 166, 538–544. [CrossRef]

67. Hill, C.J.; Lynch, D.B.; Murphy, K.; Ulaszewska, M.; Jeﬀery, I.B.; O’Shea, C.A.; Watkins, C.; Dempsey, E.;
Mattivi, F.; Tuohy, K.; et al. Evolution of gut microbiota composition from birth to 24 weeks in the
INFANTMET Cohort. Microbiome 2017, 5, 4. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

68. Ahern, G.J.; Hennessy, A.A.; Ryan, C.A.; Ross, R.P.; Stanton, C. Advances in infant formula science. Ann. Rev.

69. Athalye-Jape, G.; Patole, S. Probiotics for preterm infants—Time to end all controversies. Microb. Biotechnol.

Food Sci. Technol. 2019, 10, 75–102. [CrossRef]

2019, 12, 249–253. [CrossRef]

70. Collins, A.; Weitkamp, J.-H.; Wynn, J.L. Why are preterm newborns at increased risk of infection? Arch. Dis.

Child. Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2018, 103, F391–F394. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

71. Wandro, S.; Osborne, S.; Enriquez, C.; Bixby, C.; Arrieta, A.; Whiteson, K. The microbiome and metabolome of
preterm infant stool are personalized and not driven by health outcomes, including necrotizing enterocolitis
and late-onset sepsis. mSpehere 2018, 3, e00104-18. [CrossRef]

72. Rougé, C.; Goldenberg, O.; Ferraris, L.; Berger, B.; Rochat, F.; Legrand, A.; Göbel, U.B.; Vodovar, M.; Voyer, M.;
Rozé, J.C.; et al. Investigation of the intestinal microbiota in preterm infants using diﬀerent methods. Anaerobe
2010, 16, 362–370. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

73. Mai, V.; Torrazza, R.M.; Ukhanova, M.; Wang, X.; Sun, Y.; Li, N.; Shuster, J.; Sharma, R.; Hudak, M.L.; Neu, J.
Distortions in development of intestinal microbiota associated with late onset sepsis in preterm infants.
PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e52876. [CrossRef]

74. Claud, E.C.; Walker, W.A. Hypothesis: Inappropriate colonization of the premature intestine can cause

neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis. FASEB J. 2001, 15, 1398–1403. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

75. Warner, B.B.; Tarr, P.I. Necrotizing enterocolitis and preterm infant gut microbiota. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med.

2016, 21, 394–399. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

76. Pammi, M.; Cope, J.; Tarr, P.I.; Warner, B.B.; Morrow, A.L.; Mai, V.; Gregory, K.E.; Kroll, J.S.; McMurtry, V.;
Ferris, M.J.; et al. Intestinal dysbiosis in preterm infants preceding necrotizing enterocolitis: A systematic
review and metaanalysis. Microbiome 2017, 5, 31. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

77. Aceti, A.; Beghetti, I.; Maggio, L.; Martini, S.; Faldella, G.; Corvaglia, L. Filling the gaps: Current research
directions for a rational use of probiotics in preterm infants. Nutrients 2018, 10, 1472. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78. Chi, C.; Buys, N.; Li, C.; Sun, J.; Yin, C. Eﬀects of prebiotics on sepsis, necrotizing enterocolitis, mortality,
feeding intolerance, time to full enteral feeding, length of hospital stay, and stool frequency in preterm
infants: A meta-analysis. Eur J. Clin. Nutr 2019, 73, 657–670. [CrossRef]
Johnson-Henry, K.C.; Abrahamsson, T.R.; Wu, R.Y.; Sherman, P.M. Probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics for
the prevention of necrotizing enterocolitis. Adv. Nutr. 2016, 7, 928–937. [CrossRef]

79.

80. Dilli, D.; Aydin, B.; Fettah, N.D.; Ozyazici, E.; Beken, S.; Zenciroglu, A.; Okumus, N.; Ozyurt, B.M.; Ipek, M.S.;
Akdaq, A.; et al. The Propre-Save study: Eﬀects of probiotics and prebiotics alone or combined on necrotizing
enterocolitis in very low birth weight infants. J. Pediatr. 2015, 166, 545–551. [CrossRef]
Sreenivasa, B.; Kumar, P.S.; Suresh Babu, M.T.; Ragavendra, K. Role of synbiotics in the prevention of
necrotizing enterocolitis in preterm neonates: A randomized controlled trial. Int. J. Contemp. Pediatr. 2015, 2,
127–130.

81.

82. Nandhini, L.P.; Biswal, N.; Adhisivam, B.; Mandal, J.; Bhat, B.V.; Mathai, B. Synbiotics for decreasing
incidence of necrotizing enterocolitis among preterm neonates—A randomized controlled trial. J. Matern.
Fetal. Neonatal. Med. 2016, 29, 821–825. [CrossRef]

83. Liu, Y.; Qin, S.; Song, Y.; Feng, Y.; Lv, N.; Xue, Y.; Liu, F.; Wang, S.; Zhu, B.; Ma, J.; et al. The perturbation
of infant gut microbiota caused by cesarean delivery is partially restored by exclusive breastfeeding.
Front. Microbiol. 2019, 10, 598. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

39 of 49

84. Korpela, K.; Salonen, A.; Vepsäläinen, O.; Suomalainen, M.; Kolmeder, C.; Varjosalo, M.; Miettinen, S.;
Kukkonen, K.; Savilahti, E.; Kuitunen, M.; et al. Probiotic supplementation restores normal microbiota
composition and function in antibiotic-treated and in caesarian-born infants. Microbiome 2018, 6, 182.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

87.

85. Collier, R. Squabble over risks of probiotic infant formula. CMAJ 2009, 181, E46–E47. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Hascoët, J.M.; Hubert, C.; Rochat, F.; Legagneur, H.; Gaga, S.; Emady-Azar, S.; Steenhout, P.G. Eﬀect of
formula composition on the development of infant gut microbiota. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2011, 52,
756–762. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Skórka, A.; Pie´scik-Lech, M.; Kołodziej, M.; Szajewska, H. To add or not to add probiotics in infant formulae?
Benef. Microbes 2017, 8, 717–725. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sung, V.; D’Amico, F.; Cabana, M.D.; Chau, K.; Koren, G.; Savino, F.; Szajewska, H.; Deshpande, G.;
Dupont, C.; Indrio, F.; et al. Lactobacillus reuteri to treat infant colic: A meta-analysis. Pediatrics 2018,
141, e20171811. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Skórka, A.; Pie´scik-Lech, M.; Kołodziej, M.; Szajewska, H. Infant formulae supplemented with prebiotics:
Are they better than unsupplemented formulae? An updated systematic review. Brit. J. Nutr. 2018, 119,
810–825. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

88.

89.

90. Mugambi, M.N.; Musekiwa, A.; Lombard, M.; Young, T.; Blaauw, R. Synbiotics, probiotics or prebiotics in

91.

infant formula for full term infants: A systematic review. Nutr. J. 2012, 11, 81. [CrossRef]
Fox, A.T.; Wopereis, H.; Van Ampting, M.T.J.; Oude Nijhuis, M.M.; Butt, A.M.; Peroni, D.G.; Vandenplas, Y.;
Candy, D.C.A.; Shah, N.; West, C.E.; et al. A speciﬁc synbiotic-containing amino acid-based formula in
dietary management of cow’s milk allergy: A randomized controlled trial. Clin. Transl. Allergy 2019, 9, 5.
[CrossRef]

93.

92. Vandenplas, Y.; Analitis, A.; Tziouvara, C.; Kountzoglou, A.; Drakou, A.; Tsouvalas, M.; Mavroudi, A.;
Xinias, I. Safety of a new synbiotic starter formula. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. Nutr. 2017, 20, 167–177.
[CrossRef]
Szajewska, H.; Ruszczy ´nski, M.; Szyma ´nski, H.; Sadowska-Krawczenko, I.; Piwowarczyk, A.; Rasmussen, P.B.;
Kristensen, M.B.; West, C.E.; Hernell, O. Eﬀect of infant formula supplemented with prebiotics compared
with synbiotics on growth up to the age of 12 mo: A randomized controlled trial. Pediatr. Res. 2017, 81,
752–758. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

94. Chua, M.C.; Ben-Amor, K.; Lay, C.; Neo, A.G.E.; Chiang, W.C.; Rao, R.; Chew, C.; Chaithongwongwatthana, S.;
Khemapech, N.; Knol, J.; et al. Eﬀect of synbiotic on the gut microbiota of cesarean delivered infants: A
randomized, double-blind, multicenter study. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2017, 65, 102–106. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

95. Biagi, E.; Candela, M.; Turroni, S.; Garagnani, P.; Franceschi, C.; Brigidi, P. Ageing and gut microbes:
Perspectives for health maintenance and longevity. Pharm. Res. 2013, 69, 11–20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Haran, J.P.; Bucci, V.; Dutta, P.; Ward, D.; McCormick, B. The nursing home elder microbiome stability and
associations with age, frailty, nutrition and physical location. J. Med. Microbiol. 2018, 67, 40–51. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

97. Claesson, M.J.; Cusack, S.; O’Sullivan, O.; Greene-Diniz, R.; de Weerd, H.; Flannery, E.; Marchesi, J.R.;
Falush, D.; Dinan, T.; Fitzgerald, G.; et al. Composition, variability, and temporal stability of the intestinal
microbiota of the elderly. PNAS 2011, 108, 4586–4591. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

98. Claesson, M.J.; Jeﬀery, I.B.; Conde, S.; Power, S.E.; O’Connor, E.; Cusack, S.; Harris, H.M.B.; Coakley, M.;
Lakshminarayanan, B.; O’Sullivan, O.; et al. Gut microbiota composition correlates with diet and health in
the elderly. Nature 2012, 488, 178–185. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

99. Ticinesi, A.; Lauretani, F.; Tana, C.; Nouvenne, A.; Ridolo, E.; Meschi, T. Exercise and the immune system as

modulators of intestinal microbiome: Implications for the gut-muscle axis. EIR 2019, 25, 84–95.

100. Ticinesi, A.; Lauretani, F.; Milani, C.; Nouvenne, A.; Tana, C.; Del Rio, D.; Maggio, M.; Ventura, M.; Meschi, T.
Aging gut microbiota at the cross-road between nutrition, physical frailty, and sarcopenia: Is there a
gut-muscle axis? Nutrients 2017, 9, 1303. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

101. Cruz-Jentoft, A.J.; Baeyens, J.P.; Bauer, J.M.; Boirie, Y.; Cederholm, T.; Landi, F.; Martin, F.C.; Michel, J.P.;
Rolland, Y.; Schneider, S.M.; et al. Sarcopenia: European consensus on deﬁnition and diagnosis: Report
of the European Working Group on Sarcopenia in Older People. Age Ageing 2010, 39, 412–423. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

40 of 49

102. Mijnarends, D.M.; Schols, J.M.G.A.; Meijers, J.M.M.; Tan, F.E.S.; Verlaan, S.; Luiking, Y.C.; Morley, J.E.;
Halfens, R.J.G. Instruments to assess sarcopenia and physical frailty in older people living in a community(care)
setting: Similarities and discrepancies. J. Am. Med. Dir. Assoc. 2015, 16, 301–308. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Siddharth, J.; Chakrabarti, A.; Pannerec, A.; Karaz, S.; Morin-Rivron, D.; Masoodi, M.; Feige, J.N.;
Parkinson, S.J. Aging and sarcopenia associate with speciﬁc interactions between gut microbes, serum
biomarkers and host physiology in rats. Aging 2017, 9, 1698–1720. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

104. Walsch, M.E.; Bhattacharya, A.; Sataranatarayan, K.; Qaisar, R.; Sloane, L.; Rahman, M.M.; Kinter, M.; Van
Remmen, H. The histone deacetylase inhibitor butyrate improves metabolism and reduces muscle atrophy
during aging. Aging Cell 2015, 14, 957–970. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

105. Varian, B.J.; Goureshetti, S.; Poutahidis, T.; Lakritz, J.R.; Levkovich, T.; Kwok, C.; Teliousis, K.; Ibrahim, Y.M.;
Mirabal, S.; Erdman, S.E. Beneﬁcial bacteria inhibit cachexia. Oncotarget 2016, 7, 11803–11816. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

106. Inglis, J.E.; Ilich, J.Z. The microbiome and osteosarcopenic obesity in older individuals in long-term care

facilities. Curr. Osteoporos Rep. 2015, 13, 358–362. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

107. Ilich, J.Z.; Inglis, J.E.; Owen, K.J.; McGee, D.L. Osteosarcopenic obesity is associated with reduced handgrip
strength, walking abilities, and balance in postmenopausal women. Osteoporos Int. 2015, 26, 2587–2595.
[CrossRef]

108. Sjögren, K.; Engdahl, C.; Henning, P.; Lerner, U.H.; Tremaroli, V.; Lagerquist, M.K.; Bäckhed, F.; Ohlsson, C.

The gut microbiota regulates bone mass in mice. J. Bone Min. Res. 2012, 27, 1357–1367. [CrossRef]

109. Britton, R.A.; Irwin, R.; Quach, D.; Schaefer, L.; Zhang, J.; Lee, T.; Parameswaran, N.; McCabe, L.R. Probiotic
L. reuteri treatment prevents bone loss in a menopausal ovariectomized mouse model. J. Cell Physiol. 2014,
229, 1822–1830. [CrossRef]

110. Salazar, N.; Valdés-Varela, L.; González, S.; Guiemonde, M.; de los Reyes-Gavilán, C.G. Nutrition and the gut

microbiome in the elderly. Gut Microbes 2017, 8, 82–97. [CrossRef]

111. Salazar, N.; Lopez, P.; Valdes, L.; Margolles, A.; Suarez, A.; Patterson, A.M.; Cuervo, A.; de los Reyes-Gavilan, C.G.;
Ruas-Madiedo, P.; Gonzalez, S.; et al. Microbial targets for the development of functional foods accordingly
with nutritional and immune parameters altered in the elderly. J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 2013, 32, 399–406. [CrossRef]
112. Fulgoni, V.L., 3rd. Current protein intake in America: Analysis of the National Health and Nutrition

Examination Survey, 2003–2004. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2008, 87, 1554S–1557S. [CrossRef]

113. Pray, L.A.; Institute of Medicine (US); Planning Committee for Food Supply and Aging Populations, National
Academies Press (US). Providing Healthy and Safe Foods as We Age: Workshop Summary; National Academies
Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2010.

114. Woodmansey, E.J.; McMurdo, M.E.; Macfarlane, G.T.; Macfarlane, S. Comparison of compositions and
metabolic activities of faecal microbiotas in young adults and in antibiotic-treated and non-antibiotic-treated
elderly subjects. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2004, 70, 6113–6122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

115. Keller, J.M.; Surawicz, C.M. Clostridium diﬃcile infection in the elderly. Clin. Geriatr. Med. 2014, 30, 79.

116. Haq, K.; McElhaney, J.E. Immunosenescence: Inﬂuenza vaccination and the elderly. Curr. Opin. Immunol.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

2014, 29, 38–42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

117. Milani, C.; Ticinesi, A.; Gerritsen, J.; Nouvenne, A.; Lugli, G.A.; Mancabelli, L.; Turroni, F.; Duranti, S.;
Mangifesta, M.; Viappiani, A.; et al. Gut microbiota composition and Clostridium diﬃcile infection in
hospitalized elderly individuals: A metagenomic study. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 25945. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. O’Sullivan, O.; Coakley, M.; Lakshminarayanan, B.; Conde, S.; Claesson, M.J.; Cusack, S.; Fitzgerald, A.P.;
O’Toole, P.W.; Stanton, C.; Ross, R.P. Alterations in intestinal microbiota of elderly Irish subjects post-antibiotic
therapy. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 2013, 68, 214–221. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

119. Baghurst, K.I.; Hope, A.K.; Down, E.C. Dietary intake in a group of institutionalized elderly and the eﬀect of
a dietary supplementation programme on nutrient intake and weight gain. Community Health Stud. 1985, 9,
99–108. [CrossRef]

120. Cuervo, A.; Salazar, N.; Ruas-Madiedo, P.; Gueimonde, M.; González, S. Fiber from a regular diet is directly
associated with faecal short chain fatty acid concentrations in the elderly. Nutr. Res. 2013, 33, 811–816.
[CrossRef]

121. Gill, S.G.; Rutherford, K.J.; Cross, M.L.; Gopal, P.K. Enhancement of immunity in the elderly by dietary
intervention with the probiotic Biﬁdobacterium lactis HN019. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2001, 74, 833–839. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

41 of 49

122. Spaiser, S.J.; Culpepper, T.; Nieves, C., Jr.; Ukhanova, M.; Mai, V.; Percival, S.S.; Christman, M.C.;
Langkamp-Henken, B. Lactobacillus gasseri KS-13. Biﬁdobacterium biﬁdum G9-1, and Bifdobacterium longum
MM-2 ingestion induces a less inﬂammatory cytokine proﬁle and a potentially beneﬁcial shift in gut
J. Am.
microbiota in older adults: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover, study.
Coll. Nutr. 2015, 34, 459–469.

123. Gao, R.; Zhang, X.; Huang, L.; Shen, R.; Qin, H. Gut microbiota alteration after long-term consumption of

probiotics in the elderly. Antimicrob. Proteins 2019, 11, 655–666. [CrossRef]

124. Lahtinen, S.J.; Forssten, S.; Aakko, J.; Granlund, L.; Rautonen, N.; Salminen, S.; Viitanen, M.; Ouwehand, A.C.
Probiotic cheese containing Lactobacillus rhamnosus HN001 and Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM
modiﬁed
subpopulations of fecal lactobacilli and Clostridium diﬃcile in the elderly. AGE 2012, 34, 133–143. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

®

125. Rampelli, S.; Candela, M.; Severgnini, M.; Biagi, E.; Turroni, S.; Roselli, M.; Carnevali, P.; Donini, L.; Brigidi, P.
A probiotics-containing biscuit modulates the intestinal microbiota in the elderly. J. Nutr. Health Aging 2013,
17, 166–172. [CrossRef]

126. Lahtinen, S.J.; Tammela, L.; Korpela, J.; Parhiala, R.; Ahokoski, H.; Mykkänen, H.; Salminen, S.J. Probiotics
modulate the Biﬁdobacterium microbiota of elderly nursing home residents. AGE 2009, 31, 59–66. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

127. Eloe-Fadrosh, E.A.; Brady, A.; Crabtree, J.; Drabek, E.F.; Ma, B.; Mahurkar, A.; Ravel, J.; Haverkamp, M.;
Fiorino, A.-M.; Botelho, C.; et al. Functional dynamics of the gut microbiome in elderly people during
probiotic consumption. MBio 2015, 6, e00231-15. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

128. Bouhnik, Y.; Achour, L.; Paineau, D.; Riottot, M.; Attar, A.; Bornet, F. Four-week short chain fructo-oligosaccharides
ingestion leads to increasing faecal bifidobacteria and cholesterol excretion in healthy elderly volunteers. Nutr. J.
2007, 6, 42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

129. Vulevic, J.; Juric, A.; Walton, G.E.; Claus, S.P.; Tzortzis, G.; Toward, R.E.; Gibson, G.R. Inﬂuence of
galacto-oligosaccharide mixture (B-GOS) on gut microbiota, immune parameters and metabolomics in
elderly persons. Br. J. Nutr. 2015, 114, 586–595. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

130. Tran, T.T.T.; Cousin, F.J.; Lynch, D.B.; Menon, R.; Brulc, J.; Brown, J.R.M.; O’Herlihy, E.; Butto, L.F.; Power, K.;
Jeﬀery, I.B.; et al. Prebiotic supplementation in frail older people aﬀects speciﬁc gut microbiota taxa but not
global diversity. Microbiome 2019, 7, 39. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

131. Wolf, M.; Moser, B. Antimicrobial activities of chemokines: Not just a side eﬀect? Front. Immunol. 2012, 3,

213. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

132. Buiges, C.; Fernández-Garrido, J.; Pruimboom, L.; Hoogland, A.J.; Navarro-Martínez, R.; Martínez-Martínez, M.;
Verdejo, Y.; Mascarós, M.C.; Peris, C.; Cauli, O. Effect of a prebiotic formulation on frailty syndrome: A
randomized, double-blind clinical trial. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016, 17, 932. [CrossRef]

133. Theou, O.;

Jayanama, K.; Fernández-Garrido,

J.; Buiges, C.; Pruimboom, L.; Hoogland, A.J.;
Navarro-Martínez, R.; Rockwood, K.; Cauli, O. Can a prebiotic formulation reduce frailty levels in older
people? J. Frailty Aging 2019, 8, 48–52.

134. Costabile, A.; Bergillos-Meca, T.; Rasinkangas, P.; Korpela, K.; de Vos, W.; Gibson, G.R. Eﬀects of soluble
corn ﬁbre alone or in combination with Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and the pilus-deﬁcient derivative
GG-PB12 on faecal microbiota, metabolism and markers of immune function: A randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, crossover study in healthy elderly (Saimes Stidy). Front.
Immunol. 2017, 8, 1443.
[PubMed]

135. Langille, M.G.; Meehan, C.J.; Koenig, J.E.; Dhanani, A.S.; Rose, R.A.; Howlestt, S.E.; Beiko, R.G. Microbial

shifts in the aging mouse gut. Microbiome 2014, 2, 50. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

136. Conley, M.N.; Wong, C.P.; Duyck, K.M.; Hord, N.; Ho, E.; Sharpton, T.J. Aging and serum MCP-1 are
associated with gut microbiome composition in a murine model. PeerJ 2016, 4, e1854. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Konikoﬀ, T.; Gophna, U. Oscillospira: A central enigmatic component of the human gut microbiota.

Trends Microbiol. 2016, 24, 523–524. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

138. Salazar, N.; Arboleya, S.; Valdes, L.; Stanton, C.; Ross, P.; Ruiz, L.; Gueimonde, M.; de los Reyes-Gavilan, C.G.
The human intestinal microbiome at extreme ages of life. Dietary intervention as a way to counteract
alterations. Front. Genet. 2014, 5, 406. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

42 of 49

139. Clarke, S.F.; Murphy, E.F.; O’Sullivan, O.; Lucey, A.J.; Humphreys, M.; Hogan, A.; Hayes, P.; O’Reilly, M.;
Jeﬀery, I.B.; Wood-Martin, R.; et al. Exercise and dietary extremes impact on gut microbial diversity. Gut
2016, 63, 1913–1920. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

140. Barton, W.; Penney, N.C.; Cronin, O.; Garcia-Perez, I.; Molloy, M.G.; Holmes, E.; Shanahan, F.; Cotter, P.D.;
O’Sullivan, O. The microbiome of professional athletes diﬀers from that of more sedentary subjects in
composition and particularly at the functional metabolic level. Gut 2018, 67, 625–633. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
141. Estaki, M.; Pither, J.; Baumeister, P.; Little, J.P.; Gill, S.K.; Ghosh, S.; Ahmadi-Vand, Z.; Marsden, K.R.;
Gibson, D.L. Cardiorespiratory ﬁtness as a predictor of intestinal microbial diversity and distinct metagenomic
functions. Microbiome 2016, 4, 42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

142. Munukka, E.; Ahtiainen, J.P.; Puigbó, P.; Jalkanen, S.; Pahkala, K.; Keskitalo, A.; Kujala, U.M.; Pietilä, S.;
Hollmén, M.; Elo, L.; et al. Six-week endurance exercise alters gut metagenome that is not reﬂected in
systemic metabolism on over-weight women. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 2323. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

143. Taniguchi, H.; Tanisawa, K.; Sun, X.; Kubo, T.; Hoshino, Y.; Hosokawa, M.; Takeyama, H.; Higuchi, M. Eﬀects
of short-term endurance exercise on gut microbiota in elderly men. Physiol. Rep. 2018, 6, e13935. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

144. Allen, J.M.; Mailing, L.J.; Niemiro, G.M.; Moore, R.; Cook, M.D.; White, B.A.; Holscher, H.D.; Woods, J.A.
Exercise alters gut microbiota composition and function in lean and obese humans. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.
2018, 50, 747–757. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

145. Karl, J.P.; Margolis, L.M.; Madslien, E.H.; Murphy, N.E.; Castellani, J.W.; Gundersen, Y.; Hoke, A.V.;
Levangie, M.W.; Kumar, R.; Chakraborty, N.; et al. Changes in intestinal microbiota composition and
metabolism coincide with increased intestinal permeability in young adults under prolonged physiological
stress. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 2017, 312, G559–G571. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

146. Wilson, D.; Jackson, T.; Sapey, E.; Lord, J.M. Frailty and sarcopenia: The potential role of an aged immune

system. Ageing Res. Rev. 2017, 36, 1–10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

147. Gleeson, M.; Pyne, D.B. Respiratory inflammation and infections in high-performance athletes. Immunol. Cell Biol.

148. De Oliveira, E.P.; Burini, R.C. Food-dependent, exercise-induced gastrointestinal distress.

J. Int. Soc.

2016, 94, 124–131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Sports Nutr. 2011, 8, 12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

149. Smarkusz, J.; Ostrowska, L.; Witczak-Sawczuk, K. Probiotic strains as the element of nutritional proﬁle in
physical activity—New trend or better sports results? Rocz. Panstw. Zakl. Hig. 2017, 68, 229–235. [PubMed]
150. Jozkow, P.; Wasko-Czopnik, D.; Medras, M.; Paradowski, L. Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease and physical

activity. Sports Med. 2006, 36, 385–391. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

151. Gleeson, M.; Bishop, N.C.; Oliveira, M.; Tauler, P. Daily probiotic’s (Lactobacillus casei Shirota) reduction of

infection incidence in athletes. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2011, 21, 55–64. [CrossRef]

152. Gleeson, M.; Bishop, N.C.; Struszczak, L. Eﬀects of Lactobacillus casei Shirota ingestion on common cold
infection and herpes virus antibodies in endurance athletes: A placebo-controlled, randomized trial. Eur. J.
Appl. Physiol. 2016, 166, 1555–1563. [CrossRef]

153. Komano, Y.; Shimada, K.; Naito, H.; Fukao, K.; Ishihara, Y.; Fujii, T.; Kokubo, T.; Daida, H. Eﬃcacy of
heat-treated Lactococcus lactis JCM 5805 on immunity and fatigue during consecutive high intensity exercise
in male athletes: A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blinded trial. J. Int. Sports Nutr. 2018, 15, 39.
[CrossRef]

154. Kokubo, T.; Komano, Y.; Tsuji, R.; Fujiwara, D.; Fujii, T.; Kanauchi, O. Plasmacytoid dendritic cell-stimulative
lactic acid bacteria, Lactococcus lactis strain Plasma, relieves exercise-induced fatigue and aids recovery via
immuno-modulatory action. Int. J. Sports Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2019. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

155. Smith, T.J.; Rigassio-Radler, D.; Denmark, R.; Haley, T.; Touger-Decker, R. Eﬀect of Lactobacillus rhamnosus
on health-related quality of life in college students

LGG
aﬀected by upper respiratory infections. Br. J. Nutr. 2013, 109, 1999–2007. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

and Biﬁdobacterium animalis ssp. lactis BB-12

®

®

156. West, N.P.; Pyne, D.B.; Cripps, A.W.; Hopkins, W.G.; Eskesen, D.C.; Jairath, A.; Christophersen, C.T.;
Conlon, M.A.; Fricker, P.A. Lactobacillus fermentum (PCC
) supplementation and gastrointestinal and
respiratory tract illness symptoms: A randomised control trial in athletes. Nutr. J. 2011, 10, 30. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

®

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

43 of 49

157. Gleeson, M.; Bishop, N.C.; Oliveira, M.; McCauley, T.; Tauler, P.; Lawrence, C. Eﬀects of Lactobacillus salivarius
probiotic intervention on infection, cold symptom duration and severity, and mucosal immunity in endurance
athletes. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2012, 22, 235–242. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

158. Haywood, B.A.; Black, K.E.; Baker, D.; McGarvey, J.; Healey, P.; Brown, R.C. Probiotic supplementation reduces
the duration and incidence of infections but not severity in elite rugby union players. J. Sci. Med. Sport 2014, 17,
356–360. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

159. Strasser, B.; Geiger, D.; Schauer, M.; Gostner, J.M.; Gatterer, H.; Burtscher, M.; Fuchs, D. Probiotic supplements
beneﬁcially aﬀect tryptophan-kynurenine metabolism and reduce the incidence of upper respiratory tract
infections in trained athletes: A randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Nutrients 2016, 8, 752. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

160. Michalickova, D.; Minic, R.; Dikic, N.; Andjelkovic, M.; Kostic-Vucicevic, M.; Stojmenovic, T.; Nikolic, I.;
Djordjevic, B. Lactobacillus helveticus Lafti L10 supplementation reduced respiratory infection duration in a
cohort of elite athletes: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab.
2016, 41, 782–789. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

161. Michalickova, D.M.; Kostic-Vucicevic, M.M.; Vukasinovic-Vesic, M.D.; Stojmenovic, T.B.; Dikic, N.V.;
Andjelkovic, M.S.; Djordjevic, B.I.; Tanaskovic, B.P.; Minic, R.D. Lactobacillus helveticus Lafti L10 supplementation
modulates mucosal and humoral immunity in elite athletes: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2017, 31, 62–70. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

162. Michalickova, D.; Kotur-Stevuljevic, J.; Miljkovic, M.; Dikic, N.; Kostic-Vucicevic, M.; Andjelkovic, M.;
Koricanac, V.; Djordjevic, B. Eﬀect of probiotic supplementation on selected parameters of blood antioxidant
J. Hum. Kinet. 2018, 64, 111–122.
balance in elite athletes: A double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

163. Hao, Q.; Dong, B.R.; Wu, T. Probiotics for preventing acute upper respiratory tract infections. Cochrane

Database Syst. Rev. 2015, 2, CD006895. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

164. Möller, G.B.; da Cunha Goulart, M.J.V.; Nicoletta, B.B.; Alves, F.D.; Schneider, C.D. Supplementation of
probiotics and its eﬀects on physically active individuals and athletes: Systematic review. Int. J. Sport Nutr.
Exerc. Metab. 2019, 26, 1–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

165. Huang, W.C.; Hsu, Y.J.; Li, H.; Kan, N.W.; Chen, Y.M.; Lin, J.S.; Hsu, T.K.; Tsai, T.Y.; Chiu, Y.S.; Huang, C.C.
Eﬀect of Lactobacillus plantarum TWK10 on improving endurance performance in humans. Chin. J. Physiol.
2018, 61, 163–170. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

166. Huang, W.-C.; Wei, C.-C.; Huang, C.-C.; Chen, W.-L.; Huang, H.Y. The beneﬁcial eﬀects of Lactobacillus
plantarum PS128 on high intensity, exercise-induced oxidative stress, inﬂammation, and performance in
triathletes. Nutrients 2019, 11, 353. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

167. Roberts, J.D.; Suckling, C.A.; Peedle, G.Y.; Murphy, J.A.; Dawkins, T.G.; Roberts, M.G. An exploratory
investigation of endotoxin levels in novice long distance triathletes, and the eﬀects of a multi-strain
probiotic/prebiotic antioxidant intervention. Nutrients 2016, 8, 733. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

168. Lemon, P.W.; Yarasheski, K.E.; Dolny, D.G. The importance of protein for athletes. Sports Med. 1984, 1,

474–484. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

169. Blachier, F.; Beaumont, M.; Portune, K.J.; Steuer, N.; Lan, A.; Audebert, M.; Khodorova, N.; Andriamihaja, M.;
Airinei, G.; Benamouzig, R.; et al. High-protein diets for weight management: Interactions with the intestinal
microbiota and consequences for gut health. A position paper by the My New Gut Study group. Clin. Nutr.
2018, 38, 1012–1022. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

170. Mental Health Foundation. Stress: Are We Coping? Mental Health Foundation: London, UK, 2018.
171. Zunhammer, M.; Eichhammer, P.; Busch, V. Sleep quality during exam stress: The role of alcohol, caﬀeine

and nicotine. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e109490. [CrossRef]

172. Simíc, N.; Manenica, I. Exam experience and some reactions to exam stress. Frizol. Cheloveka. 2012, 38, 82–87.
173. Health and Safety Executive. Work Related Stress Depression or Anxiety Statistics in Great Britain. 2018.

Available online: http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/stress.pdf (accessed on 23 April 2019).

174. The American Institute of Stress. Available online: https://www.stress.org/daily-life (accessed on

175. Taylor, A.M.; Holscher, H.D. A review of dietary and microbial connections to depression, anxiety and stress.

23 April 2019).

Nutr. Neurosci. 2018. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

44 of 49

176. Opie, R.S.; Itsiopoulos, C.; Parletta, N.; Sanchez-Villegas, A.; Akbaraly, T.N.; Ruusunen, A.; Jacka, F.N. Dietary

recommendations for the prevention of depression. Nutr. Neurosci. 2017, 20, 161–171. [CrossRef]

177. Taylor, A.M.; Thompson, S.V.; Edwards, C.G.; Musaad, S.M.A.; Khan, N.A.; Holscher, H.D. Associations
among diet, the gastrointestinal microbiota, and negative emotional states in adults. Nutr. Neurosci. 2019, 22,
1–10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

178. Dinan, T.G.; Cryan, J.F. The microbiome-gut-brain axis in health and disease. Gastroenterol. Clin. North Am.

2017, 46, 77–89. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

179. Avoli, M.; Krnjevi´c, K. The long and winding road to gamma-amino-butyric acid as neurotransmitter. Can. J.

Neurol. Sci. 2016, 43, 219–226. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

180. Yano, J.M.; Yu, K.; Donaldson, G.P.; Shastri, G.G.; Ann, P.; Ma, L.; Nagler, C.R.; Ismagilov, R.F.; Mazmanian, S.K.;
Hsiao, E.Y. Indigenous bacteria from the gut microbiota regulate host serotonin biosynthesis. Cell 2015,
163, 258. [CrossRef]

181. Morris, G.; Berk, M.; Carvalho, A.; Caso, J.R.; Sanz, Y.; Walder, K.; Maes, M. The role of microbial metabolites
including tryptophan catabolites and short chain fatty acids in the pathophysiology of immune-inﬂammatory
and neuroimmune disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 2017, 54, 4432–4451. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

182. Karl, J.P.; Hatch, A.M.; Arcidiacono, S.M.; Pearce, S.C.; Pantoja-Feliciano, I.G.; Doherty, L.A.; Soares, J.W.
Eﬀects of psychological, environmental and physical stressors on the gut microbiota. Front. Microbiol. 2018,
9, 2013. [CrossRef]

183. Galley, J.D.; Nelson, M.C.; Yu, Z.; Dowd, S.E.; Walter, J.; Kumar, P.S.; Lyte, M.; Bailey, M.T. Exposure to a
social stressor disrupts the community structure of the colonic mucosa-associated microbiota. BMC Microbiol.
2014, 14, 189. [CrossRef]

184. Galley, J.D.; Yu, Z.; Kumar, P.; Dowd, S.E.; Lyte, M.; Bailey, M.T. The structures of the colonic mucosa-associated
and luminal microbial communities are distinct and diﬀerentially aﬀected by a prolonged murine stressor.
Gut Microbes 2014, 5, 748–760. [CrossRef]

185. Galley, J.D.; Mackos, A.R.; Varaljay, V.A.; Bailey, M.T. Stressor exposure has prolonged eﬀects on colonic
microbial community structure in Citrobacter rodentium-challenged mice. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 45012. [CrossRef]
186. Golubeva, A.B.; Crampton, S.; Desbonnet, L.; Edge, D.; O’Sullivan, O.; Lomasney, K.W.; Zhdanov, A.V.;
Crispie, F.; Moloney, R.D.; Borre, Y.E.; et al. Prenatal stress-induced alterations in major physiological systems
correlate with gut microbiota composition in adulthood. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2015, 60, 58–74. [CrossRef]
187. Gautam, A.; Kumar, R.; Chakraborty, N.; Muhie, S.; Hoke, A.; Hammamieh, R.; Jett, M. Altered faecal
microbiota composition in all male aggressor-exposed rodent model simulating features of post-traumatic
stress disorder. J. Neurosci. Res. 2018, 96, 1311–1323. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

188. Knowles, S.R.; Nelson, E.A.; Palombo, E.A. Investigating the role of perceived stress on bacterial ﬂora activity
and salivary cortisol secretion: A possible mechanism underlying susceptibility to illness. Biol. Psychol. 2008,
77, 132–137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

189. Rao, A.V.; Bested, A.C.; Beaulne, T.M.; Katzman, M.A.; Iorio, C.; Berardi, J.M.; Logan, A.C. A randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study of a probiotic in emotional symptoms of chronic fatigue
syndrome. Gut Pathog. 2009, 1, 6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

190. Komaroﬀ, A.L.; Buchwald, D. Symptoms and signs of chronic fatigue syndrome. Rev. Infect. Dis. 1991, 13

(Suppl. 1), S8–S11. [CrossRef]

191. Messaoudi, M.; Lalonde, R.; Violle, N.; Javelot, H.; Desor, D.; Nejdi, A.; Bisson, J.F.; Rougeot, C.; Pichelin, M.;
Cazaubiel, M.; et al. Assessment of psychotropic-like properties of a probiotic formulation (Lactobacillus
helveticus R0052 and Biﬁdobacterium longum R0175) in rats and human subjects. Br. J. Nutr. 2011, 105, 755–764.
[CrossRef]

192. Akkasheh, G.; Kashani-Poor, Z.; Tajabadi-Ebrahimi, M.; Jafari, P.; Akbari, H.; Taghizadeh, M.; Memarzadeh, M.R.;
Asemi, Z.; Esmaillzadeh, A. Clinical and metabolic response to probiotic administration in patients with
major depressive disorder: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Nutrition 2016, 32, 315–320.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

193. Slykerman, R.F.; Hood, F.; Wickens, K.; Thompson, J.M.D.; Barthow, C.; Murphy, R.; Kang, J.; Rowden, J.;
Stone, P.; Crane, J. Eﬀect of Lactobacillus rhamnosus HN001 in pregnancy on postpartum symptoms of
depression and anxiety: A randomised double-blind placebo-controlled trial. EBioMedicine 2017, 24, 159–165.
[CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

45 of 49

194. Kato-Kataoka, A.; Nishida, K.; Takada, M.; Suda, K.; Kawai, M.; Shimizu, K.; Kushiro, A.; Hoshi, R.;
Watanabe, O.; Igarashi, T.; et al. Fermented milk containing Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota prevents the
onset of physical symptoms in medical students under academic examination stress. Benef. Microbes 2016, 7,
153–156. [CrossRef]

195. Takada, M.; Nishida, K.; Kataoka-Kato, A.; Gondo, Y.; Ishikawa, H.; Suda, K.; Kawai, M.; Hoshi, R.;
Watanabe, O.; Igarashi, T.; et al. Probiotic Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota relieves stress-associated symptoms
by modulating the gut–brain interaction in human and animal models. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2016, 28,
1027–1036. [CrossRef]

196. Silk, D.B.A.; Davis, A.; Vulevic, J.; Tzortzis, G.; Gibson, G.R. Clinical trial: The effects of a trans-galactooligosaccharide
prebiotic on faecal microbiota and symptoms in irritable bowel syndrome. Aliment. Pharm. 2009, 29, 508–518.
[CrossRef]

197. Schmidt, K.; Cowen, P.J.; Harmer, C.J.; Tzortzis, G.; Errington, S.; Burnet, P.W.J. Prebiotic intake reduces
the waking cortisol response and alters emotional bias in healthy volunteers. Psychopharmacology 2015, 232,
1793–1801. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

198. Azpiroz, F.; Dubray, C.; Bernalier-Donadille, A.; Cardot, J.-M.; Accarino, A.; Serra, J.; Wagner, A.; Respondek, F.;
Dapoigny, M. Eﬀects of scFOS on the composition of faecal microbiota and anxiety in patients with irritable
bowel syndrome: A randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2017, 29,
1–8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

199. WHO. Malnutrition. 2018. Available online: http://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/malnutrition

(accessed on 24 April 2019).

200. WHO. World Health Organisation Fact Sheet on Obesity and Overweight. 2018. Available online: http:
//www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight (accessed on 15 December 2019).
201. Minami, J.; Kondo, S.; Yanagisawa, N.; Odamaki, T.; Xiao, J.; Ade, F.; Nakajima, S.; Hamamoto, Y.; Saitoh, S.;
Shimoda, T. Oral administration of Biﬁdobacterium breve B-3 modiﬁes metabolic functions in adults with
obese tendencies in a randomized controlled trial. J. Nutr. Sci. 2015, 4, e17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

202. Minami, J.; Iwabuchi, N.; Tanaka, M.; Yamauchi, K.; Xiao, J.; Abe, F.; Sakane, N. Eﬀects of Biﬁdobacterium
breve B-3 on body fat reductions in pre-obese adults: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Biosci. Microbiota Food Health 2018, 37, 67–75. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

203. Stenman, L.K.; Lehtinen, M.J.; Meland, N.; Christensen, J.E.; Yeung, N.; Saarinen, M.T.; Courtney, M.;
Burcelin, R.; Lähdeaho, M.-L.; Linros, J.; et al. Probiotic with or without ﬁber controls body fat mass,
associated with serum zonulin, in overweight and obese adults—Randomized controlled trial. EBioMedicine
2016, 13, 190–200. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

204. Rouxinol-Dias, A.L.; Pinto, A.R.; Janeiro, C.; Rodrigues, D.; Moreira, M.; Dias, J.; Pereira, P. Probiotics for the

control of obesity—Its eﬀect on weight change. Porto Biomed. J. 2016, 1, 12–24. [CrossRef]

205. WHO. Body mass index—BMI. Available online: http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/disease-

prevention/nutrition/a-healthy-lifestyle/body-mass-index-bmi (accessed on 10 June 2019).

206. Bajagai, Y.S.; Klieve, A.V.; Dart, P.J.; Bryden, W.L.; FAO. Probiotics in Animal Nutrition—Production, Impact and
Regulation; FAO Animal Production and Health Paper No. 179; Harinder, P.S.M., Ed.; FAO: Rome, Italy, 2016.
207. Million, M.; Angelakis, E.; Paul, M.; Armougom, F.; Leibovici, L.; Raoult, D. Comparative meta-analysis of
the eﬀect of Lactobacillus species on weight gain in humans and animals. Microb. Pathog. 2012, 53, 100–108.
[CrossRef]

208. Onubi, O.J.; Poobalan, A.S.; Dineen, B.; Marais, D.; McNeill, G. Eﬀects of probiotics on child growth: A

systematic review. J. Healthpopul. Nutr. 2015, 34, 8. [CrossRef]

209. Smith, M.I.; Yatsunenko, T.; Manary, M.J.; Trehan, I.; Mkakosya, R.; Cheng, J.; Kau, A.L.; Rich, S.S.;
Concannon, P.; Mychaleckyj, J.C.; et al. Gut microbiomes of Malawian twin pairs discordant for kwashiorkor.
Science 2013, 339, 548–554. [CrossRef]

210. Million, M.; Tidjani Alou, M.; Khelaiﬁa, S.; Bachar, D.; Lagier, J.-C.; Dione, N.; Brah, S.; Hugon, P.; Lombard, V.;
Armougom, F.; et al. Increased gut redox and depletion of anaerobic and methanogenic prokaryotes in
severe acute malnutrition. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 26051. [CrossRef]

211. Million, M.; Diallo, A.; Raoult, D. Gut microbiota and malnutrition. Microb. Pathog. 2017, 106, 127–138.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

46 of 49

212. Alou, M.T.; Million, M.; Traore, S.I.; Mouelhi, D.; Khelaiﬁa, S.; Bachar, D.; Caputo, A.; Delerce, J.; Brah, S.;
Alhousseini, D.; et al. Gut Bacteria Missing in Severe Acute Malnutrition, Can We Identify Potential Probiotics
by Culturomics? Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 899. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

213. Parnell, J.A.; Reimer, R.A. Weight loss during oligofructose supplementation is associated with decreased
ghrelin and increased peptide YY in overweight and obese adults. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2009, 89, 1751–1759.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

214. Nicolucci, A.C.; Hume, M.P.; Martínez, I.; Mayengbam, S.; Walter, J.; Reimer, R.A. Prebiotics reduce body fat
and alter intestinal microbiota in children who are overweight or with obesity. Gastroenterology 2017, 153,
711–722. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

215. Liber, A.; Szajewska, H. Eﬀect of oligofructose supplementation on body weight in overweight and
obese children: A randomised, double-blind, placebo- controlled trial. Br. J. Nutr. 2014, 112, 2068–2074.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

216. Dewulf, E.M.; Cani, P.D.; Claus, S.P.; Fuentes, S.; Puylaert, P.G.B.; Neyrinck, A.M.; Bindels, L.B.; de Vos, W.M.;
Gibson, G.R.; Thissen, J.P.; et al. Insight into the prebiotic concept: Lessons from an exploratory, double-blind
intervention study with inulin-type fructans in obese women. Gut 2013, 62, 1112–1121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
217. Salazar, N.; Dewulf, E.M.; Neyrinck, A.M.; Bindels, L.B.; Cani, P.D.; Mahillon, J.; de Vos, W.M.; Thissen, J.P.;
Geuimonde, M.; de Los Reyes-Gavilán, C.G.; et al. Inulin-type fructans modulate intestinal Biﬁdobacterium
species populations and decrease short-chain fatty acids in obese women. Clin. Nutr. 2015, 34, 501–507.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

218. Kerac, M.; Bunn, J.; Seal, A.; Thindwa, M.; Tomkins, A.; Sadler, K.; Bahwere, P.; Collins, S. Probiotics and
prebiotics for severe acute malnutrition (PRONUT study): A double-blind eﬃcacy randomised controlled
trial in Malawi. Lancet 2009, 374, 136–144. [CrossRef]

219. Sazawal, S.; Dhingra, U.; Hiremath, G.; Sarkar, A.; Dhingra, P.; Dutta, A.; Menon, V.P.; Black, R.E. Eﬀects of
Biﬁdobacterium lactis HN019 and prebiotic oligosaccharide added to milk on iron status, anemia, and growth
among children 1 to 4 years old. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2010, 51, 341–346. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
220. Firmansyah, A.; Dwipoerwantoro, P.G.; Kadin, M.; Alatas, S.; Conus, N.; Lestarina, L.; Bouisset, F.; Steenhout, P.
Improved growth of toddlers fed a milk containing synbiotics. Asia Pac. J. Clin. Nutr. 2011, 20, 69–76.
221. Famouri, F.; Khoshdel, A.; Golshani, A.; Kheiri, S.; Saneian, H.; Kelishadi, R. Eﬀects of synbiotics on treatment
of children with failure to thrive: A triple blind placebo-controlled trial. J. Res. Med. Sci. Oﬀ. J. Isfahan Univ.
Med. Sci. 2014, 19, 1046-e50.

222. Bozzetto, L.; Costabile, G.; Della Pepa, G.; Ciciola, P.; Vetrani, C.; Vitale, M.; Rivellese, A.A.; Annuzzi, G.
Dietary ﬁbre as a unifying remedy for the whole spectrum of obesity-associated cardiovascular disease risk.
Nutrients 2018, 10, 943. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

223. McRorie, J.W. Evidence-based approach to ﬁber supplements and clinically meaningful health beneﬁts, Part
2: What to look for and how to recommend an eﬀective ﬁber therapy. Nutr. Today 2015, 50, 90–97. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

224. Maki, K.C.; Beiseigel, J.M.; Jonnalagadda, S.S.; Gugger, C.K.; Reeves, M.S.; Farmer, M.V.; Kaden, V.N.;
Rains, T.M. Whole-grain ready-to-eat oat cereal, as part of a dietary program for weight loss, reduces
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in adults with overweight and obesity more than a dietary program
including low-ﬁber control foods. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2010, 110, 205–214. [CrossRef]

225. Kikuchi, Y.; Nozaki, S.; Makita, M.; Yokozuka, S.; Fukudome, S.I.; Yanagisawa, T.; Aoe, S. Eﬀects of whole
grain wheat bread on visceral fat obesity in Japanese subjects: A randomized double-blind study. Plant Foods
Hum. Nutr. 2018, 73, 161–165. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

226. Kristensen, M.; Toubro, S.; Jensen, M.G.; Ross, A.B.; Riboldi, G.; Petronio, M.; Bügel, S.; Tetens, I.; Astrup, A.
Whole grain compared with reﬁned wheat decreases the percentage of body fat following a 12-week,
energy-restricted dietary intervention in postmenopausal women. J. Nutr. 2012, 142, 710–716. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

227. Röytiö, H.; Mokkala, K.; Vahlberg, T.; Laitinen, K. Dietary intake of fat and ﬁbre according to reference values
relates to higher gut microbiota richness in overweight pregnant women. Br. J. Nutr. 2017, 118, 343–352.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

228. Gomez-Arango, L.F.; Barrett, H.L.; Wilkinson, S.A.; Callaway, L.K.; McIntyre, H.D.; Morrison, M.; Dekker
Nitert, M. Low dietary ﬁbre intake increase Collinsella abundance in the gut microbiota of overweight and
obese pregnant women. Gut Microbes 2018, 9, 189–201. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

47 of 49

229. Menni, C.; Jackson, M.A.; Pallister, T.; Steves, C.J.; Spector, T.D.; Valdes, A.M. Gut microbiome diversity and

high-ﬁbre intake are related to lower long-term weight gain. Int. J. Obes. 2017, 41, 1099–1105. [CrossRef]
230. Wu, G.D.; Chen, J.; Hoﬀman, C.; Bittinger, K.; Chen, Y.Y.; Keilbaugh, S.A.; Bewtra, M.; Knights, D.;
Walters, W.A.; Knight, R.; et al. Linking long-term dietary patterns with gut microbial enterotypes. Science
2011, 334, 105–108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

231. Walker, A.W.; Ince, J.; Duncan, S.H.; Webster, L.M.; Holtrop, G.; Ze, X.; Brown, D.; Stares, M.D.; Scott, P.;
Bergerat, A.; et al. Dominant and diet-responsive groups of bacteria within the human colonic microbiota.
ISME J. 2011, 5, 220–230. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

232. Sonnenburg, J.L.; Bäckhed, F. Diet-microbiota interactions as moderators of human metabolism. Nature 2016,

535, 56–64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

233. Salonen, A.; Lahti, L.; Salojärvi, J.; Holtrop, G.; Korpela, K.; Duncan, S.H.; Date, P.; Farquharson, F.;
Impact of diet and individual variation on intestinal microbiota

Johnstone, A.M.; Lobley, G.E.; et al.
composition and fermentation products in obese men. ISME J. 2014, 8, 2218–2230. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

234. Cotillard, A.; Kennedy, S.P.; Kong, L.C.; Prifti, E.; Pons, N.; Le Chatelier, E.; Almeida, M.; Quinquis, B.;
Levenez, F.; Galleron, N.; et al. ANR MicroObes Consortium. Dietary intervention impact on gut microbial
gene richness. Nature 2013, 500, 585–588. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

235. Tap, J.; Furet, J.-P.; Bensaada, M.; Philippe, C.; Roth, H.; Rabot, S.; Lakhdari, O.; Lombard, V.; Henrissat, B.;
Corthier, G.; et al. Gut microbiota richness promotes its stability upon increased dietary ﬁbre intake in
healthy adults. Environ. Microbiol. 2015, 17, 4954–4964. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

236. Kovatcheva-Datchary, P.; Nilsson, A.; Akrami, R.; Lee, Y.S.; De Vadder, F.; Arora, T.; Hallen, A.; Martens, E.;
Björck, I.; Bäckhed, F. Dietary ﬁbre-induced improvement in glucose metabolism is associated with increased
abundance of Prevotella. Cell Metab. 2015, 22, 971–982. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

237. Sandberg, J.; Kovatcheva-Datchary, P.; Björck, I.; Bäckhed, F.; Nilsson, A. Abundance of gut Prevotella at

baseline and metabolic response to barley prebiotics. Eur. J. Nutr. 2018. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

238. De Filippis, F.; Pellegrini, N.; Laghi, L.; Gobbetti, M.; Ercolini, D. Unusual sub-genus associations of faecal
Prevotella and Bacteroides with speciﬁc dietary patterns. Microbiome 2016, 4, 57. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
239. Lappi, J.; Salojärvi, J.; Kolehmainen, M.; Mykkänen, H.; Poutanen, K.; de Vos, W.M.; Salonen, A. Intake of
whole-grain and ﬁber-rich rye bread versus reﬁned wheat bread does not diﬀerentiate intestinal microbiota
composition in Finnish adults with metabolic syndrome. J. Nutr. 2013, 143, 648–655. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
240. Korpela, K.; Flint, H.J.; Johnstone, A.M.; Lappi, J.; Poutanen, K.; Dewulf, E.; Delzenne, E.; Delzenne, N.;
de Vos, W.M.; Salonen, A. Gut microbiota signatures predict host and microbiota responses to dietary
interventions in obese individuals. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e90702. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

241. Zhao, L.; Zhang, F.; Ding, X.; Wu, G.; Lam, Y.Y.; Wang, X.; Fu, H.; Xue, X.; Lu, C.; Ma, J.; et al. Gut bacteria
selectively promoted by dietary ﬁbres alleviate type 2 diabetes. Science 2018, 329, 1151–1156. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

242. Kopf, J.C.; Suhr, M.J.; Clarke, J.; Eyun, S.; Riethoven, J.-J.M.; Ramer-Tait, A.E.; Rose, D.J. Role of whole grains
versus fruits and vegetables in reducing subclinical inﬂammation and promoting gastrointestinal health
in individuals aﬀected by overweight and obesity: A randomized controlled trial. Nutr. J. 2018, 17, 72.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

243. Healey, G.; Murphy, R.; Butts, C.; Brough, L.; Whelan, K.; Coad, J. Habitual dietary ﬁbre intake inﬂuences gut
microbiota response to an inulin-type fructan prebiotic: A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
cross-over, human intervention study. Br. J. Nutr. 2018, 119, 176–189. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

244. Brahma, A.; Martínez, I.; Walter, J.; Clarke, J.; Gonzalez, T.; Menon, R.; Rose, D.J. Impact of dietary pattern
of the faecal donor on in vitro fermentation properties of whole grains and brans. J. Funct. Foods 2017, 29,
281–289. [CrossRef]

245. Griﬃn, N.W.; Ahern, P.P.; Cheng, J.; Heath, A.C.; Ilkayeva, O.; Newgard, C.B.; Fontana, L.; Gordon, J.I.
Prior dietary practices and connections to a human gut microbial metacommunity alter responses to dietary
interventions. Cell Host Microbe 2017, 21, 84–96. [CrossRef]

246. Sonnenburg, E.D.; Smits, S.A.; Tikhonov, M.; Higginbottom, S.K.; Wingreen, N.S.; Sonnenburg, J.L.
Diet-induced extinction of the gut microbiota compounds over generations. Nature 2016, 529, 212–215.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

48 of 49

247. Venkataraman, A.; Sieber, J.R.; Schmidt, A.W.; Waldron, C.; Theis, K.R.; Schmidt, T.M. Variable responses of
human microbiomes to dietary supplementation with resistant starch. Microbiome 2016, 4, 33. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

248. Pasolli, E.; Truong, D.T.; Malik, F.; Waldron, L.; Segata, N. Machine learning meta-analysis of large
metagenomic datasets: Tools and biological insights. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2016, 12, e1004977-26. [CrossRef]
249. Karlsson, F.H.; Tremaroli, V.; Nookaew, I.; Bergström, G.; Behre, C.J.; Fagerberg, B.; Nielsen, J.; Bäckhed, F.
Gut metagenome in European women with normal, impaired and diabetic glucose control. Nature 2013, 498,
99–103. [CrossRef]

250. Azcarate-Peril, M.A.; Ritter, A.J.; Savaiano, D.; Monteagudo-Mera, A.; Anderson, C.; Magness, S.T.;
Klaenhammer, T.R. Impact of short-chain galactooligosaccharides on the gut microbiome of lactose-intolerant
individuals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2017, 114, E367–E375. [CrossRef]

251. Cho, C.E.; Taesuwan, S.; Malysheva, O.V.; Bender, E.; Tulchinsky, N.F.; Yan, J.; Sutter, J.L.; Caudill, M.A.
Trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) response to animal source foods varies among healthy young men and is
inﬂuenced by their gut microbiota composition: A randomized controlled trial. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2017,
61, 1600324. [CrossRef]

252. Riccardi, G.; Rivellese, A.A. Dietary treatment of the metabolic syndrome—The optimal diet. Br. J. Nutr.

2000, 83 (Suppl. 1), S143–S148. [CrossRef]

253. Bansal, N. Prediabetes diagnosis and treatment: A review. World J. Diabetes 2015, 6, 296–303. [CrossRef]
254. Mendes-Soares, H.; Raveh-Sadka, T.; Azulay, S.; Edens, K.; Ben-Shlomo, Y.; Cohen, Y.; Ofek, T.; Bachrach, D.;
Stevens, J.; Colibaseanu, D.; et al. Assessment of a personalized approach to predicting postprandial glycemic
responses to food among individuals without diabetes. JAMA Netw. Open 2019, 2, e188102-13. [CrossRef]

255. Korem, T.; Zeevi, D.; Zmora, N.; Weissbrod, O.; Bar, N.; Lotan-Pompan, M.; Avnit-Sagi, T.; Kosower, N.;
Malka, G.; Rein, M.; et al. Bread aﬀects clinical parameters and induces gut microbiome–associated personal
glycemic responses. Cell Metab. 2017, 25, 1243–1253. [CrossRef]

256. Suez, J.; Korem, T.; Zeevi, D.; Zilberman-Schapira, G.; Thasis, C.A.; Maza, O.; Israeli, D.; Zmora, N.; Gilad, S.;
Weinberger, A.; et al. Artiﬁcical sweeteners induce glucose intolerance by altering the gut microbiota. Nature
2014, 514, 181–186. [CrossRef]

257. Qin, J.; Li, Y.; Cai, Z.; Li, S.; Zhu, J.; Zhang, F.; Liang, S.; Zhang, W.; Guan, Y.; Shen, D.; et al. A metagenome-wide

association study of gut microbiota in type 2 diabetes. Nature 2012, 490, 55–60. [CrossRef]

258. Wang, Q.-P.; Browman, D.; Herzog, H.; Neely, G.G. Non-nutritive sweeteners possess a bacteriostatic eﬀect

and alter gut microbiota in mice. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0199080-13. [CrossRef]

259. Martín, R.; Miquel, S.; Benevides, L.; Bridonneau, C.; Robert, V.; Hudault, S.; Chain, F.; Berteau, O.;
Azevedo, V.; Chatel, J.M.; et al. Functional characterization of novel Faecalibacterium prausnitzii strains
isolated from healthy volunteers: a step forward in the use of F. prausnitzii as a next-generation probiotic.
Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1226.

260. Kurilshikov, A.; Wijmenga, C.; Fu, J.; Zhernakova, A. Host genetics and gut microbiome: challenges and

perspectives. Trends Immunol. 2017, 1–15. [CrossRef]

261. Bonder, M.J.; Tigchelaar, E.F.; Cai, X.; Trynka, G.; Cenit, M.C.; Hrdlickova, B.; Zhong, H.; Vatanen, T.;
Gevers, D.; Wijmenga, C.; et al. The inﬂuence of a short-term gluten-free diet on the human gut microbiome.
Genome Med. 2016, 1–11. [CrossRef]

262. Wacklin, P.; Mäkivuokko, H.; Alakulppi, N.; Nikkilä, J.; Tenkanen, H.; Räbinä, J.; Partanen, J.; Aranko, K.;
Mättö, J. Secretor genotype (FUT2 gene) is strongly associated with the composition of biﬁdobacteria in the
human intestine. PLoS ONE 2011, 6, e20113-10. [CrossRef]

263. Grimaldi, K.A.; van Ommen, B.; Ordovas, J.M.; Parnell, L.D.; Mathers, J.C.; Bendik, I.; Brennan, L.;
Celis-Morales, C.; Cirillo, E.; Daniel, H.; et al. Proposed guidelines to evaluate scientiﬁc validity and evidence
for genotype-based dietary advice. Genes Nutr. 2017, 12, 35. [CrossRef]

264. San-Cristobal, R.; Milagro, F.I.; Martínez, J.A. Future challenges and present ethical considerations in the use
of personalized nutrition based on genetic advice. J. Acad. Nutr. Diet. 2013, 113, 1447–1454. [CrossRef]
265. Ahlgren, J.; Nordgren, A.; Perrudin, M.; Ronteltap, A.; Savigny, J.; van Trijp, H.; Nordström, K.; Görman, U.
Consumers on the internet: Ethical and legal aspects of commercialization of personalized nutrition.
Genes Nutr. 2013, 8, 349–355. [CrossRef]

266. McGuire, A.L.; Colgrove, J.; Whitney, S.N.; Diaz, C.M.; Bustillos, D.; Versalovic, J. Ethical, legal, and social
considerations in conducting the Human Microbiome Project. Genome Res. 2008, 18, 1861–1864. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

49 of 49

267. McGuire, A.L.; Achenbaum, L.S.; Whitney, S.N.; Slashinski, M.J.; Versalovic, J.; Keitel, W.A.; McCurdy, S.A.
Perspectives on Human Microbiome Research ethics. J. Empir. Res. Hum. Res. Ethics 2012, 7, 1–14. [CrossRef]
268. EFSA (European Food Safety Authority); Hart, A.; Maxim, L.; Siegrist, M.; Von Goetz, N.; da Cruz, C.;
Merten, C.; Mosbach-Schulz, O.; Lahaniatis, M.; Smith, A.; et al. Guidance on communication of uncertainty
in scientiﬁc assessments. EFSA J. 2019, 17, e05520. [CrossRef]

269. Neville, B.A.; Fotster, S.C.; Lawly, T.D. Commensal Koch’s postulates: Establishing causation in human

microbiota research. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2018, 42, 47–52. [CrossRef]

© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

