Edwards et al.

Page 2

environmental exposures (Brown et al., 2013). Development of the microbiome occurs 
simultaneously with, and plays a key role in neurologic system maturation (Borre et al., 
2014). Significant early-life disruptions of the microbiome, such as through major illness or 
exposure to high dose, broad-spectrum antibiotics, can lead to chronic disease or mental 
disorders later in life (Borre et al., 2014). While the entire gut begins in the mouth and 
continues to the anus, the gut microbiome describes the intestinal portion alone, given that 
the intestine harbors the most diverse and abundant microbial community in the body 
(Backhed et al., 2012). The focus of this review, therefore, is the gut microbiome as it is 
commonly defined, limited to the intestines. More specifically, the state of the science will 
then be presented regarding the maternal gut during pregnancy, related maternal-fetal health 
implications and evidence-based nursing care strategies to improve delivery of care and 
optimize health.

The gut microbiome provides a broad range of functions. Most importantly, it collects 
indigestible particles from food into fecal waste and assimilates nutritional particles, such as 
vitamins and minerals (Mayer, Savidge, & Shulman, 2014). It acts with the liver to detoxify 
and excrete xenobiotics, ubiquitous harmful foreign chemicals present in the environment 
(Mayer, Savidge, et al., 2014). An individual’s systemic and intestinal immune systems 
depend greatly on the gut microbiome’s function of epithelial cell renewal and management 
of intestinal integrity (Power et al., 2014). Without a healthy intestinal wall, bacteria migrate 
across the gut into the general circulation increasing systemic inflammation (Power et al., 
2014). This migration occurs through a mechanism of intestinal permeability sometimes 
referred to as “leaky gut” (Power et al., 2014). With leaky gut, junctions, composed of 
various proteins that link adjacent intestinal epithelial cells, are weak and fail to act as an 
integral barrier to migrating pathogens (Power et al., 2014). Increased intestinal permeability 
is hypothesized to be the mechanism by which a dysbiotic gut is linked with low-grade 
inflammatory disorders like obesity and its associated conditions, insulin-resistance and 
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (Mokkala et al., 2016). High permeability allows the leakage of 
bacteria, and/or bacterial components like the lipopolysaccharides (LPS) contained in the 
cell walls of gram-negative bacteria, thus inducing a deleterious systemic inflammatory 
condition called metabolic endotoxemia (Cani, Osto, Geurts, & Everard, 2012).

Immunologic Changes of the Gut Microbiome in Pregnancy

During pregnancy, inflammatory states vary from higher inflammation at implantation and 
in labor to lower levels of inflammation in mid-pregnancy (Trevisanuto et al., 2013). Anti-
inflammatory properties exist at the placental bed which protects the fetus from rejection, 
yet the mucosal surfaces of the gut and other tissues experience a low-grade inflammation 
with rising levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and white cells as the pregnancy advances 
(Koren et al., 2012). When conditions like maternal obesity, gestational diabetes or a leaky 
gut shift the maternal inflammatory state from a physiologic to an excessive level, vascular 
dysfunction of the placental tissue can develop leading to deleterious effects such as fetal 
growth restriction and preeclampsia (Kashtanova et al., 2016; Kim, Romero, 
Chaemsaithong, & Kim, 2015). Gut microbes found in amniotic fluid of women who 
experienced preterm premature rupture of membranes suggest that the gut microbiome could 
play a role in intrauterine infections (DiGiulio et al., 2010). Possible mechanisms of 

MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 01.

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Edwards et al.

Page 3

microbial translocation have been proposed; either by lipopolysaccharides (LPS) from gram 
negative bacteria that increase inflammatory mediators and prostaglandin production, via 
ascending inoculation through the vagina, or hematogenous spread of microbes from a leaky 
gut to the placenta or uterus (Nuriel-Ohayon, Neuman, & Koren, 2016).

Factors That Can Modify the Gut Microbiome

The gut microbiome is also shaped by diet and genetics. The typical Western diet consists of 
excessive processed foods, dietary fat and sugars (Morrison & Regnault, 2016). Such a diet 
promotes excess weight gain and a dysbiotic gut and is associated with adverse maternal and 
child health outcomes (Dunlop et al., 2015; Morrison & Regnault, 2016). Conversely, certain 
dietary nutrients, namely low-fat protein (for instance beans, skinless chicken, lean beef), 
organic proteins and produce (which reduces exposure to dietary antibiotics and pesticides), 
unsaturated fatty acids (for instance in canola and olive oils, flaxseeds, and salmon), whole 
grains, and certain strains of probiotics have been found to promote a healthy gut 
microbiome, enhance intestinal integrity and reduce excessive systemic inflammation 
(Griffin, 2015; Kashtanova et al., 2016). Short chain fatty acids (SCFA), such as acetate, 
propionate and butyrate, are byproducts of fiber fermentation called prebiotics and serve as 
an energy source to intestinal epithelial cells and enhance the connections between these 
cells (David et al., 2014). SCFA production by the gut microbiota is negatively correlated 
with body mass index (Gomez-Arango et al., 2016). Increased maternal serum SCFA levels 
can positively influence metabolic changes seen in pregnancy: maternal weight gain, glucose 
metabolism and levels of various metabolic hormones (Koren et al., 2012; Priyadarshini et 
al., 2014). A recent study to evaluate the relationships among maternal weight, gut 
microbiome, blood pressure and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) levels in 
overweight and obese pregnant women found the abundance of butyrate-producing bacteria 
to be significantly negatively associated with systolic and diastolic blood pressure and PAI-1 
levels (Gomez-Arango et al., 2016). These findings suggest increasing butyrate-producing 
bacteria may contribute to lower BP in overweight and obese pregnant women. Studies of 
omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) also suggest protection of the 
intestinal wall through strengthening of cellular connections (Li et al., 2008). A recent 
clinical trial examined the effect of 2000 mg omega-3 supplementation versus placebo in 
overweight and obese pregnant women (Haghiac et al., 2015). While the gut microbiome 
was not evaluated, the primary finding was a significant reduction in the plasma 
inflammatory marker CRP among the supplemented group (Haghiac et al., 2015). This could 
prove to be a strategy to reduce the low grade inflammation and higher obstetric risks 
suffered by overweight and obese women or those with gestational diabetes.

The Brain-Gut Axis

Animal and human studies support the existence of a significant bidirectional relationship 
between the gut and the brain, involving multiple neurologic and endocrine signaling 
systems (Mayer, Knight, Mazmanian, Cryan, & Tillisch, 2014). Normal central nervous 
system function relies on a healthy gut microbiome or “eubiosis” (Aitken & Gewirtz, 2013). 
The discovery of two-way signaling between the gut and brain has led to this system being 
coined, the “Brain-Gut Axis” (Foster & McVey Neufeld, 2013; Gareau, 2014). In a healthy 

MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 01.

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Edwards et al.

Page 4

individual, the autonomic nervous system (ANS), the enteric nervous system (ENS), the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, and the immune system work in synchrony 
bidirectionally between brain and gut (Cepeda, Katz, & Blacketer, 2016; Foster & McVey 
Neufeld, 2013). When there is a disruption of any of the components of this system, disease 
may manifest (Foster & McVey Neufeld, 2013; Gareau, 2014). The bidirectional nature of 
the brain-gut axis, magnified by gut inflammation, can impact the central nervous system, 
body weight, immune status and behavior (Cepeda et al., 2016) (see Figure 1).

The impact of stress on the neuroendocrine system, especially when chronic, can result in 
immunologic dysregulation and heightened risk and virulence of infection (Cepeda, Katz, & 
Blacketer, 2016). Disproportionate rates of infections have been found in chronically 
stressed minority populations and are thought to be a source of higher rates of preterm birth 
in these populations through dysbiotic gut microbe translocation mechanisms previously 
described (Culhane, Rauh, & Goldenberg, 2006; Mendez, Hogan, & Culhane, 2014).

Hormonal Changes in Pregnancy and the Gut Microbiome

The prenatal period is marked by dramatic hormonal shifts with resultant unique 
inflammatory and immune changes that alter gut function and bacterial composition 
(Brantsaeter et al., 2011; Koren et al., 2012). Estrogen and progesterone impact the 
composition of the gut microbiome through their effect on bacterial metabolism and growth 
and virulence of pathogenic bacteria (Mulak et al., 2014). An example of this is the 
susceptibility to Listeria monocytogenes infections in pregnancy partly due to elevated 
estrogen and progesterone levels, leading to adverse outcomes, including preterm delivery or 
stillbirth (Garcia-Gomez, Gonzalez-Pedrajo, & Camacho-Arroyo, 2013). Dramatic changes 
in ovarian hormones during the prenatal and postpartum periods also affect gut contractility 
and transit (Mayer, Savidge, et al., 2014). It is plausible that the hormone levels involved in 
increasing gut transit time are an adaptive response to allow greater nutrient and energy 
harvest, thus promoting weight gain in pregnancy.

Metabolic Changes in Pregnancy and the Gut Microbiome

The consequences of gut dysbiosis that lead to obesity and, likely, to excessive gestational 
weight gain, have only recently been explored in human pregnancy (Angelakis, Merhej, & 
Raoult, 2013). Of particular interest is the recognition that the immune and metabolic 
changes that occur normally in pregnancy are actually comparable to metabolic syndrome 
outside of pregnancy (Chassaing & Gewirtz, 2014). With no differences in diet, including 
total energy intake, pregnant women have been found to gain greater adiposity with 
significantly higher leptin, insulin and insulin resistance measures, cholesterol, and glycated 
hemoglobin with each trimester of pregnancy compared to their non-pregnant counterparts 
(Collado, Isolauri, Laitinen, & Salminen, 2008). The microbial diversity in the gut at the 
start of pregnancy appears to be similar to that of non-pregnant women (Santacruz et al., 
2010). Yet, as the pregnancy advances, the abundance of gut bacteria associated with 
inflammatory states increases in nearly 70% of women (Santacruz et al., 2010). The greatest 
change in the gut microbiota occurs in the ratio of certain key bacteria (Firmicutes: 
Bacteroidetes), mimicking the higher levels of Firmicutes seen in obesity (Santacruz et al., 

MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 01.

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Edwards et al.

Page 5

2010). Levels of proinflammatory cytokines (including IFN-y, IL-2, IL-6 and TNF-a) also 
rise in serum; adipose and placental tissue later in pregnancy and the mucosal surfaces 
throughout the gastrointestinal tract reflect a low-grade inflammatory state (Cani et al., 
2012). Thus, while these same metabolic and immunologic changes in a man or non-
pregnant woman would be considered abnormal and a sign of a disease state, in the context 
of a normal pregnancy, they appear to be required, improving energy storage in fat and 
providing for fetal growth and lactation (Cani et al., 2012; Chassaing & Gewirtz, 2014).

Clinical Implications of the Gut Microbiome in Pregnancy

The gut microbiome and the brain-gut axis are key players in the critical prenatal period 
when the maternal and fetal microbiome are particularly sensitive and changes can impact 
fetal brain development (Borre et al., 2014; Mayer, Knight, et al., 2014). Negative 
interference with the brain-gut axis (depicted on right side of Figure 1) during these times is 
associated with a higher maternal and child risk for chronic intestinal disorders, conditions 
which affect weight and growth, and even neuropsychiatric disorders (Mayer, Knight, et al., 
2014). Health care recommendations that promote the IOM guidelines for maternal weight 
gain by prepregnant BMI category, high quality diet and gut eubiosis should be considered 
in the delivery of prenatal care and in client education. Stress, infection and antibiotic use, 
especially during pregnancy, can lead to dysbiosis and may increase risk of maternal and 
infant neurodevelopmental disorders (Bilder et al., 2013; Vela et al., 2015). Appropriate 
type, duration and indication of prebiotic, probiotic and antibiotic use in the prevention and 
treatment of illness will become an important topic for discussion with clients in the future, 
since all act on the gut microbiome and may impact overall health and gestational weight 
gain (Griffin, 2015). There are no current clinical guidelines to facilitate these discussions 
pending further research.

Dietary and lifestyle patterns that impact the brain-gut axis also need to be assessed. When a 
mother gains excessive gestational weight or enters pregnancy obese, metabolic changes in 
pregnancy are magnified, and thus the risk of gestational diabetes, fetal macrosomia, or 
preeclampsia is elevated (Josefson, Hoffmann, & Metzger, 2013). Identification of food 
sensitivities (gluten, dairy, and nuts are common) and elimination of those foods from the 
diet reduce systemic inflammation and improves gut health. Pre- and probiotic use and 
increasing dietary fiber and fermented foods rich in probiotics and enzymes (such as yogurt, 
kefir, and miso) promotes eubiosis of the gut, possibly reducing risk of elevated blood 
pressure and improving metabolic parameters in vulnerable overweight and obese pregnant 
women. Further, fiber can improve constipation and other gastrointestinal conditions 
common in pregnancy (Griffin, 2015). Primary care and preconception evaluations should 
also include dietary and lifestyle assessment and counseling to reach a healthy prepregnant 
body mass index and optimize overall health (Egan et al., 2014).

In a recent clinical trial, supplementation with specific strains of probiotics, such as 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Lactobacillus acidophilus, combined with dietary 
counseling have been found to improve glucose metabolism in healthy pregnant and 
lactating women (Brantsaeter et al., 2011). Daily intake of milk-based dietary probiotics has 
been reported to reduce blood pressure in pregnancy as well as the incidence of 

MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 01.

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Edwards et al.

Page 6

preeclampsia among primiparous women (Brantsaeter et al., 2011; Gomez-Arango et al., 
2016). Lactose intolerance can often be managed by ingestion of lactase enzymes with the 
dairy or by limiting intake to lactose-free dairy products. Daily yogurt consumption 
containing L. rhamnosus was found to have a statistically significant protective effect against 
heavy metal toxicity (mercury and arsenic) in pregnant women with high risk diets (Bisanz 
et al., 2014). Probiotic milk and other food products may, therefore, be worth consideration 
for women at greater risk for gestational diabetes, preeclampsia and some environmental 
toxins.

Conclusion

Diet and lifestyle practices are modifiable factors that can affect the brain-gut axis, and 
ultimately, the long-term health of women and infants. The degree to which the gut 
microbiome contributes to the neurodevelopmental, immunological and intestinal health of 
the pregnant woman and her fetus is only now beginning to be measured. Health practices 
and novel therapies to promote eubiosis and treat dysbiosis of the maternal gut are still to be 
discovered but will likely prove fundamental in the care of women in pregnancy.

Acknowledgments

Sources of Funding
