Round and Mazmanian

Page 2

and anti-inflammatory responses, and balances in the community structure of gut bacteria
may be intimately linked to the proper function of the immune system.

By virtue of its responsibility to recognize, respond and adapt to countless foreign and self
molecules, the immune system is central to the processes of health and disease. While the
classical view of the immune system is that it evolved to protect organisms from infection
by microbial pathogens, we peacefully co-exist with our vast and complex microbiota. In
fact, the magnitude of the molecular interactions between the microbiota and the host
immune system appear to be extensive. Here, we discuss recent evidence that suggests a
beneficial partnership has evolved between symbiotic bacteria and the immune system.
These molecular interactions seem to direct the development of immune responses, and in
turn, the immune system shapes the composition of the microbiota. We highlight seminal
examples of microorganisms that have a role in preventing inflammatory bowel diseases
(IBD), and the beneficial immune responses they elicit during protection. Furthermore,
technological advances now allow a more detailed understanding of the alterations of the
microbial population of the gut during IBD. If some bacteria are actively shaping a healthy
immune system, does the absence of these organisms lead to disease? It has recently been
proposed that the mammalian genome does not encode the information (i.e., molecules)
capable of carrying out all functions required for health, and that products of our
microbiome (the collective genomes of the microbiota) are crucial for protection from
various diseases10. It is possible that alterations in the development or composition of the
microbiota (known as dysbiosis) disturb the partnership between the microbiota and the
human immune system, ultimately leading to altered immune responses that may underlie
various inflammatory disorders in humans.

Several important effects of the microbiota on the host immune system have been
determined by studies of gnotobiology, which is the selective colonization of germ-free
(sterile) animals. Immune responses in germ-free animals can be considered naïve to the
‘education’ provided by molecules of both pathogenic and beneficial microorganisms.
Germ-free animals show extensive deficits in the development of the gut-associated
lymphoid tissues (GALT)9,11. In addition to numerous defects in antibody production (Box
1), germ-free animals have relatively fewer and smaller Peyer's patches and mesenteric
lymph nodes (MLNs) compared to animals housed under specific pathogen free (SPF)
conditions (Table 1). A recent report has shown that germ-free animals display impaired
development and maturation of isolated lymphoid follicles (ILFs)12. These inducible
structures seem to form normally following the introduction of gut bacteria, suggesting a
dynamic relationship between the immune system and the microbiota. Together with various
morphological tissue defects observed in the intestines of germ-free animals, it appears that
the entire ultrastructural development of the gut is intimately connected to intestinal
bacteria. For example, intestinal epithelial cells (IECs), which line the gut and form a
physical barrier between luminal contents (including the microbiota) and the underlying
cells of the immune system, have altered patterns of microvilli formation and decreased

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

Insights gained from germ-free mice

Developmental defects in germ-free mice

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 3

Deficiencies in immune responses in germ-free mice

rates of cell turnover in germ-free animals compared with wild-type animals13. Gut bacteria
have been shown to direct the glycosylation of lumenally-exposed surface proteins of the
epithelium14. IECs have many immunological functions (Table 1): they can secrete and
respond to various cytokines and express molecules (such as major histocompatibility
molecules) that directly interact with lymphocytes. Expression and localization of pattern-
recognition receptors (e.g., Toll-like receptors; TLRs) by the epithelium is influenced by
bacterial colonization of the gut, and expression of defensins and other antimicrobial
proteins are deficient in germ-free animals (Table 1). Consistent with this notion, the Gram-
negative commensal organism Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, but not the Gram-positive
microbe, Bifidobacterium longum, induces the expression of the antimicrobial peptide,
RegIIIγ, by specialized IECs known as Paneth cells15, 16. Intriguingly, the specificity of
RegIIIγ is directed toward specific Gram-positive bacteria. It is therefore tempting to
speculate that symbiotic bacteria direct innate immune responses of the gut in an effort to
protect their environment. Collectively, these observations of developmental defects in
germ-free mice at the tissue, cellular and molecular levels suggest that ‘normal’ immune
function may be impaired in the absence of the microbiota.

Germ-free animals are more susceptible to infection by certain bacterial, viral and parasitic
pathogens. When challenged with the Gram-negative enteric pathogen Shigella flexneri,
germ-free animals showed decreased immune resistance to infection and increased mortality
compared with conventionally colonized animals17. Prior colonization with specific
commensal bacteria antagonized S. flexneri infections, whereas colonization with control
species such as E.coli did not, implying that some members of the microbiota provide
protection against intestinal bacterial pathogens18. Infection by the Gram-positive
intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes results in decreased bacterial clearance in
germ-free compared with colonized animals19.The mechanism for this increased
susceptibility has been attributed to a T cell trafficking defect in germ-free animals to the
site of Listeria infection. L-selectin and CD44 are known to be involved in homing of
lymphocytes to sites of inflammation. Listeria infected germ-free mice have decreased
accumulation of CD44+L-selectin+ T cells resulting in increased bacterial burden compared
to SPF animals20. Salmonella typhimurium is known to cause a more severe acute
gastroenteritis in germ-free animals21, however the reasons for this remain unclear.
Establishing an infection requires the initial task of colonizing the host. For intestinal
pathogens this can pose a difficult problem as all mammals are stably colonized by a
consortium of bacteria that can act as a barrier to infection (“colonization resistance”).
Recent studies suggest that inflammation induced in response to S. typhimurium changes the
composition of the microbiota and suppresses its regrowth. Moreover, S. typhimurium
exploits this deficiency in “colonization resistance” to establish infection and cause
disease22. While important for maintaining a barrier to the colonization of potentially
pathogenic organisms, it appears that the microbiota may also provide the host immune
benefits. Supporting this, germ-free animals show reduced antigen-specific systemic
immune responses to S. typhimuirum23. These studies support the idea that enteric pathogens
such as S. typhimurium may have developed strategies to counter both the immune system
and the microbiota during the infectious process.

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 4

Although significant work is still required to determine the beneficial immune responses
induced by the microbiota, it is exciting to consider the teleological notion that indigenous
bacteria actively prevent enteric disease by infectious microorganisms to fortify their niche.
If true, then an evolutionary alliance has been forged between mammals and beneficial
bacteria that is critical in maintaining the long-term survival of both. In other words, is our
wellbeing dependent on the microbes we harbour?

The microbiota and inflammatory bowel disease

Immune system regulation during IBD

The impact of the microbiota on human health is best exemplified by studies in IBD, such as
Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis24-26. Both represent serious medical disorders marked
by aberrant inflammation within the human gastrointestinal (GI) tract, resulting in severe
clinical outcomes in affected patients. The causes for these diseases are complex, and
include the contributions of genetic, geographic and habitual factors27. IBD (particularly
Crohn's disease) is generally thought to be driven by T lymphocytes. The disease has
classically been characterized by increases in pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumour-
necrosis factor (TNF) and interferon-γ (IFNγ). Recently, a new population of inflammatory
T cells, termed T helper 17 (TH17) cells, have been implicated in the pathogenesis of human
and experimental colitis28-33These cells are characterized by their expression of the pro-
inflammatory cytokine interleukin-17 (IL-17), and require IL-23 for their maintenance and
function. Specialized T cells, known as regulatory T (TReg) cells act to counter-balance these
pro-inflammatory responses. FOXP3 is a transcription factor believed to be the ‘master
regulator’ of TReg cells, and its absence results in massive multi-organ lymphoproliferative
disease34. The mechanisms by which Tregs are able to suppress inflammation are quite
diverse. These include the expression of inhibitory cytokines such as IL-10, TGF-β, and
IL-35; disruption of cellular metabolism by expression of the IL-2 receptor, CD25;
cytolysis, and targeting the maturation of DCs through surface expression of molecules such
as CTLA-4 and LAG-335. A population of intestinal dendritic cells expressing the surface
antigen CD103 have recently been demonstrated to be instrumental in the development and
function of intestinal Foxp3+ Tregs. CD103+ DCs, but not CD103− DCs are able to
‘convert’ CD4+Foxp3− T cells into CD4+Foxp3+ Tregs cells in a TGF-β and retinoic acid
dependent manner36, demonstrating that specialized mechanisms exist within the intestine to
promote induction and maintenance of Tregs.

The importance of Tregs in regulation of intestinal homeostasis is best demonstrated by the
ability of these cells to prevent induction of experimental colitis upon transfer into diseased
hosts 37. The ability of Tregs to secrete IL-10 and IL-35 has been reported to be important
during protection. Indeed, Treg cells deficient in either of the two subunits of IL-35 (Ebi3
and IL-12a), are unable to cure experimental colitis38. Additionally, animals in which the
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 has been specifically ablated from CD4+FOXP3+ T cells
succumb to inflammatory disease of the intestine (as well as skin and lung), but show no
signs of autoimmunity. Thus, it appears that cytokine production by Treg cells may be a
primary protective mechanism that limits uncontrolled immune responses at
environmentally-exposed surfaces such as the gut.

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 5

Recent evidence has begun to reveal mechanisms of intestinal immune modulation by the
microbiota. Germ-free animals are deficient in the development of TH17 cells in the small
intestine39. In this report, the reduction in IL-17 production is reciprocally coupled to an
increase in CD4+FOXP3+ TReg cells in the germfree colon. Reconstitution of animals with a
complex and diverse microbiota that does not contain the prominent phyla Bacteroidetes is
unable to restore proper immune balance, suggesting that discrete organisms may have the
capacity to modulate pro- and anti-inflammatory responses in the gut. The identity of
specific bacterial species and particular molecules with dedicated functions to regulate T-
helper/TReg-cell profiles in the gut remain unknown. However, ‘general’ bacterial products
appear to have immunomodulatory affects. ATP produced by intestinal bacteria specifically
increases colonic IL-17 production (and not IFNγ production)40. Consistent, with this, germ-
free animals have reduced IL-17 and ATP levels in the colon. Additionally, commensal
bacterial DNA triggers TLR9 to confer resistance to the enteric parasite Encephalitozoon
cuniculi 41. Antibiotic treatment of animals to eliminate gut bacteria results in increased
susceptibility to infection by this parasite, consistent with findings from studies in germ-free
mice. Treatment of infected animals with DNA extracted from the intestinal microbiota
upregulated Th1 and Th17 responses, while suppressing Treg activity resulting in decreased
parasite burden. Previous work had implicated TLR signaling as being important for gut
homeostasis42; therefore these recent findings extend this observation to suggest that a
molecular dialogue between immune receptors and microbial molecules confers resistance
to enteric infection.

The contribution of the microbiota to the development of TRegcells remains unclear as
multiple studies have revealed conflicting results. An earlier report demonstrated a
deficiency in the percentage of Foxp3+ cells within the CD4+CD25+ subset within the
MLNs of germfree mice when compared to conventionally colonized animals. Foxp3
mRNA levels were also lower in CD4+CD25+ isolated from total lymph nodes of germfree
mice. Supporting this, another study reported lower expression of the Foxp3 transcript in
CD4+CD62L− T cells from germfree mice.43. Additionally, studies have shown that TReg
cells from germ-free animals were not as potent in suppressing CD4 T-cell proliferation in
vitro as cells from conventionally colonized animals44. Populations of TReg cells from germ-
free animals expressed less IL-10, and were unable to prevent disease in a transfer model of
experimental colitis45. In contrast, recent studies have reported no change in the percentage
of CD4+Foxp3+ subset of T cells within the colonic lamina propria46, while yet another
study reported elevated percentages of CD4+TCRβ+Foxp3+ within the small intestine39.
These differences might be attributable to the specific subsets of TReg analyzed, differences
in experimental methodologies and/or the tissues from which TReg were harvested.
Alternatively, the particular diet given to the animal might influence Treg subsets within the
intestine as most animal food, even if autoclaved, may have varying amounts of microbial
molecules (such as TLR ligands). However, these data collectively suggest that intestinal
bacteria interact with the mammalian immune system to direct the linage differentiation of
both pro- and anti- inflammatory T-cell populations. Therefore, induction of effector T-cell
responses and modulation of TReg -cell function by the microbiota may be a crucial
component of diseases such as IBD. It is possible that different classes (or even species) of
bacteria induce diverse immunological functions. Therefore, the equilibrium between

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 6

inflammation and regulation in the gut may be due to the community structure of the
microbiota.

IBD and a breakdown in tolerance to gut bacteria

IBD involves a shift from a regulated intestinal immune responses to one that is driven by
unrestrained immune-cell activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine production474849. The
cause of this increase in immune stimulation is of great interest, and several lines of
evidence indicate a significant role for commensal bacteria in the progression of disease 50.
Patients with IBD respond favorably to antibiotic treatment and fecal diversion, and have
greater antibody titers against indigenous bacteria than unaffected individuals51,52,53. In
addition, inflammatory lesions are more pronounced in areas of the intestine that contain the
greatest number of bacteria. The data in animal models provide further evidence for the
involvement of gut bacteria in IBD. Pre-treatment with antibiotics has been shown to
alleviate intestinal inflammation in several animal models54,55. HLA-B27-transgenic rats,
interleukin-10 (IL-10)-and IL-2-deficient mice spontaneously develop chronic colitis,
whereas germ-free animals of all backgrounds fail to develop intestinal inflammation56,57,58.
In a model of disease induced by the adoptive transfer of pathogenic T cells into
immunodeficient (Scid−/− or Rag−/−) recipient mice, colonization of animals with intestinal
pathogens such as Helicobacter hepaticus was found to exacerbate inflammation59.
Moreover, pathogenic T cells can be transmitted to healthy animals through the adoptive
transfer of T cells that are reactive against specific commensal organisms50,60. The only
organism reported to be strongly associated with Crohn's disease is adherent-invasive E.coli
(AIEC)61. However, it appears that inflammatory responses during human and experimental
IBD are directed towards certain subsets of commensal organisms with pathogenic potential
such as Helicobacter, Clostridium and Enterococcus species. Curiously, these organisms are
abundant commensals, and not typically infectious pathogenic agents. As the microbiota of
all mammals contains these potentially harmful species, known as pathobionts (commensals
with pathogenic potential), the reason why inflammation ensues only in subjects affected by
IBD is not entirely known. Genetic factors play an important role in the pathogenesis of
IBD. This is demonstrated by familial aggregation of IBD and increased concordance for
IBD in monozygotic twins. Genome wide association studies have identified genetic defects
which are highly linked to disease. Mutations in bacterial sensing (NOD2/Card15)62 and T
cell immunity (IL-23R)30 have highlighted the connection between microbes and
inflammation in IBD. Additionally, experimental systems have demonstrated the importance
of host genetics during induction of IBD. Indeed, microorganisms such as E.coli and E.
faecalis, that do not initiate disease in an immunologically competent host, do so when
introduced into genetically pre-disposed strains 63. Some have predicted that IBD, at least in
part, results from an imbalance in the normal microbiota (termed dysbiosis) without
acquisition of an infectious agent64. It remains unclear whether dysbiosis directly causes
disease or is a result of the altered intestinal environment. Future studies using animal
models whereby the microbiota can be selectively manipulated during the course of
experimental disease may begin to address this important issue.

Genetic and habitual/lifestyle factors play a crucial role in maintaining health, however, the
notion that dysbiosis influences intestinal disease has gained much attention5,65,66. Recent

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 7

studies have now begun to show evidence that the composition of the microbiota alone (and
not genetics or environment) may be important to the induction of disease. T-bet (tbx21) is a
T-box transcription factor that controls the type 1 pro-inflammatory response in both
adaptive and innate immune cells67. Loss of T-bet in mice lacking an adaptive immune
system (Rag−/−) develop spontaneous and penetrate intestinal inflammation that resembles
ulcerative colitis68. Treatment of these mice with broad spectrum antibiotics cured the
intestinal disease, demonstrating that inflammation was driven by the microbiota. Finally,
when wild-type animals are co-housed with T-bet−/−Rag−/− colitic mice, they develop a
comparable colitis like disease68. Therefore, the transfer of colitigenic microbes alone (the
identity of which is still uncertain) was sufficient to induce experimental ulcerative colitis.
The second study addressing the sufficiency of dysbiosis have come from metagenomic
analysis of the microbiota during obesity. Ob/ob mice display symptoms of obesity and are
used as a model system of human disease. Remarkably, transfer of the microbiota from
ob/ob animals into germ-free wild-type animals results in an increase in the mean body fat
of recipient animals69,70. Moreover, the proportion of Bacteroidetes is decreased in obese
people when compared to lean people, demonstrating the possibility that alterations in the
human microbiota may affect disease. Much like IBD, obesity appears to have a strong
genetic component71. The complex interplay between host genotype and its effects on the
microbiota are an area very worthy of further investigation. However, studies such as these,
where bacterial transfer into wild-type animals induces , argue for a prominent role for
dysbiosis.

Similar to animal studies, dysbiosis has been implicated in human disease. Many
investigations have shown a significant alteration in the microbiota of patients with
IBD 72,73,74. A recent metagenomic (culture-independent analysis of microbial community
structure) case-control study compared the microbiota of patients with IBD to that of non-
IBD controls74. The results revealed a statistically significant difference between the
microbial compositions of IBD patients and non-IBD patient controls. Furthermore, the
authors reported that an ‘IBD-specific’ microbiota displays a reduction in the levels of two
phyla of bacteria, the Firmicutes and Bacteriodetes, both prominently represented in non-
IBD controls. Longitudinal studies are required to determine if this particular profile (that is,
the loss of certain classes of bacteria) can be used as a diagnostic tool to identify people with
a greater likelihood of developing IBD. Although our understanding of how dysbiosis may
affect IBD is still preliminary, novel sequencing technologies promise to provide a platform
to analyze many thousands of microbiomes of both healthy and diseased individuals75. With
increased knowledge of species-specific alterations during disease, the molecular
mechanisms that link dysbiosis of the microbiota to intestinal inflammation can
systematically be explored in both experimental and human studies.

Beneficial gut bacteria promote immune homeostasis

The evidence presented so far has implicated the microbiota in shaping immune system
responses during disease, but the question still remains as to which particular organisms are
mediating these beneficial responses and, more importantly, how this is achieved. Here we
review the mechanisms by which symbiotic bacteria affect the mammalian immune system
that result in the prevention or treatment of experimental and human IBD.

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 8

In the early 1900s, Ilya Mechnikov was the first to propose the use of live microorganisms
to maintain bowel health and prolong life. Now, the term ‘probiotic’ is used to describe
dietary microbes that are able to confer a health benefit on the host76. As shown in Table 2,
many individual or combinations of bacterial species have been shown to ameliorate the
symptoms of IBD in humans and mouse models. Although many of these probiotic strains
decrease toxic microbial metabolic activities, more recent evidence demonstrates the
capacity of these organisms to modulate intestinal immune responses. The common feature
of almost all bacterial species used as probiotics is the ability of these organisms to control
inflammation. Bacterial species can act on several cell types (epithelial cells, dendritic cells
(DCs) and T cells), but recent evidence suggests that induction of regulatory T cells by these
organisms is crucial to limiting inflammation and disease. Treatment of colitic mice with the
probiotic cocktail, VSL#3, increased the production of IL-10 and the percentage of TGFβ-
expressing T cells77. More importantly, transfer of lamina propria mononuclear cells from
VSL#3-treated mice was able to prevent colitis in recipient mice, indicating the ability of the
VSL#3 cocktail to initiate the generation of a protective population of cells. Depletion of
TGFβ-bearing CD4+ T cells from probiotic treated mice before the transfer of lamina
propria cells abolished the protective capacity of these cells77. More recently, in a model of
pathogen-induced inflammation, treatment of mice with Bifidobacteria infantis led to a
downregulation of intestinal inflammation and increases in the number of CD4+CD25+ TReg
cells78. Adoptive transfer of the CD4+CD25+ TReg-cell population from mice fed with B.
infantis inhibited inflammation-induced activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) in recipient
mice.

Naive CD4+ T cells can adopt a regulatory phenotype through interactions with intestinal
DCs36. Foligne et al.79 demonstrate that bone-marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs) internalize
Lactobacillus rhamnosus, yet maintain an immature phenotype. Transfer of BMDCs
incubated with L.rhamnosus can protect from inflammation and disease when transferred
into a recipient animal with colitis79. Moreover, depletion of the CD4+CD25+ T-cell subset
abolished the ability of the probiotic-treated DCs to protect from disease, suggesting that L.
rhamnosus-treated DCs can initiate TReg-cell activity79. It has recently been shown that
some patients with Crohn's disease showed a specific reduction in a prominent gut microbe,
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii80. Intriguingly, this organism or its secreted substances were
able to induce anti-inflammatory responses (such as IL-10 expression) and ameliorate
induction of TNF-α and intestinal disease when orally administered to experimental
animals. This seminal study thus directly linked the numerical reduction of a beneficial
bacterium from the human microbiota to the development of disease, suggesting that
symbiotic microbes may be directly mediating health. The specific molecules made by these
particular bacterial species that guide immune responses remain unknown; however current
data support the idea that symbiotic organisms actively communicate with the host immune
system to modulate anti-inflammatory processes.

The first demonstration that a single molecule made by a commensal microorganism could
shape beneficial immune responses was provided by the identification of polysaccharide A
(PSA) produced by the human symbiont Bacteroides fragilis (Figure 1). Colonization of
germ-free mice with B. fragilis or treatment with purified PSA directs the cellular and

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 9

physical development of the immune system, including expansion and differentiation of
splenic CD4+ T cells81. The novel immunomodulatory activities of PSA during B. fragilis
colonization of germ-free mice include correcting systemic T-cell deficiencies, T-helper cell
imbalances and directing lymphoid organogenesis. The importance of B. fragilis in
maintenance of a healthy immune response was recently illustrated by the finding that
colonization by B. fragilis or treatment with purified PSA can protect from the induction of
experimental IBD66. Moreover, mice that are colonized by a mutant form of this
microorganism that lacks expression of PSA (B. fragilis ΔPSA) are no longer protected from
disease. Oral treatment of mice with purified PSA protects recipients from weight loss,
decreases levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNFα, IL-17 and IL-23, and inhibits
epithelial hyperplasia and neutrophil infiltration to the gut associated with disease induction
in these models66. To provide insight into the mechanistic basis for PSA-mediated
protection, it was shown that increases in local induction of IL-10 were required for the anti-
inflammatory properties of PSA. PSA is unable to protect from induction of colitis in IL-10-
deficient mice, demonstrating that PSA functions by inducing the production of IL-10..
Based on this observation, we tested the ability of PSA to induce IL-10 in CD4+ T cells.
Indeed, CD4+ T cells purified from MLNs during PSA-mediated protection of colitis
showed increased levels of IL-10 compared with PBS treated control mice. Finally, transfer
of IL-10-deficient CD4+ T cells into Rag−/− recipient mice abolished the ability of PSA to
protect from experimental colitis66. These data have identified a single molecule made by a
symbiotic microorganism that stimulates CD4+ T cells to make IL-10, required for the
suppression of the inflammatory process during colitis, and suggest that other beneficial
bacteria may produce factors that can positively shape the host immune response during
IBD.

For many years, IL-10-producing CD4+ T cells (so called Tr1 cells) were considered to be
distinct from ‘natural’, thymic-derived TReg cells that are characterized by the expression of
FOXP382. It is now apparent that there is overlap between these two populations and that
IL-10-producing regulatory T cells can be found in the Foxp3+ T cell subset and are
imperative for the control of experimental colitis. While IL-10 producing T cell clones
specific for cecal bacterial contents have been generated 83the ability of a molecule from
symbiotic bacteria to regulate FOXP3+ TReg-cell differentiation and function awaits further
validation. However, it appears that certain beneficial bacteria have evolved molecules
(known as symbiosis factors) that induce protective intestinal immune responses. The
current treatments for IBD are either ineffective in most patients or result in severe side
effects. Knowledge of which beneficial species of bacteria can prevent or cure disease, and
harnessing the potent immunosuppressive potential of symbiosis factors will be important
steps towards designing novel and natural therapeutics for IBD.

The microbiota hypothesis and human disease

Does harboring certain strains of bacteria predispose an individual to disease or protect from
it? B. fragilis has been shown to protect its host from inflammatory disease caused by H.
hepaticus in an animal model of experimental colitis66. As symbiotic bacteria seem to have
evolved mechanisms to promote protection from pathobionts found in the same microbiota,
does disease result from the absence of specific organisms and their beneficial molecules? In

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 10

other words, if symbiosis factors actively maintain health, can dysbiosis reduce bacterial-
mediated immune regulation that subsequently leads to inflammation? Reflecting a growing
medical crisis in Western societies, recent epidemiological and clinical reports have revealed
dramatic increases in the incidences of several immune disorders. Incidences of IBD,
asthma, atopic disorders (skin, respiratory, and food allergies), rheumatoid arthritis, type 1
diabetes and multiple sclerosis are increasing dramatically in ‘westernized’ populations,
including those of western European nations, the United States and Japan. The rapidity of
the rise in disease rates appears to argue against a solely genetic basis for these
observations 84. Because the implementation of antimicrobial strategies (including
vaccination, sanitation, ‘western’ diets, and antibacterial therapeutics) does not permit
discrimination between infectious and non-infectious microorganisms, such interventions
have most likely led to changes in our association with the microbial world as a whole.

If improvements in hygiene and health care have altered the process by which a healthy
microbiota is assembled and maintained, then patients with these diseases in developed
countries should display signs of dysbiosis. This indeed appears to be the case, at least
according to a growing number of studies which are now linking ‘Western’ diseases to
alterations in the microbiota. The intestinal bacterial composition of IBD patients differs
greatly from that of healthy controls74. However, over many years, research to identify the
pathogenic organism(s) that elicit inflammation has repeatedly identified reactions only to
intestinal bacteria shared by all humans—healthy and ill. No infectious organisms have ever
been conclusively demonstrated to be involved in IBD, though various studies are still
ongoing. So, perhaps the targets of inflammation in IBD are not pathogens, but pathobionts
that are overrepresented during dysbiosis (Figure 2). When intestinal bacterial species were
analyzed as a factor in asthma development, reports concluded that allergic children from
both an industrialized nation (Sweden) and a developing country (Estonia) had lower levels
of colonization by Bacteroides spp. and higher levels of colonization by aerobic
microorganisms than did non-allergic children from either region85. Epidemiological studies
have linked an altered intestinal microbiota to other allergic disorders, such as atopic eczema
and rheumatoid arthritis86-88. Though cause or effect relationships still remain unresolved, it
seems that deviations in the composition of the gut microbiota may be an influencing
environmental factor underlying the development of disease in genetically predisposed
individuals.

Recent studies have launched a revolution in biology aimed at understanding how (and,
more importantly, why) mammals harbour multitudes of symbiotic bacteria. As discussed
above, the effects of the microbiota on the immune system are becoming increasingly
evident. Astonishingly, the immune disorders for which incidences have increased in
‘Western’ countries all seem to involve reduced TReg-cell activity. It has been shown in
animal models and some human studies that deficiencies in TReg-cell populations or
function underlie asthma, IBD, rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes and multiple sclerosis89.
CD4+CD25+FOXP3+ TReg cells can prevent, and in some cases, treat these disorders in
laboratory animals. The antagonism between pro-inflammatory TH17 cells and FOXP3+
TReg cells is well documented90. Most remarkably, the numbers and function of certain
TReg-cell populations are reduced in germ-free animals45,43. As mentioned above, germ-free

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 11

animals have numerous other immunological defects that may lead to disease, which
implicates a role for the microbiota in actively supporting health. After millions of years of
co-evolution with our microbial partners, have societal advances paradoxically affected
human health adversely by reducing our exposure to health-promoting bacteria?

Implications for a ‘healthy’ immune system

Although it has been known for decades that we harbour millions of commensal bacteria,
recent studies have only just begun to reveal the extraordinary complexity and diversity of
the human microbiota. This consortium of bacteria contains tenfold more cells than the
human body, 100 times the number of genes than in the human genome and has the
metabolic capacity of the human liver91,92. How is such a complex microbial network
assembled after birth? Relman, Brown and co-workers recently examined the development
of the intestinal microbiota of infants93. They found that in the first few days to weeks of
life, the microbiota of newborns is highly variable and subject to waves of temporal
fluctuations, possibly representing a time of sampling, or ‘trial and error’, to coordinately
assemble a stable microbiota. The first years of life are also a time of significant post-natal
development of the immune system. As commensal gut bacteria have profound influences
on the immune system, deviations from the ‘normal’ development of the microbiota
(through modern strategies such a caesarian section, formula-based diet, hygiene,
vaccination, and use of antimicrobials in infants) may alter the outcome of immune
development and potentially predispose individuals to various inflammatory diseases later in
life (Figure 2).

Based on clinical, epidemiological and immunological evidence, it seems possible that
changes in the intestinal microbiota may be an essential factor in the incidence of numerous
inflammatory disorders. Intestinal bacteria are a critical component in instructing the
development and function of the immune system. It is conceivable that the absence of
beneficial microorganisms (due to dysbiosis) that promote appropriate immune development
leads to the inflammatory responses that underlie various immune diseases in humans.
Recent studies have shown that at least for experimental IBD, spontaneous disease results
when immune suppression is deficient; thus inflammation appears to be a default
immunological state in the absence of regulation94. Although pathogenic bacteria clearly
induce local inflammation during acute infections, have symbiotic bacteria evolved to
regulate those inflammatory processes that are harmful to the host (and therefore, harmful to
the existence of the symbiont)? Significant research has implicated innate and adaptive
immune suppression during the control of disorders such as IBD, autoimmunity, asthma and
allergy, cancer and infectious diseases. According to a wealth of recent studies, we propose
the notion of a vast, intricate and unexpected level of interdependence between beneficial
bacteria and the immune system. Perhaps genetic and habitual factors shape the composition
of the microbiota, which in turn shapes the immune system of individuals predisposed to
inflammatory disease (Figure 3). The emerging identification of human symbiotic bacteria
with potent anti-inflammatory properties, and their correlative absence during disease,
suggests that certain aspects of human health may depend on the ‘health’ of the microbiota.
The medical and social reconsideration of the microbial world may have profound
consequences for the health of our future generations.

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 12

Acknowledgments

Biography

We thank members of the Mazmanian laboratory for their critical review of the manuscript. The authors apologize
to those whose work could not be mentioned due to space limitation and the focus of the manuscript, in particular
the vast clinical data in IBD. J.L.R is a Merck Fellow of the Jane Coffin Child's Memorial Fund. S.K.M. is a Searle
Scholar. Work in the laboratory of the authors is supported by funding from the National Institutes of Health,
Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation and the Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America to S.K.M.

Sarkis K. Mazmanian: Sarkis K. Mazmanian is an assistant professor in the Division of
Biology at the California Institute of Technology. He was formerly an assistant professor at
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School. He received his doctoral
training at the University of California, Los Angeles studying the mechanism by which
Gram-positive pathogens anchor surface protein adhesins during bacterial infection. His
work now focuses on the study of beneficial bacterial associations with mammalian hosts
and its implications to health.

June L. Round: June L. Round is a postdoctoral fellow in the laboratory of Sarkis K.
Mazmanian. She received her Ph.D from University of California, Los Angeles where she
studied scaffolding molecules involved in T cell biology . Her more recent interests are how
symbiotic bacteria within the intestine shape mucosal T cell development and responses.

Glossary

Microbiota

Microbiome

Symbiosis

Symbiont

Mutualism

Commensal

Pathogen

The amalgam of microorganisms that make up a complex and diverse
community living within a given anatomical niche (usually an
environmentally exposed surface of the body).

The collective genomes of a microbiota.

Symbiosis means “living together” as originally defined, the
relationship must be constant, intimate and between dissimilar
species. Although often used to describe a beneficial relationship,
symbiosis literally does not imply that either partner gains an
advantage.

An organism that lives in association with a host (usually for a
lifetime) without obvious benefit or harm to either member.

A symbiotic association in which both members benefit from the
relationship.

From the Latin, com mensa, meaning to ‘share a table’. This term is
frequently used to describe a microorganism which benefits from an
association with no known effects on the host.

From the Greek, pathos, meaning ‘suffering’. An opportunistic
organism that rarely comes in contact with the host, but causes acute
or chronic disease upon infection.

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 13

Parasite

Pathobiont

Dysbiosis

Specific
pathogen free
(SPF)

Gut-associated
lymphoid tissues

Peyer's patches

Mesenteric
lymph nodes

Cryptopatches

Isolated
lymphoid
follicles

Pattern-
recognition
receptor

An opportunistic organism that maintains a prolonged, close
association with the host which benefits the parasite at the expense of
the host.

A symbiont that does not normally elicit an inflammatory response
but under particular conditions (environmentally induced) has the
potential to cause dysregulated inflammation leading to disease.

Changes in the ‘normal’ or healthy composition of the microbiota
due to lifestyle practices that alter the initial development or stable
maintenance of the microbiota.

Typically used as conventionally colonized animals, these animals
are reared and maintained in an environment with an unknown
complex microbiota, that is free from known pathogens.

Lymphoid structures and aggregates associated with the intestinal
mucosa, specifically the tonsils, Peyer's patches, lymphoid follicles,
appendix or cecal patch and mesenteric lymph nodes. They are
enriched in conventional and unconventional lymphocytes and
specialized dendritic-cell and macrophage subsets. They provide the
first line of defence against entry of pathogens through the mucosal
barrier.

Groups of lymphoid nodules present in the small intestine (usually
the ileum). They occur massed together on the intestinal wall,
opposite the line of attachment of the mesentery. Peyer's patches
consist of a dome area, B-cell follicles and interfollicular T-cell
areas. High endothelial venules are present mainly in the
interfollicular areas.

(MLNs). Lymph nodes located at the base of the mesentery. They
collect lymph (including cells and antigens) draining from the
intestinal mucosa.

Clusters of cKIT+IL-7Rα+Thy1+ T-cell progenitors found in the
crypt lamina propria of both small and large intestinal villi.

Small lymphoid aggregates located in the anti-mesenteric wall of the
small intestine and containing B cells, dendritic cells, stromal cells
and some T cells. They may contain germinal centres. They are
thought to have a role in maintaining equilibrium between the
immune system and the microbiota.

(PRR). A host receptor (such as Toll-like receptors) that can sense
pathogen-associated molecular patterns and initiate signaling
cascades (which involve activation of nuclear factor-κB) that lead to
an innate immune response.

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 14

References

Inflammatory
bowel disease

Crohn's disease

Ulcerative colitis

‘Natural’
Regulatory T cell

VSL#3

(IBD). A chronic condition of the intestine that is characterized by
severe inflammation and mucosal destruction. The commonest forms
in humans are ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease.

A form of chronic inflammatory bowel disease that can affect the
entire gastrointestinal tract, but is commonest in the colon and
terminal ileum. It is characterized by transmural inflammation,
strictures and granuloma formation, and is believed to result from an
abnormal T-cell-mediated immune response to commensal bacteria.

A chronic disease characterized by inflammation of the mucosa and
sub-mucosa of the large intestine

(TReg cell). A specialized type of CD4+ T cell that can suppress the
responses of other T cells. These cells provide a crucial mechanism
for the maintenance of peripheral self-tolerance and are characterized
by expression of CD25 (the α-chain of the interleukin-2 receptor)
and the transcription factor forkhead box P3 (FOXP3).

A mixture of bacteria consisting of four strains of Lactobacillus (L.
casei, L. plantarum, L. acidophilus, and L. delbrueckii subsp.
bulgaricus), and three strains of Bifidobacterium (B. longum, B.
breve, and B.infantis), and one strain of Streptococcus salivarius
subsp. thermophilus.

1. Ley RE, Peterson DA, Gordon JI. Ecological and evolutionary forces shaping microbial diversity in

the human intestine. Cell. 2006; 124:837–48. [PubMed: 16497592]

2. Dethlefsen L, McFall-Ngai M, Relman DA. An ecological and evolutionary perspective on human-

microbe mutualism and disease. Nature. 2007; 449:811–8. [PubMed: 17943117]

3. Hooper LV. Bacterial contributions to mammalian gut development. Trends Microbiol. 2004;

12:129–34. [PubMed: 15001189]

4. Mazmanian SK, Kasper DL. The love-hate relationship between bacterial polysaccharides and the

host immune system. Nat Rev Immunol. 2006; 6:849–58. [PubMed: 17024229]

5. Peterson DA, Frank DN, Pace NR, Gordon JI. Metagenomic approaches for defining the

pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases. Cell Host Microbe. 2008; 3:417–27. [PubMed:
18541218]

6. Frank DN, Pace NR. Gastrointestinal microbiology enters the metagenomics era. Curr Opin

Gastroenterol. 2008; 24:4–10. [PubMed: 18043225]

7. Ley RE, et al. Evolution of Mammals and Their Gut Microbes. Science. 2008
8. Hooper LV, Gordon JI. Commensal host-bacterial relationships in the gut. Science. 2001;

292:1115–8. [PubMed: 11352068]

9. Macpherson AJ, Harris NL. Interactions between commensal intestinal bacteria and the immune

system. Nat Rev Immunol. 2004; 4:478–85. [PubMed: 15173836]

10. Zaneveld J, et al. Host-bacterial coevolution and the search for new drug targets. Curr Opin Chem

Biol. 2008; 12:109–14. [PubMed: 18280814]

11. Falk PG, Hooper LV, Midtvedt T, Gordon JI. Creating and maintaining the gastrointestinal

ecosystem: what we know and need to know from gnotobiology. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 1998;
62:1157–70. [PubMed: 9841668]

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 15

12. Bouskra D, et al. Lymphoid tissue genesis induced by commensals through NOD1 regulates

intestinal homeostasis. Nature. 2008; 456:507–10. [PubMed: 18987631] [This study demonstrates
that peptidoglycan from gram negative bacteria induces the generation of ILF's through the
recongition of NOD1. In the absence of ILF formation, dramatic changes in the composition of the
microbiota occur.]

13. Abrams GD, Bauer H, Sprinz H. Influence of the normal flora on mucosal morphology and cellular

renewal in the ileum. A comparison of germ-free and conventional mice. Lab Invest. 1963;
12:355–64. [PubMed: 14010768]

14. Bry L, Falk PG, Midtvedt T, Gordon JI. A model of host-microbial interactions in an open

mammalian ecosystem. Science. 1996; 273:1380–3. [PubMed: 8703071]

15. Cash HL, Whitham CV, Behrendt CL, Hooper LV. Symbiotic bacteria direct expression of an

intestinal bactericidal lectin. Science. 2006; 313:1126–30. [PubMed: 16931762] [These authors
demonstrate that microbial colonization of germfree mice induce RegIIIγ, a secreted C-type lectin.
They further show that this protein has antimicrobial activity by binding to peptidoglycan,
suggesting that microbial species actively shape the intestinal environment to their advantage.]

16. Sonnenburg JL, Chen CT, Gordon JI. Genomic and metabolic studies of the impact of probiotics
on a model gut symbiont and host. PLoS Biol. 2006; 4:e413. [PubMed: 17132046] [Using
B.thetaiotaomicron (a symbiont) co-colonization with Bifidobacterium longum,(a probiotic) in
germfree mice, this study demonstrates that B.longum can increase the diversity of polysaccarides
that can be degraded by B.thetaiotaomicron, Thus, demonstrating another layer of complexity in
host microbial interactions; that intestinal bacterial species can impact the function of one
another.]

17. Sprinz H, et al. The response of the germfree guinea pig to oral bacterial challenge with

Escherichia coli and Shigella flexneri. Am J Pathol. 1961; 39:681–95. [PubMed: 13915950]
18. Maier BR, Hentges DJ. Experimental Shigella infections in laboratory animals. I. Antagonism by
human normal flora components in gnotobiotic mice. Infect Immun. 1972; 6:168–73. [PubMed:
4631914]

19. Zachar Z, Savage DC. Microbial interference and colonization of the murine gastrointestinal tract

by Listeria monocytogenes. Infect Immun. 1979; 23:168–74. [PubMed: 106003]

20. Inagaki H, Suzuki T, Nomoto K, Yoshikai Y. Increased susceptibility to primary infection with
Listeria monocytogenes in germfree mice may be due to lack of accumulation of L-selectin+
CD44+ T cells in sites of inflammation. Infect Immun. 1996; 64:3280–7. [PubMed: 8757865]
21. Nardi RM, Silva ME, Vieira EC, Bambirra EA, Nicoli JR. Intragastric infection of germfree and
conventional mice with Salmonella typhimurium. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1989; 22:1389–92.
[PubMed: 2700668]

22. Stecher B, et al. Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium Exploits Inflammation to Compete

with the Intestinal Microbiota. PLoS Biol. 2007; 5:e244. [These authors demonstrate that that an
intestinal pathogen, Salmonella enterica, utilizes inflammation in order to perturb the commensal
microbial population to induce disease.]

23. Nardi RM, et al. Bacteriological and immunological aspects of conventional and germfree mice
infected with Salmonella typhimurium. Rev Latinoam Microbiol. 1991; 33:239–43. [PubMed:
1670260]

24. Podolsky DK. The current future understanding of inflammatory bowel disease. Best Pract Res

Clin Gastroenterol. 2002; 16:933–43. [PubMed: 12473299]

25. Shanahan F. Crohn's disease. Lancet. 2002; 359:62–9. [PubMed: 11809204]
26. Targan SR, Karp LC. Defects in mucosal immunity leading to ulcerative colitis. Immunol Rev.

2005; 206:296–305. [PubMed: 16048556]

27. Bouma G, Strober W. The immunological and genetic basis of inflammatory bowel disease. Nat

Rev Immunol. 2003; 3:521–33. [PubMed: 12876555]

28. Kullberg MC, et al. IL-23 plays a key role in Helicobacter hepaticus-induced T cell-dependent

colitis. J Exp Med. 2006; 203:2485–94. [PubMed: 17030948]

29. Hue S, et al. Interleukin-23 drives innate and T cell-mediated intestinal inflammation. J Exp Med.

2006; 203:2473–83. [PubMed: 17030949]

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 16

30. Duerr RH, et al. A genome-wide association study identifies IL23R as an inflammatory bowel

disease gene. Science. 2006; 314:1461–3. [PubMed: 17068223]

31. Schmechel S, et al. Linking genetic susceptibility to Crohn's disease with Th17 cell function: IL-22

serum levels are increased in Crohn's disease and correlate with disease activity and IL23R
genotype status. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2008; 14:204–12. [PubMed: 18022867]

32. Kobayashi T, et al. IL23 differentially regulates the Th1/Th17 balance in ulcerative colitis and

Crohn's disease. Gut. 2008; 57:1682–9. [PubMed: 18653729]

33. Sartor RB. Microbial influences in inflammatory bowel diseases. Gastroenterology. 2008;

134:577–94. [PubMed: 18242222]

34. Fontenot JD, Rudensky AY. A well adapted regulatory contrivance: regulatory T cell development
and the forkhead family transcription factor Foxp3. Nat Immunol. 2005; 6:331–7. [PubMed:
15785758]

35. Vignali DA, Collison LW, Workman CJ. How regulatory T cells work. Nat Rev Immunol. 2008;

8:523–32. [PubMed: 18566595]

36. Coombes JL, et al. A functionally specialized population of mucosal CD103+ DCs induces Foxp3+
regulatory T cells via a TGF-beta and retinoic acid-dependent mechanism. J Exp Med. 2007;
204:1757–64. [PubMed: 17620361]

37. Powrie F, Maloy KJ. Immunology. Regulating the regulators. Science. 2003; 299:1030–1.

38. Collison LW, et al. The inhibitory cytokine IL-35 contributes to regulatory T-cell function. Nature.

[PubMed: 12586934]

2007; 450:566–9. [PubMed: 18033300]

39. Ivanov II, et al. Specific microbiota direct the differentiation of IL-17-producing T-helper cells in
the mucosa of the small intestine. Cell Host Microbe. 2008; 4:337–49. [PubMed: 18854238]
40. Atarashi K, et al. ATP drives lamina propria T(H)17 cell differentiation. Nature. 2008; 455:808–

12. [PubMed: 18716618]

41. Hall JA, et al. Commensal DNA limits regulatory T cell conversion and is a natural adjuvant of

intestinal immune responses. Immunity. 2008; 29:637–49. [PubMed: 18835196]

42. Rakoff-Nahoum S, Paglino J, Eslami-Varzaneh F, Edberg S, Medzhitov R. Recognition of

commensal microflora by toll-like receptors is required for intestinal homeostasis. Cell. 2004;
118:229–41. [PubMed: 15260992] [One of the first studies to suggest that recognition of TLR
ligands of commensal bacteria by the host is important in the maintainence of intestinal
homoestasis.]

43. Ostman S, Rask C, Wold AE, Hultkrantz S, Telemo E. Impaired regulatory T cell function in

germ-free mice. Eur J Immunol. 2006; 36:2336–46. [PubMed: 16897813]

44. Ishikawa H, et al. Effect of intestinal microbiota on the induction of regulatory CD25+ CD4+ T

cells. Clin Exp Immunol. 2008; 153:127–35. [PubMed: 18460018]

45. Strauch UG, et al. Influence of intestinal bacteria on induction of regulatory T cells: lessons from a

transfer model of colitis. Gut. 2005; 54:1546–52. [PubMed: 15987795]

46. Zaph C, et al. Commensal-dependent expression of IL-25 regulates the IL-23-IL-17 axis in the

intestine. J Exp Med. 2008; 205:2191–8. [PubMed: 18762568]

47. De Winter H, Cheroutre H, Kronenberg M. Mucosal immunity and inflammation. II. The yin and
yang of T cells in intestinal inflammation: pathogenic and protective roles in a mouse colitis
model. Am J Physiol. 1999; 276:G1317–21. [PubMed: 10362634]

48. Simpson SJ, de Jong YP, Comiskey M, Terhorst C. Pathways of T cell pathology in models of
chronic intestinal inflammation. Int Rev Immunol. 2000; 19:1–37. [PubMed: 10723675]

49. Elson CO, et al. Monoclonal anti-interleukin 23 reverses active colitis in a T cell-mediated model

in mice. Gastroenterology. 2007; 132:2359–70. [PubMed: 17570211]

50. Sartor RB. The influence of normal microbial flora on the development of chronic mucosal

inflammation. Res Immunol. 1997; 148:567–76. [PubMed: 9588836]

51. Macpherson A, Khoo UY, Forgacs I, Philpott-Howard J, Bjarnason I. Mucosal antibodies in

inflammatory bowel disease are directed against intestinal bacteria. Gut. 1996; 38:365–75.
[PubMed: 8675088]

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 17

52. Elson CO. Commensal bacteria as targets in Crohn's disease. Gastroenterology. 2000; 119:254–7.

[PubMed: 10889177]

53. Tannock GW. Exploring the relationships between intestinal microflora and inflammatory
conditions of the human bowel and spine. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2002; 81:529–35.
[PubMed: 12448748]

54. Kent TH, Summers RW, DenBesten L, Swaner JC, Hrouda M. Effect of antibiotics on bacterial
flora of rats with intestinal blind loops. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1969; 132:63–7. [PubMed:
4310178]

55. Videla S, et al. Role of intestinal microflora in chronic inflammation and ulceration of the rat

colon. Gut. 1994; 35:1090–7. [PubMed: 7926912]

56. Taurog JD, et al. The germfree state prevents development of gut and joint inflammatory disease in

HLA-B27 transgenic rats. J Exp Med. 1994; 180:2359–64. [PubMed: 7964509]

57. Rath HC. Role of commensal bacteria in chronic experimental colitis: lessons from the HLA-B27

transgenic rat. Pathobiology. 2002; 70:131–8. [PubMed: 12571416]

58. Sellon RK, et al. Resident enteric bacteria are necessary for development of spontaneous colitis

and immune system activation in interleukin-10-deficient mice. Infect Immun. 1998; 66:5224–31.
[PubMed: 9784526]

59. Cahill RJ, et al. Inflammatory bowel disease: an immunity-mediated condition triggered by

bacterial infection with Helicobacter hepaticus. Infect Immun. 1997; 65:3126–31. [PubMed:
9234764]

60. Kullberg MC, et al. Induction of colitis by a CD4+ T cell clone specific for a bacterial epitope.

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:15830–5. [PubMed: 14673119]

61. Barnich N, et al. CEACAM6 acts as a receptor for adherent-invasive E. coli, supporting ileal

mucosa colonization in Crohn disease. J Clin Invest. 2007; 117:1566–74. [PubMed: 17525800]

62. Hampe J, et al. Association between insertion mutation in NOD2 gene and Crohn's disease in

German and British populations. Lancet. 2001; 357:1925–8. [PubMed: 11425413]

63. Kim SC, Tonkonogy SL, Karrasch T, Jobin C, Sartor RB. Dual-association of gnotobiotic IL-10−/

− mice with 2 nonpathogenic commensal bacteria induces aggressive pancolitis. Inflamm Bowel
Dis. 2007; 13:1457–66. [PubMed: 17763473]

64. O'Hara AM, Shanahan F. The gut flora as a forgotten organ. EMBO Rep. 2006; 7:688–93.

[PubMed: 16819463]

65. Ley RE, Knight R, Gordon JI. The human microbiome: eliminating the biomedical/environmental

dichotomy in microbial ecology. Environ Microbiol. 2007; 9:3–4. [PubMed: 17227400]
66. Mazmanian SK, Round JL, Kasper DL. A microbial symbiosis factor prevents intestinal

inflammatory disease. Nature. 2008; 453:620–5. [PubMed: 18509436]

67. Glimcher LH. Trawling for treasure: tales of T-bet. Nat Immunol. 2007; 8:448–50. [PubMed:

17440449]

68. Garrett WS, et al. Communicable ulcerative colitis induced by T-bet deficiency in the innate

immune system. Cell. 2007; 131:33–45. [PubMed: 17923086] [This study demonstrates that mice
deficient in the transcription factor T-bet within the innate immune system develop spontaneous
colitis. More importantly, transfer of the microbiota from these mice into wild-type recipients
induces disease.]

69. Turnbaugh PJ, et al. An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy
harvest. Nature. 2006; 444:1027–31. [PubMed: 17183312] [These authors show that the
microbiome from obese mice has an increased capacity for energy harvest. Transfer of the
microbiota to non-obese mice increases their mean fat body weight, suggesting that a change in the
microbiota can induce disease.]

70. Ley RE, Turnbaugh PJ, Klein S, Gordon JI. Microbial ecology: human gut microbes associated

with obesity. Nature. 2006; 444:1022–3. [PubMed: 17183309]

71. Pomp D, Nehrenberg D, Estrada-Smith D. Complex genetics of obesity in mouse models. Annu

Rev Nutr. 2008; 28:331–45. [PubMed: 18435591]

72. Lepage P, et al. Biodiversity of the mucosa-associated microbiota is stable along the distal

digestive tract in healthy individuals and patients with IBD. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2005; 11:473–80.
[PubMed: 15867587]

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 18

73. Scanlan PD, Shanahan F, O'Mahony C, Marchesi JR. Culture-independent analyses of temporal
variation of the dominant fecal microbiota and targeted bacterial subgroups in Crohn's disease. J
Clin Microbiol. 2006; 44:3980–8. [PubMed: 16988018]

74. Frank DN, et al. Molecular-phylogenetic characterization of microbial community imbalances in
human inflammatory bowel diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:13780–5. [PubMed:
17699621] [This study demonstrates that the intestinal microbial populations between human IBD
and non-IBD patients differs significantly.]

75. Turnbaugh PJ, et al. The human microbiome project. Nature. 2007; 449:804–10. [PubMed:

17943116]

76. Sartor RB. Therapeutic manipulation of the enteric microflora in inflammatory bowel diseases:

antibiotics, probiotics, and prebiotics. Gastroenterology. 2004; 126:1620–33. [PubMed: 15168372]

77. Di Giacinto C, Marinaro M, Sanchez M, Strober W, Boirivant M. Probiotics ameliorate recurrent

Th1-mediated murine colitis by inducing IL-10 and IL-10-dependent TGF-beta-bearing regulatory
cells. J Immunol. 2005; 174:3237–46. [PubMed: 15749854]

78. O'Mahony C, et al. Commensal-induced regulatory T cells mediate protection against pathogen-
stimulated NF-kappaB activation. PLoS Pathog. 2008; 4:e1000112. [PubMed: 18670628]
79. Foligne B, et al. Correlation between in vitro and in vivo immunomodulatory properties of lactic

acid bacteria. World J Gastroenterol. 2007; 13:236–43. [PubMed: 17226902]

80. Sokol H, et al. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-inflammatory commensal bacterium

identified by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;
105:16731–6. [PubMed: 18936492] [These authors identify that the bacterium F. prausnitzii is
specifically reduced within the intestine of Crohns patients. They further demonstrate that this
bacterium has an anti-inflammatory capacity and can protect animals from disease when orally
administered, suggesting that symbiotic microbes may be directly mediating health.]
81. Mazmanian SK, Liu CH, Tzianabos AO, Kasper DL. An immunomodulatory molecule of
symbiotic bacteria directs maturation of the host immune system. Cell. 2005; 122:107–18.
[PubMed: 16009137]

82. Roncarolo MG, Battaglia M. Regulatory T-cell immunotherapy for tolerance to self antigens and

alloantigens in humans. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007; 7:585–98. [PubMed: 17653126]

83. Cong Y, et al. Generation of antigen-specific, Foxp3-expressing CD4+ regulatory T cells by

inhibition of APC proteosome function. J Immunol. 2005; 174:2787–95. [PubMed: 15728488]

84. Noverr MC, Huffnagle GB. Does the microbiota regulate immune responses outside the gut?

Trends Microbiol. 2004; 12:562–8. [PubMed: 15539116]

85. Bjorksten B. The environmental influence on childhood asthma. Allergy. 1999; 54(Suppl 49):17–

23. [PubMed: 10422743]

86. Penders J, et al. Gut microbiota composition and development of atopic manifestations in infancy:

the KOALA Birth Cohort Study. Gut. 2007; 56:661–7. [PubMed: 17047098]

87. Kalliomaki M, Isolauri E. Pandemic of atopic diseases--a lack of microbial exposure in early

infancy? Curr Drug Targets Infect Disord. 2002; 2:193–9. [PubMed: 12462124]

88. Kalliomaki M, Isolauri E. Role of intestinal flora in the development of allergy. Curr Opin Allergy

Clin Immunol. 2003; 3:15–20. [PubMed: 12582309]

89. Sakaguchi S, et al. Foxp3+ CD25+ CD4+ natural regulatory T cells in dominant self-tolerance and

autoimmune disease. Immunol Rev. 2006; 212:8–27. [PubMed: 16903903]

90. Zhou L, et al. TGF-beta-induced Foxp3 inhibits T(H)17 cell differentiation by antagonizing

RORgammat function. Nature. 2008; 453:236–40. [PubMed: 18368049]

91. Eckburg PB, et al. Diversity of the human intestinal microbial flora. Science. 2005; 308:1635–8.

92. Gill SR, et al. Metagenomic analysis of the human distal gut microbiome. Science. 2006;

[PubMed: 15831718]

312:1355–9. [PubMed: 16741115]

93. Palmer C, Bik EM, Digiulio DB, Relman DA, Brown PO. Development of the Human Infant

Intestinal Microbiota. PLoS Biol. 2007; 5:e177. [PubMed: 17594176]

94. Izcue A, et al. Interleukin-23 restrains regulatory T cell activity to drive T cell-dependent colitis.

Immunity. 2008; 28:559–70. [PubMed: 18400195] [This report demonstrates that Foxp3 deficient

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 19

T cells can induce colitis in IL-23 deficient recipients, suggesting that disease can result in the
absence of regulation.]

95. O'Mahony SM, et al. Early life stress alters behavior, immunity, and microbiota in rats:

implications for irritable bowel syndrome and psychiatric illnesses. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 65:263–
7. [PubMed: 18723164]

96. Moreau MC, Ducluzeau R, Guy-Grand D, Muller MC. Increase in the population of duodenal

immunoglobulin A plasmocytes in axenic mice associated with different living or dead bacterial
strains of intestinal origin. Infect Immun. 1978; 21:532–9. [PubMed: 357289]

97. Suzuki K, et al. Aberrant expansion of segmented filamentous bacteria in IgA-deficient gut. Proc

Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:1981–6. [PubMed: 14766966]

98. Kroese FG, de Waard R, Bos NA. B-1 cells and their reactivity with the murine intestinal

microflora. Semin Immunol. 1996; 8:11–8. [PubMed: 8850294]

99. Macpherson AJ, Uhr T. Induction of protective IgA by intestinal dendritic cells carrying

commensal bacteria. Science. 2004; 303:1662–5. [PubMed: 15016999]

100. Macpherson AJ, Geuking MB, McCoy KD. Immune responses that adapt the intestinal mucosa to

commensal intestinal bacteria. Immunology. 2005; 115:153–62. [PubMed: 15885120]

101. He B, et al. Intestinal bacteria trigger T cell-independent immunoglobulin A(2) class switching by
inducing epithelial-cell secretion of the cytokine APRIL. Immunity. 2007; 26:812–26. [PubMed:
17570691]

102. Cerutti A. The regulation of IgA class switching. Nat Rev Immunol. 2008; 8:421–34. [PubMed:

18483500]

103. Tezuka H, et al. Regulation of IgA production by naturally occurring TNF/iNOS-producing

dendritic cells. Nature. 2007; 448:929–33. [PubMed: 17713535]

104. Peterson DA, McNulty NP, Guruge JL, Gordon JI. IgA response to symbiotic bacteria as a

mediator of gut homeostasis. Cell Host Microbe. 2007; 2:328–39. [PubMed: 18005754]

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 20

Antibody responses in germ-free animals

One of the first immunologic deficiencies observed in germ-free mice was a profound
reduction in the levels of secretory immunoglobulin A (sIgA) found in the intestine96.
Mono-association of mice with various bacteria leads to increased IgA expression. As
numerous studies have demonstrated that sIgA coats commensal (and pathogenic)
bacteria, some have speculated IgA is involved in limiting the penetration of bacteria into
host tissues. Studies from activation-induced cytosine deaminase (AID)-deficient animals
(which are unable to class switch to IgA), display lymphoid hyperplasia of the gut and an
altered microbiota, favoring the outgrowth of specific classes of bacteria97. Though
experimental evidence does indicate that IgA is involved in protection from some enteric
bacterial and viral infections98, contradictory studies have shown that IgA deficiency
does not cause increased prevalence of disease in animals, and IgA-deficient people
generally live a healthy life. However, pioneering discoveries initially by Macpherson
and colleagues are revealing a mechanistic role for symbiotic bacteria in actively shaping
the production of sIgA. Dendritic cells (DCs) that have acquired gut commensal bacteria
migrate to MLNs where they induce the production of IgA from naïve B cells99. This
process is required to control the penetration of commensal bacteria through the gut
epithelial barrier100. Recently, it has been shown that sensing of symbiotic bacterial
products by TLRs of intestinal epithelial cells results in localized B cell class
switching101, a process that potentially affects immune interactions with the
microbiota102. The discovery that symbiotic bacteria direct the function of a specialized
mucosal DC population that induces IgA class switching also implicates the microbiota
in having evolved defined mechanisms to direct immune responses103. Further, IgA
responses were recently shown to be involved in maintaining host-bacterial mutualism by
limiting innate immune responses to a model gut symbiont104. The recent revitalization
of research into the biological functions of intestinal sIgA promises to provide important
clues regarding the molecular communication between the immune system and the
microbiota.

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 21

Figure 1. Model for Bacteroides fragilis-mediated protection from disease induced by
Helicobacter hepaticus
B. fragilis produces an immunomodulatory polysaccharide (PSA) that induces an
immunoregulatory programme that provides protection from inflammation induced by H.
hepaticus. PSA is taken up by intestinal dendritic cells (DCs), which presumably migrate to
the local mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) where they initiate T-cell responses by presenting
PSA on MHC class II molecules to CD4+ T cells. This process helps to restore a balanced T
helper (TH) and regulatory T (TReg) cell profile. Subsequently, naive TH cells adopt anti-
inflammatory functions that include expression of interleukin-10 (IL-10). IL-10 is required
to suppress the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (such as IL-17, IL-23 and tumour-
necrosis factor (TNF) induced by H. hepaticus during experimental colitis. It is this balance
of the pro-inflammatory responses to H. hepaticus by regulation induced by B. fragilis that
results in the control of intestinal inflammation.

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 22

Figure 2. Immunological dysregulation is the result of dysbiosis in the microbiota
a | A healthy microbiota contains a balanced composition of multiple classes of bacteria.
Commensals are permanent residents of this complex ecosystem and provide no benefit or
detriment to the host (at least to our knowledge). Symbionts are organisms with known
health-promoting functions. Pathobionts are also permanent residents of the microbiota with
the potential to induce pathology. b | During dysbiosis, there is an unnatural shift in the
composition of the microbiota whereby either the numbers of symbionts are reduced and/or
pathobionts are increased. The various causes for this are not entirely clear, but are likely to
include recent societal advances in developed countries. The result is non-specific
inflammation which may predispose certain genetically susceptible people to inflammatory
disease. Pathogens are opportunistic organisms that cause rare and acute inflammation.

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 23

Figure 3. Proposed causes of Dysbiosis
We propose the notion that the composition of the microbiota can shape a healthy immune
response or predispose to disease. Multiple factors can contribute to a dysbiotic state
including host genetics, medical practices, life style, and exposure. a| Host genetics can
potentially influence dysbiosis in multiple ways. Genome wide association studies of IBD
patients have revealed polymorphisms in immune-related genes. An individual lacking
genetic regulatory mechanisms or overactive pro-inflammatory pathways will have an
intestinal environment marked by unchecked inflammation. Studies have demonstrated the
ability of inflammation alone to influence the composition of the microbiota, potentially in
favor of pathobionts. Alternatively, it is possible that genetics of the host can ‘select’ or
exclude the colonization of particular organisms. This selection can be either active (as
would be the case of an organism recognizing a particular receptor on the host) or passive
(the host environment is more conducive to fostering the growth of select organisms).
‘Selection’ of pathobionts by the host could tip the balance in favor of inflammation. b| The
food we consume and even the day-to-day stress95 represent aspects of life style that have
the potential to influence the microbiota. c| Hospitals represent a sterile environment in
which infants are born. While the sterility protects from dangerous pathogens, it also has the
potential to prevent early exposure to health-promoting bacteria. d| The advent of antibiotics
represents a major medical breakthrough; however, antibiotics do not have the capacity to
distinguish between pathogenic or symbiotic microorganism s and may adversely alter the
microbiota.

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 24

Intestinal immunologic defects in germ-free mice

Table 1

Intestinal organ development

Site

Phenotype in Germfree mice

Small Intestine

Peyers Patches

fewer, less cellular

Lamina propria

thinner, less cellular

Germinal centers

fewer plasma cells

Isolated lymphoid follicles

smaller, less cellular

Mesenteric Lymph nodes

Germinal centers

smaller, less cellular

fewer plasma cells

Cellular Defects

Cell Type

Phenotype in Germfree mice

Intestinal epithelial lymphocytes

CD8+ T cells

fewer, reduced cytotoxicity

Lamina propria lymphocytes

CD4+ T cells

decreased Th17 cells (Small intestine)

proportional decrease in number

increased Th17 cells (Colon)

reduced expression of Foxp3

reduced suppressive capacity

Mesenteric lymph nodes

CD4+CD25+ T cells

Molecular immune deficiencies

Molecule

Phenotype in Germfree mice

Paneth Cells

B cells

Intestine

Intestinal epithelial cells

Angiogenin-4

reduced expression

RegIIIγ

reduced expression

Secretory IgA

reduced production

ATP

reduced

MHC class II

reduced expression

TLR 9

IL-25

reduced expression

elevated

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 25

Bacteria shown to be protective in inflammatory bowel disease

Table 2

Bacterial Strain/s

Model system

IBD type/ model

Mechanism of suppression

VSL#3

Human/ mouse

Pouchitis, Ulcerative colitis/ TNBS

IL-10, TGF-β bearing T cells

Bifidobacteria lactis

Rat

TNBS

↓ colonic TNF-α and iNOS

Bifidobacteria infantis

Mouse

S. typhimurium induced enteritidis

Tregs, inhibits NF-κB

E. coli Nissle 1917

Human/ mouse

Ulcerative colitis/ DSS colitis

↓ inflammation via TLR-2 & TLR-4

Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG

Mouse/ Rat

TNBS/HLA-B27

induction of CD4+CD25+ cells

Lactobacillus plantarum 299v

IL10 −/− mice, but not TNBS

↓ IFN-γ and IL-12p40

Lactobacillus salivarius

Lactobacillus reuteri

Lactobacillus fermentum

Lactobacillus casei

Mouse

Mouse

Mouse

Rat

Rat

Rat

TNBS

↓ colonic inflammation

IL-10−/− mice

NGF and ↓ IL-8, TNF in cell lines

TNBS

TNBS

↓ colonic TNF-α and iNOS

↓ colonic COX-2

Bacteriodes thetaiotaomicron

S.enterica induced enteritidis

↓ IL-8 and TNF-α in Caco-2 cells

Bacteriodes fragilis

Mouse

T cell transfer model, TNBS

CD4+ T cell derived IL-10

YO-MIX Y109 FRO 1000

Mouse

Faecalibacterium prausnitzii

Mouse

TNBS

TNBS

ND

↓ NF-κB and IL-8

Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

