Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

2 of 21

20 Department of Physiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Murcia, 30100 Murcia, Spain;

medit2011@gmail.com (M.S.-C.); elvirada@um.es (E.L.D.)

21 Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Hospital Clínico Universitario Lozano Blesa, 50009 Zaragoza,

22 Neonatology Unit, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, BCNatal,

Spain

08028 Barcelona, Spain

23 Department of Neonatology La Paz University Hospital, 28046 Madrid, Spain;

miguel.saenz@salud.madrid.org

24 European Network of Excellence for Pediatric Clinical Research, 27100 Bari, Italy
25 Department of Paediatrics-Neonatology Quironsalud, Madrid University Hospital and Biomedical Research
Foundation-IDIPAZ, La Paz University Hospital, 28046 Madrid, Spain; fernando.cabanas@quironsalud.es

* Correspondence: mdmesa@ugr.es; Tel.: +34-958-246187
† All the authors are the members of SAMID Network. RETICS funded by the PN I+D+I 2018–2021 (Spain),
ISCIII-Sub-Directorate General for Research Assessment and Promotion and the European Regional
Development Fund (FEDER), ref. RD16/0022.

Received: 28 November 2019; Accepted: 20 December 2019; Published: 2 January 2020

Abstract: Pregnancy induces a number of immunological, hormonal, and metabolic changes that are
necessary for the mother to adapt her body to this new physiological situation. The microbiome of
the mother, the placenta and the fetus inﬂuence the fetus growth and undoubtedly plays a major
role in the adequate development of the newborn infant. Hence, the microbiome modulates the
inﬂammatory mechanisms related to physiological and pathological processes that are involved in
the perinatal progress through diﬀerent mechanisms. The present review summarizes the actual
knowledge related to physiological changes in the microbiota occurring in the mother, the fetus,
and the child, both during neonatal period and beyond. In addition, we approach some speciﬁc
pathological situations during the perinatal periods, as well as the inﬂuence of the type of delivery
and feeding.

Keywords: microbiome; pregnancy; fetus; placenta; newborn; infancy; critical illness; sepsis; allergy

1. Introduction

Pregnancy induces a number of immunological, hormonal, and metabolic changes necessary for the
normal development of the fetus and for a timely onset of labor and successful delivery [1]. It has been
described that maternal microbiota inﬂuences prenatal and early postnatal oﬀspring development and
health outcomes [2,3]. There is a lack of consensus about the real nature of microbiome changes during
pregnancy, since discrepant and unpredictable ﬁndings have been described [4–6]. These diﬀerences
could be explained by the diﬀerence in gestational age, genetics, ethnicity, and environmental factors
surrounding the participants included in those studies. Indeed, it has been described that maternal
microbiota composition during pregnancy is related to maternal diet [7–9], and by pre-pregnancy
weight and weight gain over the course of pregnancy [10–13]. Koren et al. described that the amounts
of anti-inﬂammatory butyrate-producer commensal bacteria present in non-pregnant women gut
microbiota decrease while bacteria associated with pro-inﬂammatory responses, such as Proteobacteria,
increase during pregnancy [4]. Similarly, bacterial diversity tends to be reduced in vaginal microbiota
during pregnancy while increasing vaginal Streptococci along with several speciﬁc Lactobacilli strains,
which are thought to prevent the growth of pathogenic bacteria, as well as to help human digestion,
and inﬂuence host innate and adaptive immune system responses [4,14]. Furthermore, the classical
paradigm of the fetus as a sterile organism is under discussion, since a characteristic microbiome has
been identiﬁed in the placenta, the amniotic ﬂuid, and the fetus in healthy pregnancies [15,16]. However,
this issue is under discussion. Perez-Muñoz et al. argued the weakness of evidence supporting the

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

3 of 21

“in utero colonization hypothesis”, due to methodological diﬃculties, and concluded that current
scientiﬁc evidence does not support the existence of microbiome within the healthy fetal milieu [17].
Gut microbiota inﬂuences the immune function [18], and thus may modulate the response
through diﬀerent microbial-derived metabolites, especially short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) such as
butyrate, acetate, or propionate [19]. These are the key drivers of T-cell subset proliferation and
activity [19,20]. Gastrointestinal bacteria generate SCFAs after fermentation of complex dietary
carbohydrates. These metabolites may have an inﬂuence both in the mother and in the newborn by
down-regulation of pro-inﬂammatory responses at the speciﬁc sites where the allergens are located,
which typically precedes asthma in childhood [21]. In addition, the may also inﬂuence bone marrow
stimulation by reprogramming the immunological tone of the mammalian ecosystem [22].

Finally, it is important to consider that the discrepancies of the data obtained to date could be
inﬂuenced by a number of factors such as the dietary pattern, the ethnicity, the geographic location,
and the research methodology. The limitations of classical culturable methods have been improved
with new molecular methods used to characterize the microbiota. However, these new methods
have their own limitations, as reagent, laboratory contamination, and the inability to diﬀerentiate
living and dead microorganisms. Indeed, recent research complements the study of microbiome
with metabolomics and proteomic analysis in order to complete the whole metabolic picture of the
microbiota and its metabolic status. Therefore, further studies are needed to conﬁrm the evolution of
microbiota during pregnancy and its inﬂuence in healthy and complicated labors and the newborn [23].
The present review summarizes the actual knowledge related to changes in maternal and fetal
microbiota occurring during pregnancy, which may inﬂuence the newborn and infant development.
In addition, changes in speciﬁc pathological infancy situations have also been revised.

2. Changes in the Microbiome during Pregnancy

During pregnancy, the female body undergoes hormonal, metabolic, and immunological changes
to preserve the health of both the mother and the oﬀspring [1]. These changes alter the mother
microbiota at diﬀerent sites such as the gut, the vagina, and the oral cavity. However, published data
are not consistent, since a number of factors might inﬂuence the microbiota proﬁle such as the diet,
antibiotic, or other supplement intakes, as well as the methodology of research. Therefore, a holistic
approach is needed to understand all this information.

2.1. Gut Microbiota

The gut microbiota shifts substantially throughout the progression of the pregnancy and is
characterized by reduced individual richness (alpha-diversity) (Figure 1), and increased inter-subject
beta-diversity [4]. These changes are not related to, although they may be inﬂuenced by, the diet,
antibiotic treatments, gestational diabetes, or pre-pregnancy body mass index, but are vital for a healthy
pregnancy [4]. It has been suggested that other factors, such as the state of the host immune and
endocrine systems, may actively contribute to the observed modiﬁcations [24]. During the ﬁrst
trimester, the gut microbiota pattern is similar in many aspects to that of healthy non-pregnant women,
showing a predominance of Firmicutes, mainly Clostridiales, over Bacteroidetes [25]. Then, maternal
gut microbiota declines in butyrate-producing bacteria, while Biﬁdobacteria, Proteobacteria, and lactic
acid-producing bacteria increase from the ﬁrst to the third trimester, when the microbiota resembles
an unpredictably disease-associated dysbiosis that diﬀers greatly among normal pregnancies [4].
Changes in the host immune system of the gastrointestinal mucosa together with metabolic hormonal
changes may trigger a low-grade pro-inﬂammatory status that could facilitate an increased diﬀusion
of glucose from the gut epithelium towards the lumen, and thus may induce weight gain while
modifying the gut microbiota during normal pregnancies [26]. Indeed, changes in the microbiota
may contribute to the evolution of this process. In addition, disruption of maternal gut microbiota
during the third trimester [27] may aﬀect host metabolism in order to provide an energy supply for
the fetus [4,26]. Moreover, it has been reported that the gut microbiota during pregnancy is a critical

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

4 of 21

determinant of oﬀspring health [13,28], and that potentially determines the development of atopy and
autoimmune phenotypes in the oﬀspring [28]. However, the relationship among the immune system,
the gut microbiota, and metabolism in pregnancy is unclear, and more research is needed to stablish
ﬁnal conclusions.

Figure 1. Alpha-diversity changes in gut microbiota during pregnancy.

2.2. Vaginal Microbiota

The composition of the vaginal microbiota is dynamic, corresponding with hormonal ﬂuctuations
throughout the woman’s reproductive life, and also during pregnancy. A number of protective lactic
acid-producing Lactobacillus species dominates the healthy vaginal microbiota in most reproductive-age
women. These bacteria protect against vaginal dysbiosis and inhibit opportunistic infections through
the direct and indirect protective eﬀects of Lactobacillus products, such as lactic acid and bacteriocin
among others. Lactic acid decreases vaginal pH and thus inhibits a broad range of infections [29],
can directly aﬀect host immune functions, by inhibiting pro-inﬂammatory responses, and also help
to release mediators from vaginal epithelial cells and stimulate antiviral response [30]. In addition,
Lactobacillus-derived bacteriocins may inhibit pathogen growth [31]. The degree of protection varies
according to the predominant Lactobacillus specie [30]. Vaginal dysbiosis is comprised of a wide array
of strict and facultative anaerobes that correlate to increased risk of infection, diseases, and poor
reproductive and obstetric outcomes [32].

During normal pregnancy, the composition of the vaginal microbiota changes as a function of
gestational age, with an increase in the relative abundance for Lactobacillus spp., such as L. crispatus,
L. jensenii, L. gasserii, L. vaginalis, and a decrease in anaerobe or strict anaerobe microbial species, such as
Atopobium, Prevotella, Sneathia, Gardenerella, Ruminococcaceae, Parvimonas, Mobilincus [33]. Those authors
reported for the ﬁrst time, that the composition and stability of the vaginal microbiota of normal
pregnant women is diﬀerent from that of non-pregnant women. In fact, low risk pregnant women have
more stable vaginal ﬂora throughout the pregnancy than non-pregnant women. Normal changes in
the vaginal ﬂora during pregnancy are transitions to another Lactobacillus community, and this stability
would protect against ascending infections through the genital tract. In addition, they reported that
Lactobacillus communities vary depending on the ethnicity of the women [33]. Stout et al. [34] conﬁrmed
that vaginal microbiota richness and diversity remained stable during the ﬁrst and second trimesters
of gestation in pregnancies ended at term, whereas in woman with preterm born, the richness and
diversity decreased early in pregnancy. Therefore, early pregnancy may be an important environment,
modulating preterm delivery. A meta-analysis reported signiﬁcant diversity diﬀerences in vaginal
microbiomes in the ﬁrst trimester, between women with term and preterm outcomes, indicating
a potential diagnostic utility of microbiome-related biomarkers [35]. In addition, the increase of
pathogens in the vagina is associated with complications of pregnancy, in particular with an increased
risk of preterm birth and spontaneous abortion [6].

Nutrients 2020, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 21  determines the development of atopy and autoimmune phenotypes in the offspring [28]. However, the relationship among the immune system, the gut microbiota, and metabolism in pregnancy is unclear, and more research is needed to stablish final conclusions.   Figure 1. Alpha-diversity changes in gut microbiota during pregnancy. 2.2. Vaginal Microbiota The composition of the vaginal microbiota is dynamic, corresponding with hormonal fluctuations throughout the woman's reproductive life, and also during pregnancy. A number of protective lactic acid-producing Lactobacillus species dominates the healthy vaginal microbiota in most reproductive-age women. These bacteria protect against vaginal dysbiosis and inhibit opportunistic infections through the direct and indirect protective effects of Lactobacillus products, such as lactic acid and bacteriocin among others. Lactic acid decreases vaginal pH and thus inhibits a broad range of infections [29], can directly affect host immune functions, by inhibiting pro-inflammatory responses, and also help to release mediators from vaginal epithelial cells and stimulate antiviral response [30]. In addition, Lactobacillus-derived bacteriocins may inhibit pathogen growth [31]. The degree of protection varies according to the predominant Lactobacillus specie [30]. Vaginal dysbiosis is comprised of a wide array of strict and facultative anaerobes that correlate to increased risk of infection, diseases, and poor reproductive and obstetric outcomes [32].  During normal pregnancy, the composition of the vaginal microbiota changes as a function of gestational age, with an increase in the relative abundance for Lactobacillus spp., such as L. crispatus, L. jensenii, L. gasserii, L. vaginalis, and a decrease in anaerobe or strict anaerobe microbial species, such as Atopobium, Prevotella, Sneathia, Gardenerella, Ruminococcaceae, Parvimonas, Mobilincus [33]. Those authors reported for the first time, that the composition and stability of the vaginal microbiota of normal pregnant women is different from that of non-pregnant women. In fact, low risk pregnant women have more stable vaginal flora throughout the pregnancy than non-pregnant women. Normal changes in the vaginal flora during pregnancy are transitions to another Lactobacillus community, and this stability would protect against ascending infections through the genital tract. In addition, they reported that Lactobacillus communities vary depending on the ethnicity of the women [33]. Stout et al. [34] confirmed that vaginal microbiota richness and diversity remained stable during the first and second trimesters of gestation in pregnancies ended at term, whereas in woman with preterm born, the richness and diversity decreased early in pregnancy. Therefore, early pregnancy may be an important environment, modulating preterm delivery. A meta-analysis reported significant diversity differences in vaginal microbiomes in the first trimester, between women with term and preterm outcomes, indicating a potential diagnostic utility of microbiome-related biomarkers [35]. In addition, the increase of pathogens in the vagina is associated with complications of pregnancy, in particular with an increased risk of preterm birth and spontaneous abortion [6].    Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

2.3. Oral Microbiota

5 of 21

An increase in the microbial load in the oral cavity during pregnancy has been described. It has
been hypothesized that pregnancy creates a nutrient environment that is more favorable to some
sensitive strains [36]. The presence of pathogenic bacteria Porphyromonas gingivalis and Aggregatibacter
actinomycotemcomitans in gingival sulcus were signiﬁcantly higher during early and middle stages
of pregnancy compared to non-pregnant women [37]. The oral alpha-diversity index was higher
in the third trimester compared to non-pregnant women, and this may be related to the increase of
progesterone and estradiol. [38]. One underlying mechanism refers to estrogens being substituted
for vitamin K in bacterial anaerobic respiration, especially for black-pigmented Bacteroides such as
Bacteroides melaninogenicus and Prevotella intermedia [38].

2.4. Placental Microbiota and Fetal Colonization

The classical paradigm of fetal environment as a sterile harbor has traditionally explained that
microbes, and thus microbiome, are acquired both vertically (from the mother) and horizontally (from
other humans or from the environment) during and after birth. However, recent data have questioned
the traditional accepted dogma of human microbiome acquisition, proposing that neither the placenta,
the amniotic ﬂuid, nor the fetus are sterile.

Several ﬁndings using both culture and metagenomic techniques have suggested the presence of
a low biomass microbial community in the healthy placenta [39–43]. The abundance of diﬀerent species
of Lactobacillus, Propionibacterium, and members of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been detected
by DNA-based studies in placental tissue of pregnant women at term and it is under debate [16].
In addition, other authors have conﬁrmed a distinct microbiota in both the placenta and amniotic
ﬂuid of healthy women at the time of elective C-section, characterized by low richness, low diversity,
and the predominance of Proteobacteria [44]. Similarly, other studies have found microbes in amniotic
ﬂuid and umbilical cord blood in healthy asymptomatic women, as well as in those with pregnancy
complications [45–47].

However, it is unclear where the fetal microbiota comes from, and when is the ﬁrst fetal exposition.
The presence of a diﬀerent placental microbiota compared to the vagina raises the possibility that
the infant may be ﬁrst seeded in utero from other sources. Microorganism may pass through the
placenta and colonize the fetus ascending from the vagina, from the oral cavity, from the urinary track,
or from the intestinal lumen of the mother. These microorganisms may reach via the hematogenous
route, the placenta, and then be transmitted to the fetus [48]. Some of those oral bacteria, such as
Fusobacterium nucleatum, may be transmitted hematogenously during placentation by binding to
the vascular endothelium, and modifying its permeability and the translation of other common
commensals, such as Escherichia coli [49]. In addition, Franasiak et al. observed that Flavobacterium and
Lactobacillus represent the majority of endometrial bacterium at the time of embryo transfer, supporting
a new hypothesis of the endometrial environment participation [50].

Diﬀerent studies have also detected microbiome in the ﬁrst baby fecal sample, the meconium,
supporting the in utero exposure to bacteria [51,52]. Staphylococcus has been reported as the most
prevalent bacteria in meconium samples, followed by Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus,
and Biﬁdobacterium even in infants born by C-section [52,53]. Modiﬁcation in placental microbiota may
be related with adverse pregnancy outcomes of pregnancy or symptoms of clinical infection [40].

On the contrary, Perez-Muñoz et al. [17] critically revised scientiﬁc evidence supporting both
the “sterile womb” and “in utero colonization” hypotheses. These authors concluded that there
is more evidence supporting a sterile womb environment. They suggest that methodological
approaches, in which contamination is very easy at diﬀerent steps and does not use appropriate
controls, are responsible for the microorganism colonization described in utero. One well-controlled
study compared oral, vaginal, and placenta samples with paired contamination controls. This study
reported that when using molecular methods, placental samples were undistinguishable from their
paired-contaminated samples. They concluded that while there were distinctive microbial signatures

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

6 of 21

in oral and vaginal samples, they did not ﬁnd a characteristic placental microbiota, evidencing a sterile
environment [54]. Therefore, conclusions remain unachievable, and more studies are needed in
this area.

3. Changes in the Microbiome Related to the Type of Delivery

There is great controversy in the scientiﬁc community about the relationship of the meconium
and infant gut microbiota proﬁle, and the type of delivery. Microbiome studies on early infancy
have demonstrated a signiﬁcant inﬂuence of the mode of delivery on the microbiome composition,
suggesting the likely association of the infant gut bacteria with maternal vaginal or skin microbiome
habitats. A systematic review has concluded that the diversity and colonization pattern of the gut
microbiota were signiﬁcantly associated to the mode of delivery during the ﬁrst three months of
life, which is a critical period of life for immunological programming [55]. However, the observed
diﬀerences disappear after 6 months of infants’ life, when solid foods are included in the diet [56].
It is important to clarify the inﬂuence of factors commonly accompanying C-section delivery on the
microbiome, due to the potential inﬂuence on some non-communicable diseases, such as neonatal skin
infection, asthma, allergies, obesity, inﬂammatory bowel disease, or type I diabetes mellitus [56,57].

Vaginally delivered newborn have shown bacterial communities resembling their own mother’s
vaginal microbiota, dominated by Lactobacillus, Prevotella, or Sneathia spp. In contrast, C-section-born
infants harbored bacterial communities similar to those found on the skin surface niche, dominated by
Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium, and Propionibacterium spp. [58] or potentially pathogenic microbial
communities such as Klebsiella, Enterococcus, and Clostridium [57]. Other authors have reported that
Biﬁdobacterium [59] and Bacteroides [55] seem to be signiﬁcantly more frequent in vaginally compared
with C-section delivered infants, which were mainly colonized by Clostridium and Lactobacillus [55].
The high abundance of Biﬁdobacterium species in infants is considered to promote the maturation
of the healthy immune system, while high presence of Clostridium diﬃcile is considered as one of
the major intra-hospital hazards of severe gastrointestinal infections during infancy [55]. Another
study proposed that some species of Propionibacterium were most abundant in the meconium of
vaginally delivered Chinese infants, whereas C-section-born children had higher amounts of Bacillus
licheniformis.
In addition, the diversity of the microbial composition was also higher in vaginal
than in C-section deliveries, although no correlation with maternal microbiome was reported [60].
Similarly, a metagenomic analysis found a Propionibacterium-enriched meconium in vaginal delivery
mothers, which may proceed from skin or fecal microbes through direct contact during the natural
labor [61]. Therefore, there is no consensus regarding the most colonizable pattern of the ﬁrst
microbiota community in the ﬁrst three days after birth, although it seems that according to phyla,
vaginal deliveries are more related to Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes, while C-section deliveries are
more related to Firmicutes. In addition, it has also been suggested that the transfer of maternal vaginal
microbes plays a minor role in seeding infant stool microbiota since the overlap of maternal vaginal
microbiota and infant faecal microbiota is minimal, while the similarity between maternal rectal
microbiota and infant microbiota was more pronounced [62].

The discrepances of the results obtained could be due to diﬀerent factors associated to C-section
delivery such as antibiotic administration, but also to breastfeeding, maternal obesity, gestational
diabetes mellitus, and even the analytical methodology. In addition, the diversity from Firmicutes and
Bacteroides colonization levels on infants gut microbiota may be inﬂuenced by geographical variation
such as the latitude [63].

Some authors have proposed that the lower presence of Biﬁdobacteria and Bacteroides, and the
abundance of Clostridia and Lactobacillus, in infants delivered by C-section could be explained
by perinatal antibiotics administration [55]. Mothers delivering by C-section receive antibiotic
prophylaxis before the beginning of surgery or, in some countries, after the cord clamping to minimize
the direct exposure of the neonate to antibiotics [64].
In addition, Azad et al. determined that
intrapartum antibiotics both in C-section and vaginal deliveries are associated with infant gut

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

7 of 21

microbiota dysbiosis, although breastfeeding modiﬁes some of these eﬀects [65]. Nevertheless,
Martinez et al. [66] performed antibiotic-free C-section delivery in mice and determined that these mice
did not have the dynamic developmental gut microbiota changes observed in control natural born
mice, evidencing the involvement of maternal vaginal bacteria in a proper metabolic development
even in absence of antibiotics supporting the hypothesis of the antibiotic-modulated dysbiosis. It is
worth to take into account that perinatal antibiotic administration may be associated with increased
risk of developing morbidities such as asthma, allergies and obesity, which may be inﬂuenced by
dysbiosis. In accordance, epidemiological data show that atopic diseases appear more often in infants
born by C-section than after vaginal delivery [67,68].

Furthermore, bacterial richness and diversity were lower in the infant gut of babies born after
elective C-section and higher in emergency C-section, suggesting that colonization may be aﬀected
diﬀerently in both situations. It is important to highlight that emergency C-section and vaginal delivery
labor are frequently accompanied by rupture of fetal membranes, and exposing the fetus to maternal
vaginal bacteria [65].

Importantly, C-section may decrease the colonization of milk-digested bacteria including the
genus Lactobacillus in newborns during the ﬁrst months of life [58]. In addition, the mode of delivery
has a relevant impact on the microbiota composition of colostrums and milk [69,70], which also may
be inﬂuenced by antibiotics administrated during C-section. It has been proposed that infants born
by C-section lacked the early provision of breast milk essential to attain a proper gut microbiota that
contains microbes such as Lactobacilli and Biﬁdobacteria. This could explain the higher colonization
rates of these genera in vaginal compared to C-section-delivered infants [71]. In fact, Sakwinska et
al. reported that only vaginal delivered and fully breastfed infants had gut microbiota dominated by
Biﬁdobacteria [62].

Finally, there are several potential preventive intervention strategies to restore the gut microbiota
after C-section [72]. The intervention could be focused on maternal administration of probiotics and
prebiotics during gestation. There is a great interest about “seeding approaches” as “vaginal seeding” to
reverse the eﬀects of C-section delivery mode on the microbiome in early life, but at the same time there
are critical voices concerned about safety and eﬃcacy of this practice [56,72]. In addition, the intervention
could concentrate on the neonate using “seeding” methods such as encouraging breastfeeding instead
of formula feeding, or the use of infant enriched formulas.
In this sense, supplementation with
symbiotic, the combination of synergistic pre- and probiotics, might oﬀer an innovative strategy to
re-establish the delayed colonization of Biﬁdobacterium spp. in C-section-delivered children [73].

4. Microbiome and the Type of Feeding

Maternal diet establishes long-lasting eﬀects on oﬀspring gut microbial composition, which may
have important clinical implications [74,75]. Complex interactions between breast milk cytokines and
microbiota guide the microbiological, immunological, and metabolic programming of infants’ health,
which may explain the higher risk of obesity in infants with overweight and excessive weight gain
mothers [76]. In addition, data supporting the notion of bacterial translocation from the maternal gut
to extra-intestinal sites during pregnancy are emerging and potentially explain the presence of bacteria
in breast milk [28].

Some authors have reported changes in meconium microbiota when delaying the collection of
meconium samples by one day, supporting that the type of feeding or the environment has an inﬂuence
after the birth, which may be more determinant to establish the intestinal microbiome during
childhood [53]. Breast milk has been recognized as the gold standard for human nutrition [77]. The type
of feeding has an important impact on gut microbial composition in preterm infants. In preterm infants,
breast milk has been associated with improved growth and cognitive development [78] and a reduced
risk of necrotizing enterocolitis and late sepsis onset [76,79,80]. Occasionally, the absence of mother’s
own milk (MOM) requires the use of donated human milk (DHM). A prospective cohort study has been
launched to determine the impact of DHM upon preterm gut microbiota admitted in a neonatal intensive

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

8 of 21

care unit. Despite the high variability of DHMs, no diﬀerences in microbial diversity and richness
were found, although feeding type signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced the preterm microbiota composition and
predictive functional proﬁles. Inferred metagenomic analyses showed higher presence of Biﬁdobacterium
in the MOM, a genus related to enrichment in the glycan biosynthesis and metabolism pathway, as well
as an unclassiﬁed Enterobacteriaceae and lower unclassiﬁed Clostridiaceae compared with the DHM
or in the formula fed groups. After adjusting for gender, postnatal age, weight, and gestational age,
the diversity of gut microbiota increased over time and was constantly higher in infants fed their MOM
relative to infants with other types of feeding. In addition, DHM favors an intestinal microbiome
more similar to MOM despite the diﬀerences between MOM and DHM [81]. Preterm infants are
prone to develop free radical-associated conditions [82] that may be inﬂuenced by the microbiota.
In a recent study, urine oxidative stress biomarkers such as 8-hydroxy-deoxyguanosine (8OHdG/2dG),
orto-tyrosine, and F2 isoprostanes, neuroprostanes, neurofurans, and di-homo-isoprostanes were
longitudinally measured in preterm infants fed either MOM or DHM using validated mass spectrometry
techniques. No signiﬁcant diﬀerences for any of the markers studied were found between preterm babies
fed MOM or DHM [83]. However, exfoliated epithelial intestinal cells transcriptome of preterm infants
fed their MOM or a DHM induced a diﬀerential gene expression of speciﬁc genes which may contribute
to a more eﬃcient antioxidant response in the postnatal period [84]. Therefore, using DHM could have
potential long-term beneﬁts on intestinal functionality, the immune system, and metabolism [85–87].
However, available pasteurization methods cause changes that may blunt many of the positive aspects
derived from the use of MOM [88–90]. Further studies are needed to understand the complex links
between microbiome and breastfeeding, its impact on health programming, and to develop sensitive
methods capable of providing human milk as similar as possible to their MOM, when the latter is
not available.

5. Microbiome in Pathological and Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes

Some studies have compared the fetal and mother microbiome in relation to adverse outcomes
such as prematurity or low birth-weight without reaching ﬁrm conclusions. Ardissone et al. [91]
compared the meconium microbiome in newborn before and after 33 weeks of gestation and concluded
that Enterococcus and Enterobacter negatively correlated with gestational age, and Lactobacillus and
Phortorhabdus were more abundant in newborns with less than 33 weeks of gestation. They indicated
that the composition of the microbiome may be involved in the inﬂammatory response that
leads to premature birth more than the colonization alone. Speciﬁcally, preterm subjects with
severe chorioamnionitis had higher abundance of Ureaplasma parvum, Fusobacterium nucleatum,
and Streptococcus agalactiae [16]. The placental microbiome varies as a consequence of an excess
of gestational weight gain, but is not related to obesity among women with spontaneous preterm
birth. Indeed, this placental dysbiosis aﬀects diﬀerent bacterially encoded metabolic pathways that
may be related to pregnancy outcomes [92]. Furthermore, it has been reported high abundance of
Burkholderia, Actinomycetales, and Alphaproteobacteria in placental samples from gravidae delivered
preterm, and of Streptococcus and Acinetobacter in placental samples from patients with a history of
antepartum urinary infection. In contrast, Paenibacillus predominated in term placental specimens [15].
Other authors have proposed that the fetal intestinal microbiota derives from swallowed amniotic ﬂuid,
and that they may trigger an inﬂammatory response which leads to premature birth [91]. Considering
that some Lactobacillus strains may possess potential anti-inﬂammatory activities, and could regulate
blood glucose levels in diabetic humans [93], the low abundance of Lactobacillus in placentas of low
birth weight neonates reported by Zheng et al. [94] might be related to a pro-inﬂammatory status in
these pregnancies. Thus, the higher sensitivity of fetal intestinal tissue to inﬂammatory stimuli may
induce labor due to an immune-mediated reaction. However, as mentioned previously, the presence
of placental microbiota is under discussion due to methodological doubts, and these data have to be
discussed with caution.

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

9 of 21

Finally, a number of bacteria, viruses, and protozoa infections have been associated with pregnancy
complications. Liu et al [95] analyzed the gut microbiome in pregnant women aﬀected by preeclampsia.
They showed an overall increase in pathogenic bacteria such as Clostridium perfringens and Bulleidia
moorei and a reduction in probiotic bacteria Coprococcus catus. A correlation between periodontitis and
the risk of spontaneous abortion or miscarriage has also been described [96]. More well-controlled
studies should be carried out in order to identify interactions between pregnancy microbiome and
mother and children health which might help to predict gestational and newborn complications and
search for new therapeutic targets in adverse obstetrical conditions.

6. Microbiome and Obese Pregnancy

Epidemiological evidence shows that 50% of women in childbearing age and 20%–25% of pregnant
women in Europe can be aﬀected by overweight or obesity [97], increasing the cardiometabolic risk in
mothers [98] and the susceptibility to metabolic diseases in oﬀspring [99–102]. Pregnancy-associated
changes are diﬀerent in overweight or obese women compared to normal-weight pregnant women.
Overweight pregnant women show a reduction in the number of Biﬁdobacterium and Bacteroides,
and an increase in the number of Staphylococcus, Enterobacteriaceae, and Escherichia coli [11]. Additionally,
higher levels of Staphylococcus and Akkermansia muciniphila, and lower levels of Biﬁdobacterium were
detected in women with excessive weight gain during pregnancy as compared to normal-weight
ones [76]. Consequently, this altered maternal microbiome will contribute to shape an altered
composition of the oﬀspring’s microbiome [103,104] and thus inﬂuence their future health.

Vaginal-born neonates from overweight or obese mothers show increased numbers of Bacteroides
and depleted in Enterococcus, Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas, and Hydrogenophilus [104]. When speciﬁcally
examining phyla level relative taxonomic abundance among preterm women by virtue of maternal
weight gain, other authors have reported an appreciable and signiﬁcant increased abundance of
Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Cyanobacteria, and decreased relative abundance of Proteobacteria [92].
Furthermore, this altered maternal microbiota composition may be transferred from mother to fetus
during the prenatal period [94] and through lactation [105].

In addition, gut microbiota can induce obesity in children by several mechanisms. For example,
lower amounts of Biﬁdobacteria can aﬀect weight gain in infants through mucosal host-microbe crosstalk,
and immune and inﬂammatory dysregulation. Moreover, higher presence of Bacteroides, Clostridium,
and Staphylococcus can stimulate greater energy extraction from food, combined with a reduced control
of inﬂammation during the ﬁrst six months of life in infants of overweight mothers [12]. These ﬁrst
months of life are of great importance since rapid weight gain during this period is associated with
an increased risk of obesity during childhood, and this inﬂuence is even more important than the birth
weight [106].

7. Microbiome in Critical Ill Children

Critical illness itself or its treatment can inﬂuence the composition of microbiota [107,108].
Although broad-spectrum antibiotics are probably the factor which further alters its composition,
other factors can alter the ecosystem in which develops the microbiota, such as enteral or parenteral
feeding, drugs administration, disease co-morbidities, central venous catheters, or intubation and
mechanical ventilation. These studies have shown that the intestinal microbiota of critical patients
has low diversity, with a shortage of key commensal bacteria and overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria
such as Clostridium diﬃcile, and some species of Enteococcus, Escherichia and Shigella [107,109–111].
In addition, the microbiota changes throughout the stay in the intensive care units (ICU) [112], and the
possibility of pathogenic colonization increases with the time of stay in the unit.

To our best knowledge, only one study has analyzed the microbiota in children in a pediatric ICU
(PICU) [113]. These authors found that the skin, oral, and fecal microbiota diﬀers sharply from critically
ill children compared with healthy children and adults. They reported a PICU-associated dysbiosis
with less alpha-diversity, diﬀerent composition (beta-diversity), and the loss of body site-speciﬁcity,

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

10 of 21

increasing the abundance of nosocomial pathogens across all body sites and reducing gut commensals
such as Faecalibacterium [113]. A number of studies have shown an association between the microbiota
and the immune function [114], the systemic inﬂammation [115], the metabolism of nutrients [116],
the function of the central nervous system [117], the circadian rhythm [118], and the digestive
system [119]. Therefore, PICU-associated dysbiosis may contribute to malnutrition, nosocomial
infection, neurocognitive alteration, organ dysfunction, and sepsis associated to critical illness [113],
and may also have an eﬀect on the lung, the brain, and the kidneys [107].

Critically ill patient conditions may contribute to changes in the oropharynx microbiota, such as the
increase of Klebsiella or Pseudomonas proliferation. On one hand, sedation and endotracheal intubation
decrease mucociliary clearance and cough, reducing the elimination of microorganisms. On the other
hand, mechanical ventilation, pneumonia, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) favor
alveolar edema, increasing the amount of nutrients available and decreasing the amount of oxygen
in some areas. These facts stimulate bacterial proliferation [120], and increase the risk of nosocomial
infection and ARDS [121].

In addition to the critical patients, associated dysbiosis, hypoperfusion, and reperfusion of the
intestinal wall produce an intense inﬂammation of the digestive mucosa which alters the gradient of
oxygen concentration and increases the concentration of nitrates favoring the growth of pathogenic ﬂora.
Furthermore, the slowing down of intestinal transit, frequent drugs (sedatives, opioids, catecholamines),
and the alteration of the mechanisms of microbial elimination (decreased production of bile salts and
IgA, pharmacological alkalinization of pH, etc.) may also inﬂuence the alteration of the digestive
functions [122]. Freedberg et al. observed that colonization by some microorganisms prior to admission
in ICU was associated with increased risk of infection by that same germ, and subsequently increased
mortality [123]. This fact indicates that the gastrointestinal microbiome can help stratiﬁcation and early
identiﬁcation of the risk of ICU patient complications.

8. Microbiome and Sepsis in the Newborn

The modiﬁcation of the normal microbiota pattern can contribute to the development of
a systemic inﬂammatory response with increased cytokine production, sepsis, multi-organ failure,
and morbi-mortality [107,109–111]. In spite of variation in net incidence, neonatal sepsis remains one
of the leading causes of preventable neonatal morbidity and mortality throughout the world. The main
agents responsible for sepsis are group B Streptococcus (GBS), Escherichia coli, and coagulase-negative
Staphylococci (CONS) [124]. However, this scenario may be modiﬁed depending on the use of antibiotics
and/or the implementation of non-culture diagnostic techniques [125].

In recent years, there has been growing interest in the role of commensal bacteria in an individual´s
susceptibility to infection. A few studies have evaluated the maternal vaginal microbiota in relation
to GBS carrier status. Although it seems that some speciﬁc taxa might be associated with the
presence of GBS [126], there is no apparent parallel reduction of the predominant commensal bacteria
Lactobacilli [127]. Indirect evidence suggests that the neonatal gut microbiome might be of relevance
in GBS infection, since diﬀerent colonizing species have been found in the stool of infants from
GBS positive and negative mothers, while the protective eﬀect of pre and probiotics has also been
suggested [127].

It seems that gastrointestinal microbiota might induce an increase in permeability, modulating gut
and systemic immune response, and decreasing the tight junction integrity [128]. As a consequence,
intestinal bacteria can promote the systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome, facilitate bacterial
translocation, and cause late-onset sepsis and necrotizing enterocolitis, especially aﬀecting premature
neonates. Most, but not all, of the evidence suggests that premature newborns with low microbiome
gut diversity, or with predominance of Staphylococcus, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria are associated
with increased risk for late-onset sepsis compared to those premature infants at lower risk [129].
Furthermore, gut colonization with Biﬁdobacterium and increased presence of prebiotic oligosaccharides
in feces, has been related to less disruption of the mucosal barrier and gut epithelial translocation,

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

11 of 21

providing an improved gut development and protection [130].
It remains unclear if invasion of
the bloodstream during sepsis is caused by the same microorganisms identiﬁed in stool [131] or by
others [129], in which case the gut microbiota would act as a facilitating mechanism by interfering with
the gut barrier or intestinal immune function. Further studies are needed to tease out if the diﬀerences
observed in gut colonization in ICU patients predispose to sepsis or if they respond to other factors
such as the diet, site diﬀerences in initiating and advancing feeds, breastfeeding, the use of antibiotics,
or interpatient transmission within the neonatal intensive care units [131].

9. Microbiome and Allergic Conditions

Allergy disorders represent an important global health burden with an increasing prevalence in
infants and children, mainly as food allergies, atopic eczema [132], and respiratory pathologies such as
rhinitis [133] or asthma [134]. Their causes are multifactorial and contemplate interactions between
genetic, environmental, and socioeconomic factors leading to diﬀerent symptoms or phenotypes [135].
Among this heterogeneity, a restricted microbial exposure at early life seems to play an important role
inﬂuencing allergic diseases, and asthma onset [136].

9.1. Gut Microbiome and Atopy

Eczema or atopic dermatitis (AD) is the ﬁrst typical allergic manifestation in newborns [137].
A recent study has reported a high proportion of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii on the gut microbiome
from AD subjects. The presence of these bacteria is lower in Crohn’s disease patients, as well as
anti-inﬂammatory fecal bacteria metabolites [138]. Besides, it has been shown that infants with AD
improved their symptomatology when the abundance of fecal Coprococcus eutactus, a butyrate-producing
bacterium, is increased [139]. Consequently, it has been proposed that dysbiotic gut microbiota and
subsequent dysregulation of the gut inﬂammation may promote an aberrant Th2-type immune response
to allergens altering the epithelial barrier in AD skin [140].

9.2. Gut Microbiome and Food Allergy

Available literature on animal models suggests that gut microbiome may have an important role
in the susceptibility to food sensitization and food allergy, mainly at early stages of life [141]. Chen et
al. [142] recently showed both lower microbiota alpha-diversity and altered gut microbiota composition
(an increased number of Firmicutes in detriment of Bacteroidetes) in children with food sensitization in
early life compared with children without these conditions. Among the causes, the increasing use of
antibiotics both in humans and in agriculture, and the lower intake of dietary ﬁber may have an impact
on these situations [143].

9.3. Gut Microbiome and Asthma

Allergies are the strongest risk factors for childhood asthma in Western countries [144], but the
relationship between asthma and the microbiota is not clear. Although it seems that the diversity
of the gut microbiota in infancy is even more determinant for asthma onset than the prevalence of
speciﬁc bacterial taxa, it has been suggested that there might be speciﬁc important bacterial species
related to the prevention of asthma, and that gut microbial diversity during the ﬁrst month of life
may be the most important factor associated with asthma development at school age than with other
allergic manifestations [136]. In addition, another study has indicated that the neonatal gut microbiota
inﬂuences susceptibility to childhood allergic asthma via alterations in the gut microenvironment
that modulates CD4+ T-cell proliferation and functions. These authors have observed a characteristic
depletion of dihomo-γ-linoleate, a precursor of anti-inﬂammatory ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid and
prostaglandins that may be related [145].

As described previously, diﬀerent factors have been associated with infant microbiome and the
risk of asthma, such as furry pets exposure [146], gestational age, the mode of delivery (vaginal vs.
C-section), and antibiotic treatment (direct vs. indirect via mother) among others [147,148]. However,

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

12 of 21

there is no doubt that a key issue is the type of feeding. A systematic review addressing the eﬀect of
breastfeeding in the development of asthma concluded that children who were breastfed for a longer
time during the ﬁrst two years of life had a lower risk of developing asthma, and this eﬀect could be
mediated by an adequate and early shaping of the gut microbiota [149,150], although whether the
dysbiotic microbiota is the cause or the consequence of atopic and allergic diseases is still unknown [140].
Besides, interventional studies have suggested that pre- and probiotics could prevent or down-regulate
the severity of some diseases, such as asthma or allergies, but the biological mechanisms, as well as the
best taxa or type of intervention, require further research [151].

10. Microbiome and Infection in Infants

The role of microbiome diversity and its variations in the incidence and susceptibility to infection
has also aroused great interest beyond the neonatal period. In view of the interaction between the
microbiota and the immune system, the implications are probably major and remain challenging,
but for some authors, is even more attractive the idea of its usefulness as a diagnostic tool, a preventive
strategy, or even a therapeutic target. As described in the neonatal period, in most infectious diseases
scenarios, a decrease in alpha and beta diversity of the microbiota seems to be present. Regarding
respiratory infections, diversity of the oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal microbiota in children
with pneumonia was lower compared with healthy controls. Furthermore, a correlation between the
presence of certain taxa in sputum and the clinical course of community acquired pneumonia has been
described [152,153].

HIV infected children present reduced gastrointestinal microbial diversity [154]. Modulation of
the intestinal microbiome through nutritional supplementation, with the aim of decreasing bacterial
permeability, has been attempted in the context of HIV infection with scarce success [155,156].
In addition, the microbiome has been suggested to impact the risk of diﬀerent infectious diseases.
Both vaginal and penile microbiotas modify the risk of sexual acquisition of HIV, due to their inﬂuence
on inﬂammatory pathways and metabolization of antiretroviral drugs [157,158]. Recent studies have
shown how an altered vaginal microbioma increases the risk of vertical transmission of HIV [159].
These studies beautifully exemplify the potential inﬂuence of the microbiome on the risk of infections,
as well as its implications in pharmacokinetics modulating bacterial metabolism.

Finally, based on the potential role of the gut microbiota as a modulator of the immune function,
attempts of supplementation with pre and probiotics have also been carried out. Two randomized
controlled trials have analyzed the impact of probiotic supplementation on children with acute
gastroenteritis without proving any beneﬁcial clinical outcome [160,161]. Supplementation with
prebiotics or probiotics may also enhance vaccine response and thus becomes a new tool for the
improvement of vaccine eﬃcacy [162]. However, results have been controversial in this ﬁeld and
warrant further investigation. The evidence for a beneﬁcial eﬀect of probiotics on vaccine response was
strongest for oral vaccinations and for parenteral inﬂuenza vaccination, and depended on the choice of
probiotic, strain, dose, viability, purity, and the time and duration of administration [163].

11. Conclusions

There are many data conﬁrming the interaction of microbiota in pregnancy and in the newborn
period, on the establishment of labor, children growth and development, and susceptibility to infections
and diseases. However, most studies are descriptive and entangling factors inﬂuencing the human
microbiome such as the age, race, type of feeding, mother’s diet, and antibiotics treatments is
challenging. Whatever it is, what is clear is that a number of microbiota-derived substances may easily
reach the bloodstream, and impact human metabolism.

Recent advances in genome sequencing technologies, metabolomics, proteomics, transcriptomics,
and bioinformatics will enable researchers to explore the fascinating ﬁeld of the microbiota and,
in particular, its functions at a more detailed level. Therefore, larger and prospective studies are needed
to characterize the evolution of the microbiota during diﬀerent conditions and its inﬂuence on healthy

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

13 of 21

and pathological pregnancies, on labor onset, and on the perinatal period, in order to promote the
development of new preventive, diagnostic, and therapeutic tools.

Author Contributions: All authors have contributed to the writing of the work. M.D.M. had primary responsibility
for the ﬁnal content. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the PN I+D+I 2008–2011 (Spain), ISCIII- Sub-Directorate General for
Research Assessment and Promotion and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), RETICS Maternal
and Child Health and Development Network, SAMID Network, Ref. RD16/0022/0015. Anna Parra-Llorca
acknowledges Rio Hortega grant CM18/00165 from the Instituto de Investigación en Salud Carlos III (Ministry of
Science, Universities and Innovation; Kingdom of Spain); Talía Sainz is funded by The Instituto de Salud Carlos
III- Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation cofounded by FEDER (EU). (Grant nº JR16/00021); Cristina Calvo
is a member of the IdiPAZ Research Institute, Madrid. Spain. Translational Research Network for Pediatric
Infectious Diseases (RITIP), Madrid, Spain. TEDDY Network Member (European Network of Excellence for
Pediatric Clinical Research, Bari, Italy).

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1. Newbern, D.; Freemark, M. Placental hormones and the control of maternal metabolism and fetal growth.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Curr. Opin. Endocrinol. Diabetes Obes. 2011, 18, 409–416. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Rodríguez, J.M.; Murphy, K.; Stanton, C.; Ross, R.P.; Kober, O.; Juge, N.; Avershina, E.; Rudi, K.; Narbad, A.;
Jenmalm, M.C.; et al. The composition of the gut microbiota throughout life, with an emphasis on early life.
Microb. Ecol. Health Dis. 2015, 26, 26050. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Jašarevi´c, E.; Bale, T.L. Prenatal and postnatal contributions of the maternal microbiome on oﬀspring
programming. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 2019, 55, 100797. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Koren, O.; Goodrich, J.K.; Cullender, T.C.; Spor, A.; Laitinen, K.; Bäckhed, H.K.; Gonzalez, A.; Werner, J.J.;
Angenent, L.T.; Knight, R.; et al. Host remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes during
pregnancy. Cell 2012, 150, 470–480. [CrossRef]
DiGiulio, D.B.; Callahan, B.J.; McMurdie, P.J.; Costello, E.K.; Lyell, D.J.; Robaczewska, A.; Sun, C.L.;
Goltsman, D.S.; Wong, R.J.; Shaw, G.; et al. Temporal and spatial variation of the human microbiota during
pregnancy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015, 112, 11060–11065. [CrossRef]
Peelen, M.J.; Luef, B.M.; Lamont, R.F.; de Milliano, I.; Jensen, J.S.; Limpens, J.; Hajenius, P.J.; Jørgensen, J.S.;
Menon, R.; PREBIC Biomarker Working Group 2014–2018. The inﬂuence of the vaginal microbiota on
preterm birth: A systematic review and recommendations for a minimum dataset for future research. Placenta
2019, 79, 30–39. [CrossRef]

8.

7. Wankhade, U.D.; Zhong, Y.; Kang, P.; Alfaro, M.; Chintapalli, S.V.; Piccolo, B.D.; Mercer, K.E.; Andres, A.;
Thakali, K.M.; Shankar, K. Maternal high-fat diet programs oﬀspring liver steatosis in a sexually dimorphic
manner in association with changes in gut microbial ecology in mice. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 16502. [CrossRef]
Olivier-Van Stichelen, S.; Rother, K.I.; Hanover, J.A. Maternal exposure to non-nutritive sweeteners impacts
progeny’s metabolism and microbiome. Front. Microbiol. 2019, 10, 1360. [CrossRef]
Garcia-Mantrana, I.; Selma-Royo, M.; Alcantara, C.; Collado, M.C. Shifts on Gut Microbiota Associated to
Mediterranean Diet Adherence and Speciﬁc Dietary Intakes on General Adult Population. Front. Microbiol.
2018, 9, 890. [CrossRef]

9.

10. Collado, M.C.; Isolauri, E.; Laitinen, K.; Salminen, S. Distinct composition of gut microbiota during pregnancy

11.

in overweight and normal-weight women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2008, 88, 894–899. [CrossRef]
Santacruz, A.; Collado, M.C.; Garcia-Valdes, L.; Segura, M.T.; Martin-Lagos, J.A.; Anjos, T.; Martí-Romero, M.;
Lopez, R.M.; Florido, J.; Campoy, C.; et al. Gut microbiota composition is associated with body weight,
weight gain and biochemical parameters in pregnant women. Br. J. Nutr. 2010, 104, 83–92. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

12. Collado, M.C.; Isolauri, E.; Laitinen, K.; Salminen, S. Eﬀect of mother’s weight on infant’s microbiota
acquisition, composition, and activity during early infancy: A prospective follow-up study initiated in early
pregnancy. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2010, 92, 1023–1230. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

13. Gomez-Arango, L.F.; Barrett, H.L.; McIntyre, H.D.; Callaway, L.K.; Morrison, M.; Dekker Nitert, M.;
SPRING Trial Group. Connections Between the Gut Microbiome and Metabolic Hormones in Early
Pregnancy in Overweight and Obese Women. Diabetes 2016, 65, 2214–2223. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

14 of 21

14. Aagaard, K.; Riehle, K.; Ma, J.; Segata, N.; Mistretta, T.A.; Coarfa, C.; Raza, S.; Rosenbaum, S.; Van den Veyver, I.;
Milosavljevic, A.; et al. A metagenomic approach to characterization of the vaginal microbiome signature in
pregnancy. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e36466. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

15. Aagaard, K.; Ma, J.; Antony, K.M.; Ganu, R.; Petrosino, J.; Versalovic, J. The placenta harbors a unique

microbiome. Sci. Transl. Med. 2014, 21, 237ra65. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

16. Prince, A.L.; Ma, J.; Kannan, P.S.; Alvarez, M.; Gisslen, T.; Harris, R.A.; Sweeney, E.L.; Knox, C.L.; Lambers, D.S.;
Jobe, A.H.; et al. The placental membrane microbiome is altered among subjects with spontaneous preterm
birth with and without chorioamnionitis. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 2016, 214, 627. [CrossRef]

17. Perez-Muñoz, M.E.; Arrieta, M.C.; Ramer-Tait, A.E.; Walter, J. A critical assessment of the “sterile womb” and
“in utero colonization” hypotheses: Implications for research on the pioneer infant microbiome. Microbiome
2017, 28, 48. [CrossRef]

18. Guinane, C.M.; Cotter, P.D. Role of the gut microbiota in health and chronic gastrointestinal disease:

19.

20.

Understanding a hidden metabolic organ. Therap. Adv. Gastroenterol. 2013, 6, 295–308. [CrossRef]
Smith, P.M.; Howitt, M.R.; Panikov, N.; Michaud, M.; Gallini, C.A.; Bohlooly, Y.M.; Glickman, J.N.; Garrett, W.S.
The microbial metabolites, short-chain fatty acids, regulate colonic Treg cell homeostasis. Science 2013, 341,
569–573. [CrossRef]
Furusawa, Y.; Obata, Y.; Hase, K. Commensal microbiota regulates T cell fate decision in the gut. Semin.
Immunopathol. 2015, 37, 17–25. [CrossRef]

21. Havstad, S.; Johnson, C.C.; Kim, H.; Levin, A.M.; Zoratti, E.M.; Joseph, C.L.; Ownby, D.R.; Wegienka, G.
Atopic phenotypes identiﬁed with latent class analyses at age 2 years. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2014, 134,
722–727. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

22. Lynch, S.V. Gut Microbiota and Allergic Disease. New Insights. Ann. Am. Thorac. Soc. 2016, 13 (Suppl. 1),

23. Adak, A.; Khan, M.R. An insight into gut microbiota and its functionalities. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2019, 76,

S51–S54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

473–493. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

24. Neuman, H.; Koren, O. The Pregnancy Microbiome. Nestle Nutr. Inst. Workshop Ser. 2017, 88, 1–9. [CrossRef]
25. Walters, W.A.; Xu, Z.; Knight, R. Meta-analyses of human gut microbes associated with obesity and IBD.

FEBS Lett. 2014, 588, 4223–4233. [CrossRef]

26. Gosalbes, M.J.; Compte, J.; Moriano-Gutierrez, S.; Vallès, Y.; Jiménez-Hernández, N.; Pons, X.; Artacho, A.;
Francino, M.P. Metabolic adaptation in the human gut microbiota during pregnancy and the ﬁrst year of life.
EBioMedicine 2019, 39, 497–509. [CrossRef]

27. Nyangahu, D.D.; Lennard, K.S.; Brown, B.P.; Darby, M.G.; Wendoh, J.M.; Havyarimana, E.; Smith, P.;
Butcher, J.; Stintzi, A.; Mulder, N.; et al. Disruption of maternal gut microbiota during gestation alters
oﬀspring microbiota and immunity. Microbiome 2018, 6, 124. [CrossRef]

28. Nyangahu, D.D.; Jaspan, H.B. Inﬂuence of maternal microbiota during pregnancy on infant immunity. Clin.

Exp. Immunol. 2019, 23. [CrossRef]

29. O’Hanlon, D.E.; Moench, T.R.; Cone, R.A. Vaginal pH and microbicidal lactic acid when lactobacilli dominate

30.

31.

the microbiota. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e80074. [CrossRef]
Smith, S.B.; Ravel, J. The vaginal microbiota, host defence and reproductive physiology. J. Physiol. 2017, 595,
451–463. [CrossRef]
Stoyancheva, G.; Marzotto, M.; Dellaglio, F.; Torriani, S. Bacteriocin production and gene sequencing analysis
from vaginal Lactobacillus strains. Arch. Microbiol. 2014, 196, 645–653. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

32. Kroon, S.J.; Ravel, J.; Huston, W.M. Cervicovaginal microbiota, women’s health, and reproductive outcomes.

Fertil. Steril. 2018, 110, 327–336. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

33. Romero, R.; Hassan, S.S.; Gajer, P.; Tarca, A.L.; Fadrosh, D.W.; Nikita, L.; Galuppi, M.; Lamont, R.F.;
Chaemsaithong, P.; Miranda, J.; et al. The composition and stability of the vaginal microbiota of normal
pregnant women is diﬀerent from that of non-pregnant women. Microbiome 2014, 2, 4. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Stout, M.J.; Zhou, Y.; Wylie, K.M.; Tarr, P.I.; Macones, G.A.; Tuuli, M.G. Early pregnancy vaginal microbiome
trends and preterm birth. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 2017, 217, 356.e1–356.e18. [CrossRef]

34.

35. Haque, M.M.; Merchant, M.; Kumar, P.N.; Dutta, A.; Mande, S.S. First-trimester vaginal microbiome diversity:

A potential indicator of preterm delivery risk. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 16145. [CrossRef]

36. Lin, W.; Jiang, W.; Hu, X.; Gao, L.; Ai, D.; Pan, H.; Niu, C.; Yuan, K.; Zhou, X.; Xu, C.; et al. Ecological Shifts of
Supragingival Microbiota in Association with Pregnancy. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2018, 8, 24. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

15 of 21

37.

Fujiwara, N.; Tsuruda, K.; Iwamoto, Y.; Kato, F.; Odaki, T.; Yamane, N.; Hori, Y.; Harashima, Y.; Sakoda, A.;
Tagaya, A.; et al. Signiﬁcant increase of oral bacteria in the early pregnancy period in Japanese women. J.
Investig. Clin. Dent. 2017, 8, 1. [CrossRef]

38. Kornman, K.S.; Loesche, W.J. Eﬀects of estradiol and progesteroneon Bacteroides melaninogenicus and Bacteroides

39. Nuriel-Ohayon, M.; Neuman, H.; Koren, O. Microbial Changes during Pregnancy, Birth, and Infancy. Front.

gingivalis. Infect. Immun. 1982, 35, 256–263.

Microbiol. 2016, 7, 1031. [CrossRef]

40. Pelzer, E.; Gomez-Arango, L.F.; Barrett, H.L.; Nitert, M.D. Review: Maternal health and the placental

microbiome. Placenta 2017, 54, 30–37. [CrossRef]

41. D’Argenio, V. The Prenatal Microbiome: A New Player for Human Health. High. Throughput 2018, 7, 38.

42.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Jimenez, E.; Fernandez, L.; Marin, M.L.; Martin, R.; Odriozola, J.M.; Nueno-Palop, C.; Narbad, A.; Olivares, M.;
Xaus, J.; Rodríguez, J.M. Isolation of commensal bacteria from umbilical cord blood of healthy neonates born
by C-section. Curr. Microbiol. 2005, 51, 270–274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

43. Wassenaar, T.M.; Panigrahi, P. Is a foetus developing in a sterile environment? Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 2014, 59,

572–579. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

44. Collado, M.C.; Rautava, S.; Aakko, J.; Isolauri, E.; Salminen, S. Human gut colonisation may be initiated
in utero by distinct microbial communities in the placenta and amniotic ﬂuid. Sci. Rep. 2016, 22, 23129.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

45. DiGiulio, D.B.; Gervasi, M.; Romero, R.; Mazaki-Tovi, S.; Vaisbuch, E.; Kusanovic, J.P.; Seok, K.S.; Gómez, R.;
Mittal, P.; Gotsch, F.; et al. Microbial invasion of the amniotic cavity in preeclampsia as assessed by cultivation
and sequence-based methods. J. Perinat. Med. 2010, 38, 503–513. [CrossRef]

46. DiGiulio, D.B.; Romero, R.; Kusanovic, J.P.; Gómez, R.; Kim, C.J.; Seok, K.S.; Gotsch, F.; Mazaki-Tovi, S.;
Vaisbuch, E.; Sanders, K.; et al. Prevalence and diversity of microbes in the amniotic ﬂuid, the fetal
inﬂammatory response, and pregnancy outcome in women with preterm pre-labor rupture of membranes.
Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 2010, 64, 38–57. [CrossRef]

47. Romero, R.; Miranda, J.; Chaemsaithong, P.; Chaiworapongsa, T.; Kusanovic, J.P.; Dong, Z.; Ahmed, A.I.;
Shaman, M.; Lannaman, K.; Yoon, B.H.; et al. Sterile and microbial-associated intra-amniotic inﬂammation
in preterm prelabor rupture of membranes. J. Matern.-Fetal Neonatal Med. 2015, 28, 1394–1409. [CrossRef]

48. McClure, E.M.; Goldenberg, R.L. Infection and stillbirth. Semin. Fetal Neonatal Med. 2009, 14, 182–189.

49.

50.

[CrossRef]
Fardini, Y.; Wang, X.; Témoin, S.; Nithianantham, S.; Lee, D.; Shoham, M.; Han, Y.W. Fusobacterium
nucleatumadhesinFadA binds vascular endothelial cadherin and alters endothelial integrity. Mol. Microbiol.
2011, 82, 1468–1480. [CrossRef]
Franasiak, J.M.; Werner, M.D.; Juneau, C.R.; Tao, X.; Landis, J.; Zhan, Y.; Treﬀ, N.R.; Scott, R.T. Endometrial
microbiome at the time of embryo transfer: Next-generation sequencing of the 16S ribosomal subunit. J.
Assist. Reprod. Genet. 2016, 33, 129–136. [CrossRef]
Jimenez, E.; Marín, M.L.; Martín, R.; Odriozola, J.M.; Olivares, M.; Xaus, J.; Fernández, L.; Rodríguez, J.M.
Is meconium from healthy newborns actually sterile? Res. Microbiol. 2008, 159, 187–193. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Hansen, R.; Scott, K.P.; Khan, S.; Martin, J.C.; Berry, S.H.; Stevenson, M.; Okpapi, A.; Munro, M.J.; Hold, G.L.
First-Pass Meconium Samples from Healthy Term Vaginally-Delivered Neonates: An Analysis of the
Microbiota. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0133320. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

51.

53. Martin, R.; Makino, H.; Cetinyurek Yavuz, A.; Ben-Amor, K.; Roelofs, M.; Ishikawa, E.; Kubota, H.;
Swinkels, S.; Sakai, T.; Oishi, K.; et al. Early-Life Events, Including Mode of Delivery and Type of Feeding,
Siblings and Gender, Shape the Developing Gut Microbiota. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0158498. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

54. Lauder, A.P.; Roche, A.M.; Sherrill-Mix, S.; Bailey, A.; Laughlin, A.L.; Bittinger, K.; Leite, R.; Elovitz, M.A.;
Parry, S.; Bushman, F.D. Comparison of placenta samples with contamination controls does not provide
evidence for a distinct placenta microbiota. Microbiome 2016, 23, 29. [CrossRef]

55. Rutayisire, E.; Huang, K.; Liu, Y.; Tao, F. The mode of delivery aﬀects the diversity and colonization pattern
of the gut microbiota during the ﬁrst year of infants’ life: A systematic review. BMC Gastroenterol. 2016, 16,
86. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

16 of 21

56.

Stinson, L.F.; Payne, M.S.; Keelan, J.A. A Critical Review of the Bacterial Baptism Hypothesis and the Impact
of C-section Delivery on the Infant Microbiome. Front. Med. 2018, 4, 135. [CrossRef]

57. Montoya-Williams, D.; Lemas, D.J.; Spiryda, L.; Patel, K.; Carney, O.O.; Neu, J.; Carson, T.L. The Neonatal
Microbiome and Its Partial Role in Mediating the Association between Birth by C-Section and Adverse
Pediatric Outcomes. Neonatology 2018, 114, 103–111. [CrossRef]

58. Dominguez-Bello, M.G.; Costello, E.K.; Contreras, M.; Magris, M.; Hidalgo, G.; Fierer, N.; Knight, R. Delivery
mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the initial microbiota across multiple body habitats in newborns.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 11971–11975. [CrossRef]

59. Biasucci, G.; Rubini, M.; Riboni, S.; Morelli, L.; Bessi, E.; Retetangos, C. Mode of delivery aﬀects the bacterial

60.

community in the newborn gut. Early Hum. Dev. 2010, 86 (Suppl. 1), 13–15. [CrossRef]
Shi, Y.C.; Guo, H.; Chen, J.; Sun, G.; Ren, R.R.; Guo, M.Z.; Peng, L.H.; Yang, Y.S. Initial meconium microbiome
in Chinese neonates delivered naturally or by C-section. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 3255. [CrossRef]

61. Backhed, F.; Roswall, J.; Peng, Y.; Feng, Q.; Jia, H.; Kovatcheva-Datchary, P.; Datchary, P.; Li, Y.; Xia, Y.; Xie, H.;
et al. Dynamics and Stabilization of the Human Gut Microbiome during the First Year of Life. Cell Host.
Microbe 2015, 17, 690–703. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sakwinska, O.; Foata, F.; Berger, B.; Brüssow, H.; Combremont, S.; Mercenier, A.; Dogra, S.; Soh, S.E.;
Yen, J.C.K.; Heong, G.Y.S.; et al. Does the maternal vaginal microbiota play a role in seeding the microbiota
of neonatal gut and nose? Benef. Microbes 2017, 8, 763–778. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

62.

63. Escobar, J.S.; Klotz, B.; Valdes, B.E.; Agudelo, G.M. The gut microbiota of Colombians diﬀers from that of

64.

Americans, Europeans and Asians. BMC Microbiol. 2014, 14, 311. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Seedat, F.; Stinton, C.; Patterson, J.; Geppert, J.; Tan, B.; Robinson, E.R.; McCarthy, N.D.; Uthman, O.A.;
Freeman, K.; Johnson, S.A.; et al. Adverse events in women and children who have received intrapartum
antibiotic prophylaxis treatment: A systematic review. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2017, 17, 247. [CrossRef]

65. Azad, M.B.; Konya, T.; Maughan, H.; Guttman, D.S.; Field, C.J.; Chari, R.S.; Sears, M.R.; Becker, A.B.;
Scott, J.A.; Kozyrskyj, A.L.; et al. Gut microbiota of healthy Canadian infants: Proﬁles by mode of delivery
and infant diet at 4 months. CMAJ 2013, 185, 385–394. [CrossRef]

66. Martinez, K.A.; Devlin, J.C.; Lacher, C.R.; Yin, Y.; Cai, Y.; Wang, J.; Dominguez-Bello, M.G. Increased weight
gain by C-section: Functional signiﬁcance of the primordial microbiome. Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, eaao1874.
[CrossRef]

67. Laubereau, B.; Filipiak-Pittroﬀ, B.; von Berg, A.; Grübl, A.; Reinhardt, D.; Wichmann, H.E.; Koletzko, S.;
GINI Study Group. C-section and gastrointestinal symptoms, atopic dermatitis, and sensitisation during the
ﬁrst year of life. Arch. Dis. Child. 2004, 89, 993–997. [CrossRef]

68. Negele, K.; Heinrich, J.; Borte, M.; von Berg, A.; Schaaf, B.; Lehmann, I.; Wichmann, H.E.; Bolte, G.; LISA Study
Group. Mode of delivery and development of atopic disease during the ﬁrst 2 years of life. Pediatr. Allergy
Immunol. 2004, 15, 48–54. [CrossRef]

69. Cabrera-Rubio, R.; Mira-Pascual, L.; Mira, A.; Collado, M.C. Impact of mode of delivery on the milk

microbiota composition of healthy women. J. Dev. Orig. Health. Dis. 2016, 7, 54–60. [CrossRef]

70. Toscano, M.; De Grandi, R.; Peroni, D.G.; Grossi, E.; Facchin, V.; Comberiati, P.; Drago, L. Impact of delivery

mode on the colostrum microbiota composition. BMC Microbiol. 2017, 17, 205. [CrossRef]

71. Neu, J.; Rushing, J. C-section versus vaginal delivery: Long-term infant outcomes and the hygiene hypothesis.

Clin. Perinatol. 2011, 38, 321–331. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

72. Moya-Perez, A.; Luczynski, P.; Renes, I.B.; Wang, S.; Borre, Y.; Anthony Ryan, C.; Knol, J.;
Stanton, C.; Dinan, T.G.; Cryan, J.F. Intervention strategies for cesarean section-induced alterations in
the microbiota-gut-brain axis. Nutr. Rev. 2017, 75, 225–240. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Francavilla, R.; Cristofori, F.; Tripaldi, M.E.; Indrio, F. Intervention for Dysbiosis in Children Born by
C-Section. Ann. Nutr. Metab. 2018, 73 (Suppl. 3), 33–39. [CrossRef]

73.

74. Penders, J.; Thijs, C.; Vink, C.; Stelma, F.F.; Snijders, B.; Kummeling, I.; van den Brandt, P.A.; Stobberingh, E.E.
Factors inﬂuencing the composition of the intestinal microbiota in early infancy. Pediatrics 2006, 118, 511–521.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

75. Clarke, G.; O’Mahony, S.M.; Dinan, T.G.; Cryan, J.F. Priming for health: Gut microbiota acquired in early life

regulates physiology, brain and behaviour. Acta Paediatr. 2014, 103, 812–819. [CrossRef]

76. Collado, M.C.; Laitinen, K.; Salminen, S.; Isolauri, E. Maternal weight and excessive weight gain during
pregnancy modify the immunomodulatory potential of breast milk. Pediatr. Res. 2012, 72, 77–85. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

17 of 21

77. American Academy of Pediatrics. Breastfeeding and the use of human milk. Pediatrics 2012, 129, e827–e884.

[CrossRef]

78. Belfort, M.B.; Anderson, P.J.; Nowak, V.A.; Lee, K.J.; Molesworth, C.; Thompson, D.K.; Doyle, L.W.; Inder, T.E.
Breast milk feeding, brain development, and neurocognitive outcomes: A 7-year longitudinal study in
infants born at less than 30 weeks’ gestation. J. Pediatr. 2016, 177, 133–139. [CrossRef]

79. Meinzen-Derr, J.; Poindexter, B.; Wrage, L.; Morrow, A.L.; Stoll, B.; Donovan, E.F. Role of human milk in
extremely low birth weight infants’ risk of necrotizing enterocolitis or death. J. Perinatol. 2009, 29, 57–62.
[CrossRef]

80. Ballard, O.; Morrow, A.L. Human milk composition: Nutrients and bioactive factors. Pediatr. Clin. N. Am.

2013, 60, 49–74. [CrossRef]

81. Parra-Llorca, A.; Gormaz, M.; Alcantara, C.; Cernada, M.; Nuñez-Ramiro, A.; Vento, M.; Collado, M.C.
Preterm Gut Microbiome Depending on Feeding Type: Signiﬁcance of Donor Human Milk. Front. Microbiol.
2018, 27, 1376. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

82. Vento, M.; Hummler, H.; Dawson, J.A.; Escobar, J.; Kuligowski, J. Use of Oxygen in the Resuscitation of
Neonates. In Perinatal and Prenatal Disorders; Dennery, P.A., Buonocore, G., Saugstad, O.D., Eds.; Humana
Press: New York, NY, USA, 2014; pp. 213–244.

83. Parra-Llorca, A.; Gormaz, M.; Sánchez-Illana, A.; Piñeiro-Ramos, J.D.; Collado, M.C.; Serna, E.; Cernada, M.;
Nuñez-Ramiro, A.; Ramón-Beltrán, A.; Oger, C.; et al. Does pasteurized donor human milk eﬃciently protect
preterm infants against oxidative stress? Antioxid. Redox Signal. 2019, 31, 791–799. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

84. Parra-Llorca, A.; Gormaz, M.; Lorente-Pozo, S.; Cernada, M.; García-Robles, A.; Torres-Cuevas, I.;
Kuligowski, J.; Collado, M.C.; Serna, E.; Vento, M. Impact of donor human milk in the preterm very
low birth weight gut transcriptome proﬁle by use of exfoliated intestinal cells. Nutrients 2019, 11, 2677.
[CrossRef]

85. Bertino, E.; Giuliani, F.; Occhi, L.; Coscia, A.; Tonetto, P.; Marchino, F.; Fabris, C. Beneﬁts of donor human
milk for preterm infants: Current evidence. Early Hum. Dev. 2009, 85, S9–S10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Christen, L.; Lai, C.T.; Hartmann, B.; Hartmann, P.E.; Geddes, D.T. The eﬀect of UV-C pasteurization on
bacteriostatic properties and immunological proteins of donor human milk. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e85867.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

87. Madore, L.S.; Bora, S.; Erdei, C.; Jumani, T.; Dengos, A.R.; Sen, S. Eﬀects of donor breastmilk feeding on
growth and early neurodevelopmental outcomes in preterm infants: An observational study. Clin. Ther.
2017, 39, 1210–1220. [CrossRef]

88. Untalan, P.B.; Keeney, S.E.; Palkowetz, K.H.; Rivera, A.; Goldman, S. Heat susceptibility of interleukin-10

89.

and other cytokines in donor human milk. Breastfeed. Med. 2009, 4, 137–144. [CrossRef]
Sousa, S.G.; Santos, M.D.; Fidalgo, L.G.; Delgadillo, I.; Saraiva, J.A. Eﬀect of thermal pasteurisation and
high-pressure processing on immunoglobulin content and lysozyme and lactoperoxidase activity in human
colostrum. Food Chem. 2014, 151, 79–85. [CrossRef]

90. Peila, C.; Moro, G.E.; Bertino, E.; Cavallarin, L.; Giribaldi, M.; Giuliani, F.; Cresi, F.; Coscia, A. The eﬀect
of holder pasteurization on nutrients and biologically-active components in donor human milk: A review.
Nutrients 2016, 8, 477. [CrossRef]

91. Ardissone, A.N.; De La Cruz, D.M.; Davis-Richardson, A.G.; Rechcigl, K.T.; Li, N.; Drew, J.C.;
Murgas-Torrazza, R.; Sharma, R.; Hudak, M.L.; Triplett, E.W.; et al. Meconium microbiome analysis
identiﬁes bacteria correlated with premature birth. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e90784. [CrossRef]

92. Antony, K.M.; Ma, J.; Mitchell, K.B.; Racusin, D.A.; Versalovic, J.; Aagaard, K. The preterm placental
microbiome varies in association with excess maternal gestational weight gain. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 2015,
212, 653.e1–653.e16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

93. Ejtahed, H.S.; Mohtadi-Nia, J.; Homayouni-Rad, A.; Niafar, M.; Asghari-Jafarabadi, M.; Moﬁd, V. Probiotic
yogurt improves antioxidant status in type 2 diabetic patients. Nutrition 2012, 28, 539–543. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

94. Zheng, J.; Xiao, X.; Zhang, Q.; Mao, L.; Yu, M.; Xu, J. The placental microbiome varies in association with low

birth weight in full-term neonates. Nutrients 2015, 7, 6924–6937. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

95. Liu, J.; Yang, H.; Yin, Z.; Jiang, X.; Zhong, H.; Qiu, D.; Zhu, F.; Li, R. Remodeling of the gut microbiota and
structural shifts in Preeclampsia patients in South China. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 2017, 36, 713–719.
[CrossRef]

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

18 of 21

96. Chanomethaporn, A.; Chayasadom, A.; Wara-Aswapati, N.; Kongwattanakul, K.; Suwannarong, W.;
Tangwanichgapong, K.; Sumanonta, G.; Matangkasombut, O.; Dasanayake, A.P.; Pitiphat, W. Association
between periodontitis and spontaneous abortion: A case-control study. J. Periodontol. 2019, 90, 381–390.
[CrossRef]
Stevens, G.A.; Singh, G.M.; Lu, Y.; Danaei, G.; Lin, J.K.; Finucane, M.M.; Bahalim, A.N.; McIntire, R.K.;
Gutierrez, H.R.; Cowan, M.; et al. National, regional, and global trends in adult overweight and obesity
prevalences. Popul. Health Metr. 2012, 10, 22. [CrossRef]

97.

98. Zhu, Y.; Zhang, C. Prevalence of Gestational Diabetes and Risk of Progression to Type 2 Diabetes: A Global

Perspective. Curr. Diabates Rep. 2016, 16, 7. [CrossRef]

99. Eriksson, J.G.; Sandboge, S.; Salonen, M.; Kajantie, E.; Osmond, C. Maternal weight in pregnancy and
oﬀspring body composition in late adulthood: Findings from the Helsinki Birth Cohort Study (HBCS). Ann.
Med. 2015, 47, 94–99. [CrossRef]

100. Hussen, H.I.; Persson, M.; Moradi, T. Maternal overweight and obesity are associated with increased risk
of type 1 diabetes in oﬀspring of parents without diabetes regardless of ethnicity. Diabetologia 2015, 58,
1464–1473. [CrossRef]

101. Gaillard, R.; Santos, S.; Duijts, L.; Felix, J.F. Childhood Health Consequences of Maternal Obesity during

Pregnancy: A Narrative Review. Ann. Nutr. Metab. 2016, 69, 171–180. [CrossRef]

102. Toemen, L.; Gishti, O.; van Osch-Gevers, L.; Steegers, E.A.; Helbing, W.A.; Felix, J.F.; Reiss, I.K.; Duijts, L.;
Gaillard, R.; Jaddoe, V.W. Maternal obesity, gestational weight gain and childhood cardiac outcomes: Role of
childhood body mass index. Int. J. Obes. 2016, 40, 1070–1078. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

103. Ma, J.; Prince, A.L.; Bader, D.; Hu, M.; Ganu, R.; Baquero, K.; Blundell, P.; Alan Harris, R.; Frias, A.E.;
Grove, K.L.; et al. High-fat maternal diet during pregnancy persistently alters the oﬀspring microbiome in
a primate model. Nat. Commun. 2014, 20, 3889. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

104. Mueller, N.T.; Shin, H.; Pizoni, A.; Werlang,

I.C.; Matte, U.; Goldani, M.Z.; Goldani, H.A.;
Dominguez-Bello, M.G. Birth mode-dependent association between pre-pregnancy maternal weight status
and the neonatal intestinal microbiome. Sci. Rep. 2016, 1, 23133. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

105. Garcia-Mantrana, I.; Collado, M.C. Obesity and overweight: Impact on maternal and milk microbiome and
their role for infant health and nutrition. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2016, 60, 865–875. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Taveras, E.M.; Rifas-Shiman, S.L.; Belfort, M.B.; Kleinman, K.P.; Oken, E.; Gillman, M.W. Weight status in the

ﬁrst 6 months of life and obesity at 3 years of age. Pediatrics 2009, 123, 1177–1183. [CrossRef]

107. Jacobs, M.C.; Haak, B.W.; Hugenholtz, F.; Wiersinga, W.J. Gut microbiota and host defense in critical illness.

Curr. Opin. Crit. Care 2017, 23, 257–263. [CrossRef]

108. Williams, V.; Angurana, S.K. Probiotics do have a role to play in treating critically ill children. Acta Paediatr.

2019, 108, 180. [CrossRef]

109. Kitsios, G.D.; Morowitz, M.J.; Dickson, R.P.; Huﬀnagle, G.B.; McVerry, B.J.; Morris, A. Dysbiosis in the
intensive care unit: Microbiome science coming to the bedside. J. Crit. Care 2017, 38, 84–91. [CrossRef]
110. Lyons, J.D.; Coopersmith, C.M. Pathophysiology of the Gut and the Microbiome in the Host Response.

Pediatr. Crit. Care Med. 2017, 18, S46–S49. [CrossRef]

111. Wischmeyer, P.E.; McDonald, D.; Knight, R. Role of the microbiome, probiotics, and ‘dysbiosis therapy’ in

critical illness. Curr. Opin. Crit. Care 2016, 22, 347–353. [CrossRef]

112. Lankelma, J.M.; van Vught, L.A.; Belzer, C.; Schultz, M.J.; van der Poll, T.; de Vos, W.M.; Wiersinga, W.J.
Critically ill patients demonstrate large interpersonal variation in intestinal microbiota dysregulation: A pilot
study. Intensive Care Med. 2017, 43, 59–68. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

113. Rogers, M.B.; Firek, B.; Shi, M.; Yeh, A.; Brower-Sinning, R.; Aveson, V.; Kohl, B.L.; Fabio, A.; Carcillo, J.A.;
Morowitz, M.J. Disruption of the microbiota across multiple body sites in critically ill children. Microbiome
2016, 4, 66. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

114. Surana, N.K.; Kasper, D.L. Deciphering the tête-à-tête between the microbiota and the immune system. J.

Clin. Investig. 2014, 124, 4197–4203. [CrossRef]

115. Trompette, A.; Gollwitzer, E.S.; Yadava, K.; Sichelstiel, A.K.; Sprenger, N.; Ngom-Bru, C.; Blanchard, C.;
Junt, T.; Nicod, L.P.; Harris, N.L.; et al. Gut microbiota metabolism of dietary ﬁber inﬂuences allergic airway
disease and hematopoiesis. Nat. Med. 2014, 20, 159–166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

116. Tremaroli, V.; Bäckhed, F. Functional interactions between the gut microbiota and host metabolism. Nature

2012, 489, 242–249. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

19 of 21

117. Mayer, E.A.; Tillisch, K.; Gupta, A. Gut/brain axis and the microbiota. J. Clin. Investig. 2015, 2, 926–938.

118. Leone, V.; Gibbons, S.M.; Martinez, K.; Hutchison, A.L.; Huang, E.Y.; Cham, C.M.; Pierre, J.F.; Heneghan, A.F.;
Nadimpalli, A.; Hubert, N.; et al. Eﬀects of diurnal variation of gut microbes and high-fat feeding on host
circadian clock function and metabolism. Cell Host Microbe 2015, 13, 681–689. [CrossRef]

119. Wolﬀ, N.S.; Hugenholtz, F.; Wiersinga, W.J. The emerging role of the microbiota in the ICU. Crit. Care 2018,

[CrossRef]

22, 78. [CrossRef]

120. Rajili´c-Stojanovi´c, M.; de Vos, W.M. The ﬁrst 1000 cultured species of the human gastrointestinal microbiota.

FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 2014, 38, 996–1047. [CrossRef]

121. Haaka, B.W.; Levi, M.; Wiersinga, W.J. Microbiota-targeted therapies on the intensive care unit. Curr. Opin.

Crit. Care 2017, 23, 167–174. [CrossRef]

122. Dickson, R.P. The microbiome and critical illness. Lancet Respir. Med. 2016, 4, 59–72. [CrossRef]
123. Freedberg, D.E.; Zhou, M.J.; Cohen, M.E.; Annavajhala, M.K.; Khan, S.; Moscoso, D.I.; Brooks, C.; Whittier, S.;
Chong, D.H.; Uhlemann, A.C.; et al. Pathogen colonization of the gastrointestinal microbiome at intensive
care unit admission and risk for subsequent death or infection. Intensive Care Med. 2018, 44, 1203–1211.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

124. Shane, A.L.; Stoll, B.J. Recent developments and current issues in the epidemiology, diagnosis,
and management of bacterial and fungal neonatal sepsis. Am. J. Perinatol. 2013, 30, 131–141. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

125. Özenci, V.; Schubert, U. Earlier and more targeted treatment of neonatal sepsis. Acta Paediatr. 2018, 108,

169–170. [CrossRef]

126. Rosen, G.H.; Randis, T.M.; Desai, P.V.; Sapra, K.J.; Ma, B.; Gajer, P.; Humphrys, M.S.; Ravel, J.; Gelbe, S.E.;

Ratner, A.J. Group B Streptococcus and the vaginal microbiota. J. Infect. Dis. 2017, 16, 744–751. [CrossRef]

127. Kolter, J.; Henneke, P. Codevelopment of microbiota and innate immunity and the risk for Group B

Streptococcal disease. Front. Immunol. 2017, 8, 1497. [CrossRef]

128. Berrington, J.E.; Stewart, C.J.; Embleton, N.D.; Cummings, S.P. Gut microbiota in preterm infants: Assessment
and relevance to health and disease. Arch. Dis. Child.-Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2013, 98, F286–F290. [CrossRef]
129. Madan, J.C.; Salari, R.C.; Saxena, D.; Davidson, L.; O’Toole, G.A.; Moore, J.H.; Sogin, M.L.; Foster, J.A.;
Edwards, W.H.; Palumbo, P.; et al. Gut microbial colonisation in premature neonates predicts neonatal sepsis.
Arch. Dis. Child.-Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2012, 97, F456–F462. [CrossRef]

130. Stewart, C.J.; Embleton, N.D.; Marrs, E.C.L.; Smith, D.P.; Fofanova, T.; Nelson, A. Longitudinal development
of the gut microbiome and metabolome in preterm neonates with late onset sepsis and healthy controls.
Microbiome 2017, 5, 75. [CrossRef]

131. Carl, M.A.; Ndao, I.M.; Springman, A.C.; Manning, S.D.; Johnson, J.R.; Johnston, B.D.; Burnham, C.A.D.;
Weinstock, E.S.; Weinstock, G.M.; Wylie, T.N.; et al. Sepsis from the gut: The enteric habitat of bacteria that
cause late-onset neonatal bloodstream infections. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2014, 58, 1211–1218. [CrossRef]

132. Dunlop, J.H.; Keet, C.A. Epidemiology of Food Allergy. Immunol. Allergy. Clin. N. Am. 2018, 38, 13–25.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

133. Bousquet, J.; Khaltaev, N.; Cruz, A.A.; Denburg, J.; Fokkens, W.J.; Togias, A.; Burnham, C.A.; Weinstock, E.S.;
Weinstock, G.M.; Wylie, T.N.; et al. Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA) 2008 update (in
collaboration with the World Health Organization, GA(2)LEN and AllerGen). Allergy 2008, 63 (Suppl. 86),
8–160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

134. Bousquet, J.; Kaltaev, N.; World Health Organization. Global Surveillance, Prevention and Control of Chronic
Respiratory Diseases: A Comprehensive Approach. Global Alliance against Chronic Respiratory Diseases:
2007. Available online: http://www.who.int/iris/handle/10665/43776 (accessed on 2 August 2019).

135. Johansson, S.G.; Bieber, T.; Dahl, R.; Friedmann, P.S.; Lanier, B.Q.; Lockey, R.F.; Motala, C.; Ortega Martell, J.A.;
Platts-Mills, T.A.; Ring, J.; et al. Revised nomenclature for allergy for global use: Report of the Nomenclature
Review Committee of the World Allergy Organization, October 2003. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2004, 113,
832–836. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

136. Abrahamsson, T.R.; Jakobsson, H.E.; Andersson, A.F.; Bjorksten, B.; Engstrand, L.; Jenmalm, M.C. Low gut
microbiota diversity in early infancy precedes asthma at school age. Clin. Exp. Allergy 2013, 44, 842–850.
[CrossRef]

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

20 of 21

137. Wopereis, H.; Sim, K.; Shaw, A.; Warner, J.O.; Knol, J.; Kroll, J.S. Intestinal microbiota in infants at high
risk for allergy: Eﬀects of prebiotics and role in eczema development. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2017, 141,
1334–1342. [CrossRef]

138. Song, H.; Yoo, Y.; Hwang, J.; Na, Y.C.; Kim, H.S. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii subspecies-level dysbiosis
in the human gut microbiome underlying atopic dermatitis. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2015, 137, 852–860.
[CrossRef]

139. Nylund, L.; Nermes, M.; Isolauri, E.; Salminen, S.; de Vos, W.M.; Satokari, R. Severity of atopic disease
inversely correlates with intestinal microbiota diversity and butyrate-producing bacteria. Allergy 2015, 70,
241–244. [CrossRef]

140. Muir, A.B.; Benitez, A.J.; Dods, K.; Spergel, J.M.; Fillon, S.A. Microbiome and its impact on gastrointestinal

atopy. Allergy 2016, 71, 1256–1263. [CrossRef]

141. Stefka, A.T.; Feehley, T.; Tripathi, P.; Qiu, J.; McCoy, K.; Mazmanian, S.K.; Tjota, M.Y.; Seo, G.Y.; Cao, S.;
Theriault, B.R.; et al. Commensal bacteria protect against food allergen sensitization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 2014, 111, 13145–13150. [CrossRef]

142. Chen, C.C.; Chen, K.J.; Kong, M.S.; Chang, H.J.; Huang, J.L. Alterations in the gut microbiotas of children

with food sensitization in early life. Pediatr. Allergy Immunol. 2015, 27, 254–262. [CrossRef]

143. Berni Canani, R.; Gilbert, J.A.; Nagler, C.R. The role of the commensal microbiota in the regulation of

tolerance to dietary allergens. Curr. Opin. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2015, 15, 243–249. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

144. Simpson, A.; Tan, V.Y.; Winn, J.; Svensen, M.; Bishop, C.M.; Heckerman, D.E.; Buchan, I.; Custovic, A. Beyond
atopy: Multiple patterns of sensitization in relation to asthma in a birth cohort study. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care
Med. 2010, 181, 1200–1206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

145. Fujimura, K.E.; Sitarik, A.R.; Havstad, S.; Lin, D.L.; Levan, S.; Fadrosh, D.; Panzer, A.R.; LaMere, B.;
Rackaityte, E.; Lukacs, N.W.; et al. Neonatal gut microbiota associates with childhood multisensitized atopy
and T cell diﬀerentiation. Nat. Med. 2016, 22, 1187–1191. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

146. Tun, H.M.; Konya, T.; Takaro, T.K.; Brook, J.R.; Chari, R.; Field, C.J.; Guttman, D.S.; Becker, A.B.; Mandhane, P.J.;
Turvey, S.E.; et al. Exposure to household furry pets inﬂuences the gut microbiota of infant at 3–4 months
following various birth scenarios. Microbiome 2017, 5, 40. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

147. Marques, T.M.; Wall, R.; Ross, R.P.; Fitzgerald, G.F.; Ryan, C.A.; Stanton, C. Programming infant gut
microbiota: Inﬂuence of dietary and environmental factors. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2010, 21, 149–156.
[CrossRef]

148. Chong, C.Y.L.; Bloomﬁeld, F.H.; O’Sullivan, J.M. Factors Aﬀecting Gastrointestinal Microbiome Development

in Neonates. Nutrients 2018, 10, 274. [CrossRef]

149. Dogaru, C.M.; Nyﬀenegger, D.; Pescatore, A.M.; Spycher, B.D.; Kuehni, C.E. Breastfeeding and childhood

asthma: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2014, 179, 1153–1167. [CrossRef]

150. Groer, M.W.; Luciano, A.A.; Dishaw, L.J.; Ashmeade, T.L.; Miller, E.; Gilbert, J.A. Development of the preterm

infant gut microbiome: A research priority. Microbiome 2014, 2, 38. [CrossRef]

151. Mennini, M.; Dahdah, L.; Artesani, M.C.; Fiocchi, A.; Martelli, A. Probiotics in Asthma and Allergy Prevention.

Front. Pediatr. 2017, 5, 165. [CrossRef]

152. Sakwinska, O.; Bastic Schmid, V.; Berger, B.; Bruttin, A.; Keitel, K.; Lepage, M.; Moine, D.; Ngom Bru, C.;
Brüssow, H.; Gervaix, A. Nasopharyngeal microbiota in healthy children and pneumonia patients. J. Clin.
Microbiol. 2014, 52, 1590–1594. [CrossRef]

153. Pettigrew, M.M.; Gent, J.F.; Kong, Y.; Wade, M.; Gansebom, S.; Bramley, A.M.; Jain, S.; Arnold, S.L.;
McCullers, J.A. Association of sputum microbiota proﬁles with severity of community-acquired pneumonia
in children. BMC Infect. Dis. 2016, 8, 317. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

154. Machiavelli, A.; Duarte, R.T.D.; Pires, M.M.S.; Zárate-Bladés, C.R.; Pinto, A.R. The impact of in utero HIV
exposure on gut microbiota, inﬂammation, and microbial translocation. Gut Microbes 2019, 10, 599–614.
[CrossRef]

155. Kaur, U.S.; Shet, A.; Rajnala, N.; Gopalan, B.P.; Moar, P.D.H.; Singh, B.P.; Chaturvedi, R.; Tandon, R. High
Abundance of genus Prevotella in the gut of perinatally HIV-infected children is associated with IP-10 levels
despite therapy. Sci. Rep. 2018, 5, 17679. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

21 of 21

156. Serrano-Villar, S.; de Lagarde, M.; Vázquez-Castellanos, J.; Vallejo, A.; Bernadino, J.I.; Madrid, N.;
Matarranz, M.; Díaz-Santiago, A.; Gutiérrez, C.; Cabello, A.; et al. Eﬀects of Immunonutrition in Advanced
Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus Disease: A Randomized Placebo-controlled Clinical Trial [Promaltia Study].
Clin. Infect. Dis. 2019, 1, 120–130. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

157. Liu, C.M.; Prodger, J.L.; Tobian, A.A.R.; Abraham, A.G.; Kigozi, G.; Hungate, B.A.; Aziz, M.; Nalugoda, F.;
Sariya, S.; Serwadda, D.; et al. Penile Anaerobic Dysbiosis as a Risk Factor for HIV Infection. MBio 2017, 25,
8. [CrossRef]

158. Klatt, N.R.; Cheu, R.; Birse, K.; Zevin, A.S.; Perner, M.; Noël-Romas, L.; Grobler, A.; Westmacott, G.; Xie, I.Y.;
Butler, J.; et al. Vaginal bacteria modify HIV tenofovir microbicide eﬃcacy in African women. Science 2017, 2,
938–945. [CrossRef]

159. Frank, D.N.; Manigart, O.; Leroy, V.; Meda, N.; Valéa, D.; Zhang, W.; Dabis, F.; Pace, N.R.; Van de Perre, P.;
Janoﬀ, E. Altered vaginal microbiota are associated with perinatal mother-to-child transmission of HIV in
African women from Burkina Faso. J. Acquir. Immune Deﬁc. Syndr. 2012, 1, 299–306. [CrossRef]

160. Freedman, S.B.; Williamson-Urquhart, S.; Farion, K.J.; Gouin, S.; Willan, A.R.; Poonai, N.; Hurley, K.;
Sherman, P.M.; Finkelstein, Y.; Lee, B.E.; et al. Multicenter Trial of a Combination Probiotic for Children with
Gastroenteritis. N. Engl. J. Med. 2018, 22, 2015–2026. [CrossRef]

161. Schnadower, D.; Tarr, P.I.; Casper, T.C.; Gorelick, M.H.; Dean, J.M.; O’Connell, K.J.; Mahajan, P.; Levine, A.C.;
Bhatt, S.R.; Roskind, C.G.; et al. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG versus Placebo for Acute Gastroenteritis in
Children. N. Engl. J. Med. 2018, 22, 2002–2014. [CrossRef]

162. Yeh, T.L.; Shih, P.C.; Liu, S.J.; Lin, C.H.; Liu, J.M.; Lei, W.T.; Lin, C.Y. The inﬂuence of prebiotic or probiotic
supplementation on antibody titers after inﬂuenza vaccination: A systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Drug Des. Dev. Ther. 2018, 25, 217–230. [CrossRef]

163. Zimmermann, P.; Curtis, N. The inﬂuence of probiotics on vaccine responses—A systematic review. Vaccine

2018, 4, 207–213. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

