A.L. Prince et al.

riage patterns far exceeded what was initially
suspected (Aagaard et al. 2012a,b; Human Mi-
crobiome Project 2012a,b,c; Huse et al. 2012;
Gevers et al. 2012; Li et al. 2012). These initial
studies on the “healthy” reference human mi-
crobiome laid the foundation for a burgeoning
wealth of investigations of the potential role of
the microbiome in a spectrum of health and
disease states. Indeed, associations between
dysbiotic microbiota, or a microbial imbalance,
and disease have been suggested for obesity, type
II diabetes mellitus, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s
disease, and colorectal cancer (Mangin et al.
2004; Ley et al. 2005; Gophna et al. 2006; Man-
ichanh et al. 2006; Turnbaugh et al. 2006, 2008,
2009; Ba¨ckhed et al. 2007; Cani et al. 2007; Will-
ing et al. 2009; Larsen et al. 2010; Schwiertz et al.
2010; Wu et al. 2010; Joossens et al. 2011; Lepage
et al. 2011; Marchesi et al. 2011; Sobhani et al.
2011; Qin et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2012; Devaraj
et al. 2013). However, causation has yet to be
established, and a multitude of other etiologies
for these common, complex disorders have been
suggested over the decades. Thus, it is critical-
ly important to ﬁrst discriminate when in the
course of the lifespan there is normal and antic-
ipated variation in the human microbiome,
in which body niches such variation occurs,
and what other covariates (such as host disease-
susceptible genotype, host metabolic milieu and
associated disorders, as well as age, gender, race/
ethnicity, and medications and diet) may con-
tribute to any observed variation.

Our laboratory and others have shown that
the vaginal microbiota vary in association with
normal pregnancy, thus providing a unique
“signature” in pregnancy with relative alter-
ed abundance of multiple taxa (Aagaard et al.
2012b; Romero et al. 2014b). This is intriguing,
as the vaginal microﬂora inﬂuences gestational
and postnatal health. It has long been suggested
that intrauterine infections, such as chorioam-
nionitis, are the sequelae of ascending micro-
biota from the upper vaginal tract (Gonc¸alves
et al. 2002), and the development of highly mor-
bid neonatal conditions, such as neonatal sepsis
and necrotizing enterocolitis, are potentially at-
tributable to anatomical displacement of these
ﬂora with subsequent inﬂammation and neona-

tal acquisition (Claud and Walker 2001; Guthrie
et al. 2003; Yee et al. 2012). However, in this
dawning era of metagenomic medicine and sci-
ence, we are questioning these notions, and are
coming to appreciate that many so-called “ster-
ile” niches—notably in and among the female
reproductive tract (such as the placenta)—may
function as active low biomass ecologic niches
that harbor unique microbiomes. These early
observations challenge not only our assumed
notions of “from when and where” our earliest
microbiomes are colonized (or seeded), but our
concepts of inﬂammatory mediators, reproduc-
tive immunity, and whether microbes in such
niches may constitute more friend than foe.

Here, we will review the literature on how
the microbiome is studied and how metageno-
mic science tools have been used in characteriz-
ing microbial communities and their genomic
repertoire (Table 1). We will thereafter discuss
ﬁndings by our group and others pertaining to
the microbial ecology of pregnancy, with a focus
on the potential role of the microbiome in me-
diating parturition and notably preterm birth.
Finally, we will close with a discussion on future
implications and applications as metagenomic
medicine emerges as a frontier for both under-
standing and managing the most common and
complex disorders of our current time.

METAGENOMIC SCIENCE: METHODS,
APPLICATIONS, AND CHALLENGES
IN THE FIELD

Mapping the human microbiome in repro-
duction requires that we not only characterize
which microbes are present and what each taxon
contributes to the biology of the host, but what
their genetic repertoire entails and encodes for
(so-called “gene carriage patterns”). Numerous
methods have been developed to address these
questions over the years, and with the advent
of Next Generation (Next-Gen) sequencing, in-
vestigators have been able to relatively eff-
iciently describe the composition of a microbial
community. Additionally, other multi’omic
techniques (e.g., metabolomics and metatran-
scriptomics) have been developed to attribute
potential functions and metabolic capacity.

2

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

gravid vaginal
microbiome
throughout pregnancy

gravid vaginal
microbiome
throughout pregnancy

The placenta harbors a
unique microbiome
proﬁle, most akin to
the oral microbiome
and varies by virtue of
preterm birth and a
remote history of
antenatal infection

Characterized neonatal
microbiome by mode
of delivery

Continued

3

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

Table 1. Metagenomic studies pertaining to perinatal health

Reference

Site

Technique(s)

Study design

Findings

Nongravid Vaginal Studies
NIH HMP

Skin, nares, oral,

vagina

Next-Gen

sequencing

V1V3

Longitudinal Characterized healthy

V3V5

reference population

Primers
used

Consortium
2012
Ravel et al.
2010

Gajer et al.
2012

2013

Mid-vagina

Next-Gen

V1V2

Cross-

(self-collected)

sequencing

sectional

Mid-vagina (self-

Next-Gen

V1V2

Longitudinal

collected)

sequencing

Macklaim et al.

Vagina

Metatranscriptomics

Cross-

sectional

Characterized healthy,
nongravid vaginal
microbiome
Showed temporal
dynamics of the
vaginal microbiome

Showed potential for

metatranscriptomics
on vaginal swabs

Gravid Vaginal Studies
Aagaard et al.

2012b

posterior
fornix, and
mid-vagina

Romero et al.
2014b

Vaginal introitus,

Next-Gen

V3V5

Cross-

Characterized healthy,

sequencing

sectional

gravid vaginal
microbiome

Posterior fornix Next-Gen

V1V2

Longitudinal Characterized healthy,

sequencing

Walther-

Posterior fornix,

Next-Gen

V3V5

Longitudinal Characterized healthy,

V1V2

Longitudinal Characterized ﬁrst and
third trimester stool

V1V3 and
WGS

Population-

based, cross-
sectional

Anto´ nio
et al. 2014

cervix

sequencing

Beyond the Vagina: Intestinal Microbiome
Koren et al.
2012

Stool

Sequencing

Beyond the Vagina: The Placenta
Aagaard et al.

Placenta

2014

Next-Gen

sequencing

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

Beyond the Vagina: Neonatal Studies
Stool
Schultz et al.

Sequencing

Palmer et al.

Stool

Sequencing,

Longitudinal Characterized healthy

Microarray, PCR

neonatal microbiome

Strain-

Longitudinal Vertical transmission

from mother to infant

speciﬁc
Universal
16S
rRNA

Oral, vagina,
skin, rectal

Next-Gen

sequencing

V2

Cross-

sectional

2004

2007

Dominguez-
Bello et al.
2010

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

A.L. Prince et al.

Table 1. Continued

Reference

Site

Technique(s)

Study design

Findings

Koenig et al.

Stool

2011

Next-Gen

sequencing

Jost et al. 2012 Stool

Sequencing

V1V2

Longitudinal Characterized the

intestinal microbiome
from birth to 2.5 yr
Longitudinal Characterized healthy

neonatal microbiome

Wang et al.
2013

Cord blood,

Bacterial culture and

Cross-

Neonates with

amniotic ﬂuid

sequencing

sectional

Milisavljevic
et al. 2013

esophageal

Gastro-

Sequencing

Longitudinal Characterized the

Azad et al.
2013

Stool

Next-Gen

sequencing

Longitudinal Characterized the

Primers
used

Sanger,
V5V6
Universal
16s
rRNA

Universal
16S
rRNA
V5, V6,
V7

Rogier et al.
2014

Stool

Microarray

Murine

Ma et al. 2014b Colon, anus,

Next-Gen

V3V5

stool

sequencing

Nonhuman
primate

necrotizing colitis had
predominantly one
bacteria dominating

microbiome in VLBW
infants

neonatal microbiome
from birth to 4 mo
while examining mode
of delivery and feeding

Examined the role of
maternal IgA on
intestinal microbiome

Examined the role of
maternal diet on
juvenile microbiome

16S-Based Metagenomics

Sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene using Next-
Gen technology has recently been widely ex-
ploited to characterize the human microbiome
(Jonasson et al. 2007; Liu et al. 2007). The 16S
rRNA gene is an ideal target to classify bacteria
because of the nine hypervariable regions in this
gene that can be used to distinguish species
based on individual nucleotide polymorphisms
(Fig. 1A). Ergo, Next-Gen sequencing charac-
terizes both coarse ( phylum level) as well as ﬁne
(genus and limited species and strain) differ-
ences using universal primers to the adjacent
conserved regions (Klindworth et al. 2013).
However, 16S-amplicon-based approaches are
limited to a shorter read length as compared
with Sanger sequencing, and as a result, only
a few hypervariable regions can be contigu-
ously sequenced at a time. Initial work on ap-
proach and validation by the HMP Consortium
showed that there is variation in the taxonomy

proﬁle identiﬁed based on sequencing different
variable regions. For example, V1V3 amplicons
may underestimate Acinetobacter and Escheri-
chia genera, but V3V5 provides both breadth
and depth of communities dominated by these
genera. Furthermore, V6V9 may underesti-
mate Bacteroides but provides good coverage
for Pseudomonas and Escherichia (Human Mi-
crobiome Project 2012b).

Comparison of the vaginal microbiome
data from the HMP reveals that V1V3 will
distinguish communities primarily by the rela-
tive predominant Lactobacillus species present
whereas, V3V5 amplicons will reveal either lac-
tobacilli-dominant or lactobacilli-diminished
groups. Furthermore, the number of Lactobacil-
lus species detected (and thus relative abun-
dance) will vary depending on the 16S region
sequenced, with V1V3 revealing more unique
Lactobacillus operational
taxonomic units
(OTUs) as compared with V3V5 (Huse et al.
2012). However, unlike V3V5, V1V3 does not

4

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

V1

V2

V3

V4

V7

V8

V9

V3V5

F357

500

R534

R926

V5

V6

1000

1500

100 bp

V3V5

– –

–

+ +

+ +

+ +

V1V3

V1V3

+ +

+

– – –

+

16s rDNA

F27

A

B

Lactobacillus

Prevotella

Enterobacteriaceae

Bifidobacteriaceae

Staphylococcus

Clostridium

Figure 1. The 16S rDNA gene is an ideal target for classifying bacteria. (A) The 16S rDNA gene of bacteria
contains nine hypervariable regions (V1–V9) that are ﬂanked by conserved regions, which makes this gene an
ideal target for PCR ampliﬁcation and bacterial classiﬁcation. The V1V3 and V3V5 primers sets used by the
HMP consortium are outlined. The dotted line indicates the direction of ampliﬁcation. (B) Advantages and
disadvantages to characterizing the vaginal microbiome with V1V3 (includes V2) and V3V5 (includes V4)
primer sets. Species identiﬁcation of Lactobacillus is enabled using a V1V3 primer set; however, V3V5 primers
sets are better suited to identify Enterobacteriaceae and Biﬁdobacteriaceae. Thus, experimental design is essen-
tial when examining the pregnant microbiome.

fully discriminate Enterobacteriaceae family
projections (including Escherichia and Proteus),
and some genera (including Staphylococcus) (Fig.
1B) (Fettweis et al. 2012). Few studies have di-
rectly compared the vaginal communities de-
scribed by V6, V7, V8, and V9 to other primer
sets, although a number of studies have used
these regions with good coverage (Hummelen
et al. 2010; Ghartey et al. 2014). Taken together,
these data emphasize the need for prudent con-
sideration when choosing primer sets for se-
quencing with appreciation of both the body
site to be characterized, the reference data set
to be compared with, and limitations when
comparing to other published ﬁndings.

Numerous bioinformatics suites, such as
Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology
(QIIME), Mothur, and Genboree, have been
developed speciﬁcally to handle the taxonomic
information gathered from 16S studies (Schloss
et al. 2009; Caporaso et al. 2010; Riehle et al.
2012). These tools streamline the process of qual-

ity ﬁltering, operation taxonomic unit (OTU)
picking, chimeric sequence removal and taxo-
nomic assignment. For rapid and accurate tax-
onomic assignment, several reference databases,
including Ribosomal Database Project (RDP),
SiLVA, and Greengenes, have curated full length
16S sequences for more than 700 distinct taxa
(DeSantis et al. 2006; Pruesse et al. 2007; Wang
et al. 2007). Lastly, these bioinformatics tools
can perform basic microbial community anal-
ysis, including measuring alpha diversity (with-
in sample variation) and beta diversity (be-
tween sample variation).

Whole Genome Shotgun (WGS)-Based
Metagenomics

Although 16S sequencing is a cost effective
approach to perform metagenomics studies,
whole genome shotgun (WGS) sequencing al-
lows for deep and reﬁned taxonomic classiﬁca-
tion to the species and strain level, as well as the

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

5

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al.

capacity to capture total gene content and met-
abolic capacity (Butler et al. 2008; Liu et al.
2012; Morgan et al. 2012; Qin et al. 2012; Aa-
gaard et al. 2014). However, the sheer volume
of data generated by this approach poses sig-
niﬁcant bioinformatics challenges (Prakash and
Taylor 2012). On receiving sequence reads,
quality ﬁltering is performed to remove human
contamination, which consists of .90% of
reads in vaginal or placental samples (Human
Microbiome Project 2012c; Aagaard et al.
2014). To get species assignment to provide po-
tential gene expression information, sequence
reads are ﬁrst assembled into contigs, or genes.
This is challenging because of the lack of refer-
ence genomes, which results in de novo assembly
of microbial genomes with the potential to dis-
tort the species abundance and generate chime-
ric genomes (Pop 2009). Following assembly,
gene prediction is then possible by analyzing
molecular characteristics of existing open read-
ing frames of sequenced genomes (Zhu et al.
2010). Given the complexity of assembly and
low efﬁciency, taxonomy classiﬁcation can also
be achieved by alignment of sequence reads
to clade-speciﬁc markers identiﬁed from inte-
grated microbial genomes (IMG) without prior
assembly (Segata et al. 2012). The reconstruc-
tion of functional proﬁle is achieved by map-
ping reads onto pathway collections such as
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG), with additional interference steps for
pathway coverage and abundance (Abubucker
et al. 2012). Further, web tools have recently
been developed to perform the tasks described
above to facilitate the analysis of WGS data
(Glass et al. 2010). However, regardless of ap-
proach, WGS and 16S sequencing are limited to
describing community composition and its po-
tential metabolic or functional capability.

Multi’omics Data Integration

To truly understand how the microbiome im-
pacts human health, metabolomic and meta-
transcriptomic approaches will be required to
characterize their precise roles as symbionts
(reviewed in Morgan and Huttenhower 2014).
Metatranscriptomics, unlike its DNA-based

counterparts, reveals dynamic gene expression
patterns and nonprotein-coding small RNAs
present in microbial communities. Therefore,
metatranscriptomics can elaborate more pre-
cisely how bacteria are contributing to host bi-
ology. However, the current challenge in this
area of research is how to remove host nucleo-
tides and rRNA while preserving the shorter
microbial transcripts (Booijink et al. 2010; Go-
salbes et al. 2011; Schmieder et al. 2012). Once
this challenge is overcome, the analysis of meta-
transcriptomics could use previous statistical
methods developed for RNA-seq studies.

Metabolomics will be similarly critical for
linking bacterial function to host health. Al-
though studying the collection of metabolites
associated with a microbial community is not
unlike studying single organisms, associating
individual metabolites with the microbe of
origin is a signiﬁcant challenge. Because mi-
crobes provide metabolic capabilities otherwise
unavailable to the host, observing alterations in
metabolites through changes in diet or the use
of antibiotics in correlation with the micro-
biome may help us decipher the interrelation-
ships between bacteria and their corresponding
metabolomics (Zhang et al. 2010; Sellitto et al.
2012; McHardy et al. 2013). Although it is cur-
rently challenging to fully integrate multi’omics
data, meaningful associations are beginning
to be established through correlations, network
analysis, and co-occurrence analysis (Shi et al.
2011; Faust et al. 2012; McHardy et al. 2013;
Morgan and Huttenhower 2014).

THE VAGINAL MICROBIOME IN
REPRODUCTIVE AGED WOMEN

Before the advent of Next-Gen sequencing, the
the vaginal microbiome
characterization of
through traditional microbiological techniques
(culture-dependent) revealed a predominance
of Lactobacillus species (Redondo-Lopez et al.
1990; Larsen and Monif 2001). These early
characterizations of the vaginal microbiome
resulted in the delineation of “normal” ﬂora
(deﬁned as Lactobacillus predominant), and
“abnormal” or “aberrant” vaginal ﬂora (non-
lactobacillus predominant). Early descriptions

6

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

also attempted to characterize abnormal vaginal
ﬂora, most notably in conjunction with bacterial
vaginosis (BV). BV is a common and complex
alteration of vaginal ﬂora, but the description of
the bacteria involved in the vaginal dysbiosis
has changed over time. The association be-
tween anerobic cocci and abnormal vaginal dis-
charge was ﬁrst described by Curtis in 1914, and
Gardnerella vaginalis was ﬁrst described as a
causative agent for BV in 1955 (Eschenbach
1993; Ledger 1993). However, by the 1990s,
multiple other species were found in anaerobic
cultures of vaginal discharge from subjects with
symptoms consistent with BV (Faro et al. 1993;
Hillier et al. 1993). Despite the multiplicity of
causative agents, one common ﬁnding is that
women experiencing clinically symptomatic
BV tend to be deﬁcient in lactic acid producing
species of bacteria that also convert oxygen to
H2O2 (Eschenbach et al. 1989; Hillier et al. 1992,
1993). This observation has led to several de-
cades of data demonstrating that adverse repro-
ductive health outcomes accompany “abnormal
ﬂora” associated with BV (Gravett et al. 1986;
Martius et al. 1988; Krohn et al. 1991; Hillier
et al. 1995a; Martin et al. 1999; Wiesenfeld et al.
2003; Ness et al. 2005; Brotman et al. 2010). For
instance, the incidence of BV has been associat-
ed with preterm birth and with increased risk
for acquiring sexually transmitted diseases, such
as Neisseria gonorrhea, Chlamydia trachomatis,
and human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)
(Gravett et al. 1986; Martius et al. 1988; Krohn
et al. 1991; Kurki et al. 1992; Hillier et al. 1995b;
Martin et al. 1999; Wiesenfeld et al. 2003; Ness
et al. 2005; Brotman et al. 2010; Perla et al.
2012). This
infection is
increased risk of
thought to be because of the deﬁciency of Lac-
tobacillus species that produce lactic acid and
H2O2 to provide protection from pathogenic
bacteria and viruses (Eschenbach et al. 1989).
Along these lines, previous in vitro studies have
shown that Lactobacillus acidophilus can protect
from infection with G. vaginalis, Bacteroides bi-
vius, and HIV through a peroxidase dependent
mechanism (Klebanoff and Coombs 1991; Kle-
banoff et al. 1991). Thus, although BV may in-
dicate vaginal dysbiosis in a clinical setting, there
has been historically a lack of data regarding

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

whether vaginal dysbiosis occurred as “normal”
ﬂora in women asymptomatic for BV. Currently,
Next-Gen sequencing techniques have enabled
the vaginal microbiome to be more thoroughly
characterized to determine the bacterial ﬂora of
the “normal” versus “abnormal” vagina.

One of the ﬁrst studies to reveal the com-
plexity of the vaginal microbiome using Next-
Gen techniques was performed by Ravel et
al. This study recruited nearly 400 women of
mixed ethnicities. Samples were prepared for
either V1V2 16S sequencing and were scored
for BV using Nugent criteria (Ravel et al. 2010).
Five distinct community state types (CSTs) were
revealed, and the majority of these CSTs were
dominated by species of lactobacilli. The fourth
CST included women with a vaginal micro-
biome deﬁcient in Lactobacillus species, and in-
terestingly, this group had increased incidence
of BV. Also, this study showed that the vagi-
nal microbiome could be distinguished by eth-
nicity. Asian subjects had a higher prevalence of
CST III (Lactobacillus
iners), non-Hispanic
Caucasians had a higher prevalence of CST I
(Lactobacillus crispatus), and African-American
and Hispanic subjects had a higher prevalence
of CST III (L. iners) and IV (decreased Lactoba-
cillus species) (Ravel et al. 2010). However, re-
cent studies have shown the caution that must
be used when performing analysis such as CSTs
(Koren et al. 2013). In these investigations, Ko-
ren et al. (2013) showed that these types of clus-
ter analysis are sensitive to the distance metric
used for analysis and that multiple distance
metrics should be used to promote accuracy
in data. In fact, this study used the data of Ravel
et al. (2010) in their analysis and found varying
support for the presence of CSTs based on the
analysis used (Koren et al. 2013). Thus, multiple
methods of analysis must be used to establish
a CST. An additional method that may be use-
ful to examine microbiome communities across
ethnicities is to use single nucleotide poly-
morphisms (SNPs) in mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), which provides more precision in
analysis (Ruiz-Pesini et al. 2007). We have re-
cently used this method in conjunction with
analysis of the microbiome through data lever-
aged from the HMP to examine associations

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

7

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al.

between mtDNA haplotypes and microbiome
communities (Ma et al. 2014a). Although we
did see similar microbiome communities as
the Ravel group, our analysis has provided a
molecular basis in which to describe the struc-
ture of microbiome communities (Ma et al.
2014a).

Although this initial study revealed the
complexity of the vaginal microbiome, it did
not determine the stability of the vaginal mi-
crobiome. This aspect was queried in a separate
study in which 32 subjects, mostly African-
American and non-Hispanic Caucasian, self-
collected vaginal samples over a 16 wk time
frame (Gajer et al. 2012). Intriguingly, the sta-
bility of the vaginal microbiome over time ap-
peared to vary by individual. In other words,
some women tended to have high variability
in their vaginal microbiome, even to the extent
in which the CST classiﬁcation of their vaginal
microbiome was altered up to three times over
the course of the study (Gajer et al. 2012). How-
ever, other women tended to have an incred-
ibly stable vaginal microbiome throughout the
study (Gajer et al. 2012). Because this study had
a limited number of subjects and ethnic diver-
sity, it is challenging to determine how host
genetics may be associated with variability in
the stability of the vaginal microbiome between
subjects. Thus, utilizing the mtDNA haplo-
groups described above may be of great utility
in future studies that examine the stability of any
microbiome community over time. Additional-
ly, ﬂuctuations in alpha diversity were associat-
ed with the menstrual cycle, such as increased
levels of estradiol and progesterone correspond-
ed to decreased diversity (Gajer et al. 2012). In-
creases in these hormones promote the presence
of lactic acid producing bacteria, which main-
tain low pH and low diversity in the vagina.

Alterations in the vaginal microﬂora attrib-
uted to pH have been described to have func-
tional consequences as well. Using inferred
function analysis obtained from WGS sequenc-
ing data, the HMP consortium noted that a
decrease in the vaginal pH corresponded to
an increase in metabolic activity, speciﬁcally
when examining the phosphate transport sys-
tem (Human Microbiome Project 2012c). Even

further, a recent study examined the vaginal
metatranscriptomics proﬁle of
two women
with healthy vaginal proﬁles and two women
diagnosed with BV. This group found that
there were distinct differences in expression of
CRISPR-related genes, butyrate production,
and glycogen metabolism (Macklaim et al.
2013). In women with healthy vaginal micro-
ﬂora, glycogen metabolism resulted in the pro-
duction of lactic acid although subjects with
BV had an increase in succinate production
(Macklaim et al. 2013). What is even more in-
triguing is that some of these differences ap-
peared to be attributable to gene regulation by
L. iners. Thus, this study exempliﬁes the need
for further metatranscriptomic and metabolo-
mic studies involving large cohorts to under-
stand the role of the reproductive microbiome
in health and disease.

THE VAGINAL MICROBIOME IN
PREGNANCY

With the demonstration that the vaginal micro-
biome ﬂuctuates based on the menstrual cycle,
with intercourse, and (to a much more limited
degree) with clinical symptoms of BV, we and
others sought to characterize the vaginal micro-
biome during pregnancy. Nearly every organ
system changes during pregnancy to promote
pregnancy maintenance or prepare for parturi-
tion. In the vagina, increased vascularity and
hyperemia develop in the skin of the vulva and
the mucosa of the vagina. Additionally, the vag-
inal mucosa increases in thickness and cervical
secretions increase, which causes the underlying
smooth muscle cells to hypertrophy and relax
the connective tissue. At the epithelial surface,
the vaginal epithelium hypertrophies and caus-
es a crowding of the epithelial cells, which are
rich in glycogen (Nieburgs 1947). Estrogen
(namely estradiol) rises across gestation, and
further leads to increases in glycogen levels; gly-
cogen is metabolized into lactic acid resulting in
the decrease pH (acidity) of the vagina (Gre-
goire et al. 1971; Paavonen 1983). This metab-
olism of glycogen into lactic acid was historical-
ly thought to be performed by the vaginal
epithelium, because the vaginal lumen is sufﬁ-

8

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

ciently distant from the oxygen supply to be-
come anaerobic. However, the primary source
of lactic acid became debated when Boskey et al.
reported that vaginal lactobacilli were capable of
producing lactic acid in vitro at a rate sufﬁcient
to reacidify the vagina in vivo following a neu-
tralizing exposure (i.e., ejaculate) (Boskey et al.
1999; Pybus and Onderdonk 1999). Afterward,
the speciﬁc lactate structures in the vagina were
explored and it was discovered that the majority
of the vaginal lactic acid was of the D-isoform,
which cannot be produced by human metabo-
lism (Boskey et al. 2001). Thus, vaginal bacteria,
namely lactobacilli, appear to be the primary
source of lactic acid in the vagina. In pregnancy,
the preponderance of Lactobacillus
species
appears to be aided by the estrogen-induced
increase in glycogen that contributes to the
vaginal acidic environment, which is not only
enhanced by lactobacilli but also fosters Lacto-
bacillus growth.

Before the advent of metagenomics, the
presence of lactobacilli were noted to increase
as gestational age advanced during pregnancy
(Nieburgs 1947). Further, more recent studies
showed a high prevalence of Lactobacillus spe-
cies in the vagina during either the ﬁrst, second,
or third trimester using PCR-denaturing gra-
dient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) for the V3
region of the 16S rRNA gene, and the species
with the highest prevalence were L. acidophilus
and L. iners (Herna´ndez-Rodrı´guez et al. 2011).
The utilization of Next-Gen sequencing tech-
niques to study the vaginal microbiome further
showed the presence of Lactobacillus species in
the vagina during pregnancy. Our group initial-
ly published this 16S-based metagenomic char-
acterization in a cross-sectional study (Aagaard
et al. 2012b). We used V3V5 16S sequencing
and examined the posterior fornix, mid-vagi-
na, and vaginal introitus of 24 gravid and 60
nongravid subjects. Vaginal samples collected
from a cross-sectional survey of gravid subjects
from 18 wk gestation to term or delivery, and
all samples were collected by a single physician
who also conducted the HMP sampling for
50% of subjects. All samples were extracted in
a manner identical to that used by the HMP, and
sequenced on the same pipelines. When com-

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

pared with the HMP nonpregnant reference
subjects, we found that pregnancy was associat-
ed with an altered vaginal microbiome and
marked by a decrease in alpha diversity at the
subgenus level (Fig. 2) (Aagaard et al. 2012b).
When we examined this phenomenon further,
we discovered that there was an overall enrich-
ment of the orders Lactobacillus, Clostridiales,
Bacteriodales, and Actinomycetales. And on
probing at the species level using supervised
machine learning approaches, such as linear
discriminate analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe)
and Boruta feature selection, we discovered that
the vaginal microbiome during pregnancy was
enriched in L. iners, L. crispatus, Lactobacillus
jensenii, and Lactobacillus johnsonii (Aagaard
et al. 2012b). The increase in lactobacilli may
be explained by the increase in estrogen that
occurs during pregnancy. However, direct asso-
ciations between speciﬁc species of Lactobacillus
and estrogen levels are lacking and warrant fur-
ther investigation.

However, the aforementioned studies were
cross-sectional, which allows for the character-
ization of a pregnancy and gestational age-com-
mon microbiome signature, but lacks capacity
for description of the dynamic changes, which
may occur in an individual over time. Longi-
tudinal analysis of the vaginal microbiome in
a small cohort of women across gestation has
been performed using terminal restriction frag-
ment length polymorphism (tRFLP) in 100
gravid women (Verstraelen et al. 2009). This
study categorized gravidae into two cohorts
during the ﬁrst trimester: lactobacilli-dominant
and lactobacilli-diminished. Interestingly, only
16.9% of gravidae that had a lactobacilli-dom-
inant vaginal microbiome in the ﬁrst trimester
decreased the prevalence of lactobacilli during
pregnancy. On the other hand, 56.5% of gravi-
dae with a lactobacilli-diminished vaginal
microbiome during the ﬁrst trimester gained
prevalence of this genus. In contrast to the
cross-sectional study, these longitudinal co-
horts showed that L. crispatus dominated dur-
ing pregnancy and that prominence of Lactoba-
cillus gasseri and/or L. iners during the ﬁrst
trimester may be associated with diminished
lactobacilli as pregnancy progressed (Verstrae-

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

9

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

Hormone levels

Lactation

???
???

Campylobacter spp.
in juvenile gut

Non-pregnant

Pregnant

Follicular

Luteal

C.L.

Placenta

Breastfeeding

Post-partum

Implantation

Parturition

Impact on vaginal
microbiome

Impact on maternal
Gut and vaginal microbiome

Impact on infant
Gut microbiome

Obesity

High fat diet

Host genotype

???

???

???

Race/ethnicity (mtDNA)

Potential ethnic variation

???

Haplogroup association;
Ethnic variation

Preterm birth

???

Associated with decreased
diversity in the vagina

Decreased diversity and
incidence of NEC

Figure 2. Inﬂuences on the pregnant microbiome. A number of hormonal changes, environmental exposures
and genetic differences may impact the maternal microbiome before and during pregnancy that may alter the
developing neonatal microbiome. During pregnancy, the maternal intestinal and vaginal microbiome have
reduced alpha diversity and species richness. Metabolic demands increase throughout pregnancy and after
parturition as the mother is lactating. Estradiol, progesterone and prolactin levels gradually increase during
pregnancy, although it is unclear how these changes affect the maternal microbiome. Increased estrogen raises
glycogen production in the vagina, but how the availability of this substrate structures the vaginal microbiome is
unknown. The effect of host genetics on the maternal microbiome throughout pregnancy is relatively unknown.
Different ethnicities, which can be inferred by mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplotypes, have been shown to
have varied vaginal microbiomes before and after pregnancy. Further studies are needed to understand these
differences, and to explore the effect of host genotype on the maternal microbiome. The impact of diet and
obesity on the pregnant microbiome is just beginning to be explored. A primate model of maternal high fat diet
showed that diet alone can persistently alter the juvenile microbiome at one year of age regardless of juvenile diet.
However, how diet alters the maternal environment during pregnancy and how this affects the vertical trans-
mission of bacteria is unknown.

len et al. 2009). Recently, Romero et al. have
performed longitudinal studies of the posterior
fornix of the vaginal microbiome during preg-
nancy using Next-Gen sequencing of the V1V2
region of the 16S rRNA amplicon (Romero et al.
2014b). These studies used the self-collection of
vaginal samples over 16 wk of the nonpregnant
cohort and swabbing of the posterior fornix at

four prenatal visits from the gravid cohort with
22 subjects. Additionally, the gravid cohort con-
sisted of mainly African-American ethnicity. In
their analysis, the authors used the CSTs estab-
lished by Ravel et al. to interrogate the vaginal
microbiome during pregnancy (Ravel et al.
2010; Romero et al. 2014b). This study conclud-
ed that the vaginal microbiome of gravid wom-

10

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

A.L. Prince et al.

Estradiol

Progesterone

Prolactin

Metabolic demands

Vaginal mircobiota
Diversity/richness

Gut microbiota
Diversity/richness

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

en mostly consisted of the CST I or III with odds
ratios of 2.986 and 2.136, respectively, and that
the vaginal microbiome of gravid women shift
toward these two CSTs as their pregnancy
progressed (Romero et al. 2014b). When the
stability of the vaginal microbiome was exam-
ined during pregnancy, the authors noted that
the vaginal microbiome of gravid subjects shift-
ed between CSTs dominated by lactobacilli but
rarely shifted to CST IV, which is marked by a
diminished abundance of Lactobacillus species
(Romero et al. 2014b). However, with a low
number and low ethnic diversity of subjects in
the study, further studies are needed to conﬁrm
these shifts of the vaginal microbiome toward
CSTs dominated by lactobacilli as pregnancy
progresses. Initial studies of the vaginal micro-
biome showed that African-American women
have a higher prevalence of vaginal CSTs con-
sisting of Lactobacillus species (Ravel et al. 2010),
which was further shown by this recent study
(Romero et al. 2014b). In a separate study, the
vaginal microbiome was examined longitudi-
nally during gestation using the V3V5 amplicon
of 16S rRNA in 12 subjects that were mostly
Caucasian (Walther-Anto´ nio et al. 2014). In
agreement with previous studies, these authors
showed that alpha diversity decreases as preg-
nancy progresses and that L. crispatus and
L. iners dominate the vaginal microﬂora (Fig.
2) (Walther-Anto´ nio et al. 2014). Intriguingly,
these authors suggest that maternal age may be
important for the dominance of L. crispatus or
L. iners, with, L. iners being dominant in older
gravidae (Walther-Anto´ nio et al. 2014). Al-
though this insight should be kept in mind for
future studies, this study had only two subjects
with advanced maternal age (34 –36) (Walther-
Anto´ nio et al. 2014). To take these studies
further, this group attempted to analyze their
data in conjunction with the Romero et al.
study; however, differences in primer sets and
sequencing platforms used in these separate
studies prevented in depth analysis (Romero
et al. 2014b; Walther-Anto´ nio et al. 2014).
Despite these challenges, the authors found
that, although alpha diversity of the vaginal
microbiome decreased with gestational age in
both African-American and Caucasian subjects,

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

African-American subjects had increased beta
diversity between gravid subjects whereas Cau-
casian gravidae did not (Walther-Anto´ nio et al.
2014). Thus, these studies highlight the need for
further longitudinal studies with large subject
enrollment and ethnic diversity. Additionally,
studies are needed with a high enrollment of
BV subjects or women with a dysbiotic vaginal
microbiome to lend further insight into vaginal
microbiome shifts and stability that are associ-
ated with pregnancy.

In addition to better understanding shifts in
the vaginal microbiome during pregnancy, in-
vestigating the microbiome of subjects with BV
may lend insight into the role of the vaginal
microbiome in preterm birth. It is known that
BV is associated with preterm birth (Martius
et al. 1988; Krohn et al. 1991; Hillier et al.
1995a,b), and therefore, it is logical to question
the potential association of the vaginal micro-
biome with preterm birth (Ganu et al. 2013).
The Preterm Prediction Study examined the as-
sociation between BV and preterm birth (PTB)
(Meis et al. 1995). In this study, vaginal speci-
mens were obtained at 24 and 28 wk gestation,
and an association with increased risk for spon-
taneous PTB at ,35 wk gestation was found in
19.8% of women with BV at 28 wk gestation
(Meis et al. 1995). However, conclusions could
not be drawn regarding whether BV itself was
causative of PTB (Meis et al. 1995). Additional-
ly, although treatment of BV during pregnancy
does eradicate infection, it does not reduce the
risk of PTB (Hillier et al. 1995b; Brocklehurst
et al. 2013). Therefore, given the lack of beneﬁt,
screening of asymptomatic women in pregnan-
cy is not recommended (Nygren et al. 2008).
Even more concerning are the ﬁndings of two
studies that found an increase in preterm de-
livery (,34 wk) among women who tested
negative for BV but were treated (Hauth et al.
1995; Vermeulen and Bruinse 1999). Thus, the
relationship of BV and preterm birth is com-
plicated and the beneﬁt of treatment is ques-
tionable. These issues regarding BV and PTB
warrant further investigation into these associ-
ations, and the examination of the microbiome
using Next-Gen sequencing techniques will be
of great utility for these studies.

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

11

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al.

Despite the need for further investigation
into the role of the vaginal microbiome in as-
sociation with BV and preterm birth, a recent
study by Hyman et al. (2014) has examined
the vaginal microbiome in preterm birth. This
group used a prospective cohort study with 46
high-risk ( previous unexplained PTB) and 42
low-risk (all other gravid) subjects for PTB
gravidae enrolled (Hyman et al. 2014); however,
only 14 subjects were able to be sampled in each
trimester. Intriguingly, the investigators found
that the presence of lactobacilli did not distin-
guish term (.37 wk) from preterm (,37 wk)
subjects using Sanger sequencing methods.
However, low-risk subjects had a higher preva-
lence of lactobacilli when compared with high-
risk subjects (Hyman et al. 2014). Despite the
lack of association of lactobacilli with preterm
birth, measured alpha diversity was reported as
diminished when comparing Caucasian term
and preterm subjects (Hyman et al. 2014).
Among the two longitudinal subjects that ulti-
mately delivered preterm, their vaginal micro-
biomes were dominated by L. crispatus (Hyman
et al. 2014), which is in contrast to a previous
study demonstrating that L. crispatus is domi-
nant in healthy term pregnancies (Verstraelen
et al. 2009; Aagaard et al. 2012b). Moreover,
although two subjects in the Hyman et al. study
had outgrowths of Biﬁdobacterium and Urea-
plasma genera, separately, these genera are re-
ported in both normal pregnant subjects as well
as nonpregnant (Ravel et al. 2010; Aagaard et al.
2012b; Romero et al. 2014b). Similar ﬁndings
were found in an independent study by Romero
et al. In this prospective study, term (38 – 32 wk)
versus preterm (,34 wk) subjects were sam-
pled at the posterior fornix by an obstetrician
and sequenced using V1V3 primers (Romero
et al. 2014a). The authors found no associa-
tion between the CSTs of the vaginal micro-
biome and preterm birth, nor did they ﬁnd
any CST of the vaginal microbiome associated
with preterm subjects having acute chorioam-
nionitis (Romero et al. 2014a). In contrast to
the study by Hyman et al., this study found no
signiﬁcant difference in the alpha diversity of
the vaginal microbiome of term and preterm
subjects (Hyman et al. 2014; Romero et al.

2014a). In summary, although promising, these
studies underscore the need for broader gesta-
tional age-speciﬁc, reference-based cohorts to
deﬁne both the effect size and population vari-
ance. Before the publication of such studies, it
would be premature to ascribe such micro-
biome proﬁling as indicative or heralding of
preterm birth.

VARIANCE OF THE HUMAN MICROBIOME
IN PREGNANCY: BEYOND THE VAGINAL
COMMUNITY

In addition to changes described in the vaginal
microbiome during pregnancy, Koren et al.
(2012) investigated the intestinal microbiome
during pregnancy using a prospective cohort
study and found that as pregnancy progressed,
the intestinal microbiome was altered. This
study used the V1V2 region of the 16S rRNA
gene and found that alpha diversity (within
sample variation) was decreased between the
ﬁrst and third trimesters (Fig. 2). Further, stool
samples collected from gravidae in the ﬁrst tri-
mester clustered separately from stool samples
collected in the third trimester (Koren et al.
2012). These differences in beta diversity (be-
tween sample variation) were a reﬂection of in-
creases in Proteobacteria in the stool during the
third trimester when compared with stool from
the ﬁrst trimester. When fecal transplants of ﬁrst
and third trimester stool into germ-free mice
were performed, mice receiving third trimester
stool had increases in inﬂammatory cytokines
and adiposity, similarly to fecal transplants in-
volving obese subjects (Turnbaugh et al. 2006;
Koren et al. 2012; Ridaura et al. 2013). These
alterations in the intestinal microbiome did not
associate with any other covariates, such as body
mass index (BMI), development of gestational
diabetes mellitus, or multiparity (Koren et al.
2012).

BEYOND THE VAGINAL MICROBIOME:
EARLY INFANT COLONIZATION

Recently, the establishment of the neonatal
microbiome has been the subject of debate
and investigation. As shown with vaginal micro-

12

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

biome studies, there has been wide variability
between the use of techniques and the variable
region of 16S used for studies. An initial study
by Schultz and colleagues examined the vertical
transmission of a probiotic, Lactobacillus rham-
nosus GG, from mother to infant (Schultz et al.
2004). Gravid women took the probiotic twice
daily from 30 – 36 wk of gestation. The authors
found that all infants born vaginally (4/4) con-
tained this probiotic in their stool whereas the
probiotic was only detected in the stool of half
of the cesarean delivered infants (1/2) (Schultz
et al. 2004). This study showed that vertical
transmission did occur between mother and in-
fant. However, this study included a small sub-
ject number and did not examine the maternal
stool postpartum, which would be relevant to
determine the persistence of the probiotic in
the maternal microbiome that would provide
an opportunity for horizontal transmission.
The maternal microbiome during infancy, and
not solely delivery mode, may be an important
factor in establishing the neonatal microbiome.
In fact, a recent study examining the establish-
ment of the intestinal microbiome of healthy,
term neonates using qPCR found that bacterial
loads between maternal and infant stool were
remarkably similar (Jost et al. 2012). This study
shows that the maternal microbiome at birth
and postpartum may be critical in the establish-
ment and development of the neonatal micro-
biome via horizontal transmission.

When directly examining the intestinal mi-
crobiome of infants born via cesarean or vaginal
delivery, culture-based microbiological tech-
niques have shown differences in the coloniza-
tion of the neonatal
intestinal microbiome,
particularly of Biﬁdobacterium-like bacteria,
Lactobacillus-like bacteria, and Bacteriodes fra-
gilis (Gro¨nlund et al. 1999a). However, a sepa-
rate study by this group also determined that
bacterial enzymes were not altered in the stool
of infants based on mode of delivery (Gro¨nlund
et al. 1999b). Using culture-independent, PCR-
based techniques, Penders et al. also showed
that B. fragilis and Biﬁdobacterium were de-
creased in cesarean delivered infants in compar-
ison to vaginally delivered infants. However, this
study also showed differences in the intestinal

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

microbiome of infants based on formula-feed-
ing or breastfeeding (Penders et al. 2006). An
Italian study further investigated the intestinal
microbiome of infants based on mode of deliv-
ery using the V6V8 region of the 16S rRNA gene
in PCR-DGGE and PCR-temperature gradi-
ent gel electrophoresis (TGGE) assays (Biasucci
et al. 2008). This group determined that infants
born vaginally had increased diversity in their
intestinal microbiome when compared with ce-
sarean delivered infants. Again, infants born by
cesarean delivery appeared to have an absence of
Biﬁdobacterium in their intestinal microbiome
(Biasucci et al. 2008).

To date, few studies on this issue regarding
mode of delivery have used Next-Gen sequenc-
ing techniques. An initial study was performed
in Venezuela with nine gravid subjects, four giv-
ing vaginal birth and ﬁve having a cesarean de-
livery (Dominguez-Bello et al. 2010). This study
used the V2 region of the 16S rRNA gene and
showed that the infant microbiome most close-
ly resembled the mothers’ vaginal microbiome
following vaginal delivery. Similarly, if the in-
fant was born by cesarean delivery, the infant
microbiome most closely resembled the skin
microbiome (Dominguez-Bello et al. 2010).
Furthermore, a Canadian study using Next-
Gen sequencing techniques for the V5, V6, and
V7 regions of the 16S rRNA gene showed that
Escherichia shigella and Bacteroides were signiﬁ-
cantly diminished in the intestinal microbiome
of infants born by cesarean section (Azad et al.
2013). This study also found that infants with
the highest species richness and diversity of
their intestinal microbiome were born by emer-
gency cesarean section rather than by an elective
cesarean section or vaginally (Azad et al. 2013).
However, when followed out to 4 mo postpar-
tum, infants’ intestinal microbiome could be
differentiated primarily based on mode of feed-
ing. Speciﬁcally, infants that were formula-fed
had a higher prevalence of Peptostreptococca-
ceae and Verrucomicrobiaceae when compared
with breastfed infants (Azad et al. 2013). Thus,
mode of feeding may be more crucial than
mode of delivery in regards to the long-term
establishment of the microbiome. These ﬁnd-
ings suggest that the establishment of a stable

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

13

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al.

microbiome is not only a question of what bac-
teria are present at birth, but also what factors,
either host-derived or environmental, inﬂuence
the species that persist.

Which Microbiota First Populate the Infant?

Further studies into the establishment of the
neonatal microbiome highlight this principle.
Jost et al. (2012) showed that the intestinal
microbiome of infants born vaginally and ex-
clusively breastfed decrease the amount of the
Firmicutes phylum, of which Lactobacillus be-
longs, over time while increasing the prevalence
of Bacteroides species. Thus, although these in-
fants were born vaginally, a high presence of
Firmicutes did not persist. Intriguingly, these
vaginally delivered infants could be classiﬁed
into two cohorts in this study: those that had
species of Bacteriodes present in their intestinal
microbiome and those that did not (Jost et al.
2012), and this trend was also seen in a separate
study (Palmer et al. 2007). This is in contrast to
previous studies ﬁnding that Bacteroides relative
abundance differed based on mode of delivery
(Gro¨nlund et al. 1999a; Penders et al. 2006).
However, Palmer et al. also determined that var-
iations in the Bacteroides species seen early in
neonatal life were less variant and more con-
sistent in the abundance by 1 yr of age. Addi-
tionally, the neonatal intestinal microbiome also
appeared more adult-like near the end of the ﬁrst
year of life (Palmer et al. 2007). This ﬁnding was
conﬁrmed in a study by Koenig et al. in which the
intestinal microbiome of an infant was moni-
tored for 2.5 yr. Here, the authors found that
the diversity of the intestinal microbiome in-
creased over time and with the introduction of
foods (Koenig et al. 2011). Also, Bacteroides spe-
cies were found to increase on the introduction
of vegetables (Koenig et al. 2011). Altogether,
this data indicate that the neonatal microbiome
is highly variable within the ﬁrst year of life.
Therefore, various exposures during this time
may have a signiﬁcant impact on the developing
microbiome.

Although it is unclear if the health and
microbiome of the offspring is persistently in-
ﬂuenced by mode of delivery, gestational age at

delivery appears to be the greater arbiter for the
developing microbiome. For instance, differ-
ences in the intestinal microbiome of preterm
and term neonates have been described
(Schwiertz et al. 2003). In this study, the authors
found that healthy, term neonates that were
breast fed had increased diversity in their intes-
tinal microbiome when compared with hospi-
talized, preterm infants using PCR-DGGE anal-
ysis (Schwiertz et al. 2003). Additional studies
have conﬁrmed that the microbiome of infants
with conditions like PTB, very low birth weight
infants, or necrotizing enterocolitis, also have
an altered microbiome (Schwiertz et al. 2003;
Ha¨llstro¨m et al. 2004; Milisavljevic et al. 2013;
Wang et al. 2013). However, it is unclear if these
alterations are caused by early gestational age at
delivery or hospitalization because neonatal ex-
posure in early life is pertinent to the establish-
ment of the microbiome.

Furthermore, these exposures at delivery
and in early life may have lasting effects on the
microbiome (Ding and Schloss 2014; Ma et al.
2014b). For instance, a recent study showed that
breastfeeding has an impact in the long-term
enterotype of an individual (Ding and Schloss
2014). This study is bolstered by murine studies
suggesting that maternal antibodies transferred
via breast milk may have a persistent impact on
the intestinal microbiome (Rogier et al. 2014).
However, retrospective analysis of the literature
determined that mode of delivery may in-
ﬂuence obesity in adulthood (Darmasseelane
et al. 2014). Thus, these aforementioned asso-
ciations with mode of feeding and delivery may
be attributable to differences in the seeding
of the neonatal microbiome. Therefore, future
studies are needed to entail how and why mi-
crobes remain in distinct body sites. In other
words, it may not be a question as to who is
there and from whenst and where do they arise,
but rather why do certain microbes take up and
retain residence? As the maternal diet and mi-
crobiome has been shown to inﬂuence the
establishment and development of the infant
microbiome, these future studies may reveal
early mechanisms of adult metabolic disorders,
which may allow for the early treatment and/or
prevention of associated diseases.

14

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

THE PLACENTAL MICROBIOME

The placenta has long been considered sterile in
normal gestation, where the presence of bacteria
in clinical cultures is diagnostic for intrauterine
infection and a signiﬁcant risk for PTB (Hillier
et al. 1988). The ELGAN studies constituted a
large effort that systematically identiﬁed bacte-
ria from PTB placentas under this assumption
(Olomu et al. 2009; Onderdonk et al. 2008a,b).
However, there is increasing recognition of a
large discordance between the presence of bac-
teria as per culture-based diagnoses and clinical
outcome (Watts et al. 1992; Pettker et al. 2007;
Buhimschi et al. 2009; Han et al. 2009; Leviton
et al. 2010; Stout et al. 2013; Combs et al. 2014;
Fortner et al. 2014). In fact, the presence of pla-
cental or membrane bacteria in the absence of
histological infection has been discovered re-
peatedly over the last few decades (Hillier et al.
1988; Steel et al. 2005; Redline 2007; Stout et al.
2013; Fortner et al. 2014). This has led to the
recognition of the need to study and redeﬁne
our understanding of the role of intrauterine
bacteria in gestation.

One of the earliest studies to recognize the
absence of pathogenicity of intrauterine bacte-
ria was performed using histological analysis. It
was shown that membranes of normal pregnan-
cies often contain bacteria, yet show no signs of
histological infection (Steel et al. 2005). Later
studies using similar methodologies discovered
intracellular bacteria localized to the tropho-
blast of the basal plate of the maternal decidua
in the absence of chorioamnionitis although
there was an association with PTB (Cao and
Mysorekar 2013; Stout et al. 2013). Seemingly
in agreement, it was also shown that intra-am-
nionic invasion is relatively benign in the
absence of inﬂammation with associations be-
tween PTB and inﬂammation alone rather
than PTB and bacterial invasion (Combs et al.
2014). Intriguing work by Murtha and col-
leagues showed that high levels of bacteria
were strongly associated with premature rup-
ture of membranes (PPROM) and membrane
thickness, although there was no histological
inﬂammation in half of the subjects. Although
there was bacteria found in subjects of all groups

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

including PPROM (both term and preterm),
PTB, and even normal gestation controls, there
was no inﬂammation detected in the majority
of subjects (Fortner et al. 2014). Thus, these
studies suggest that it is not the occurrence of
bacteria in the placenta, but the bacterial pop-
ulations present that may initiate intrauterine
infection.

Along these lines, a metagenomic study us-
ing a Rhesus macaque model identiﬁed more
than 300 microbial species in the chorioamnion
and placenta (Aagaard et al. 2013). Interestingly,
it was shown that this population was modiﬁ-
able with a sterile intra-amniotic injection of
IL-1b that induced histological inﬂammation
(Aagaard et al. 2013). This suggests that cho-
rioamnionitis may be caused by microbial dys-
biosis rather than the presence of bacteria per se.
The potential translational implications of this
model to human pregnancy was emphasized
recently by our description of a vibrant and di-
verse commensal placental microbiome in nor-
mal pregnancies (Aagaard et al. 2014). Analysis
of more than 300 human samples using both
16S and WGS sequencing revealed a low abun-
dance complex community dominated by the
phyla Firmicutes, Tenericutes, Proteobacteria,
Bacteroidetes, and Fusobacteria, found in near-
ly all samples. Subjects with a remote history of
antenatal infection and antibiotic treatment, or
who developed PTB, had discrete statistically
signiﬁcant groupings of taxa (Aagaard et al.
2014). It was also found that the placental mi-
crobiome most closely resembles the oral mi-
crobiomes of the supragingival plaque and the
dorsum of the tongue; however, the placental
microbiome did not closely resemble the stool
or the vaginal microbiomes. This implies that
the bulk of the low level placental bacteria are
likely not ascending nor are contaminants of the
stool or the vagina, and instead, are quite pos-
sibly seeded largely from the oral cavity through
hematogenous spread (Fig. 3).

The entering of oral microbes into the blood
stream as a result of periodontitis or dental
procedures is well established (Han and Wang
2013), and it has been known for decades that
periodontal disease is linked to PTB (Offen-
bacher et al. 1996, 2009; Goldenberg et al.

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

15

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al.

Oral
microflora

Intestinal
microflora

Urinary tract
microflora

Vaginal
microflora

Skin
microflora

Vaginal
microflora

Oral
microflora

Breast milk
microflora

Skin
microflora

Pregnancy

Delivery

Infancy

Hematogenous spread
Ascending colonization

Mode of delivery
(Cesarean vs. Vaginal)

Breastfeeding
Mother–infant contact

Figure 3. Speculated origins for microbiota colonizing the placenta and seeding the initial neonatal microbiome.
Vaginal microﬂora likely contribute to the initial seeding of the neonatal microbiome during vaginal deliveries,
but the discovery that the uterine environment may not be sterile suggests that colonization of the infant may
happen before birth. Recent data demonstrating that the placenta has its own unique microbiome most closely
resembling the oral microbiome suggests a potential hematogenous route by which bacteria can seed the
placenta and the developing fetus. Microbiota from maternal oral, vaginal, urinary tract, and intestine are all
potential sources for these colonizing bacteria. Microbiota from breast milk and maternal contact may be an
important source of commensal bacteria during early infancy and must be considered when studying the
microﬂora of the neonate.

2000; Michalowicz et al. 2006; Macones et al.
2010). Animal models have shown that bacteria
may be spread hematogenously to the placenta
(Han et al. 2004; Fardini et al. 2010), and re-
ports have suggested that oral bacteria may be
associated with pregnancy complications (Katz
et al. 2009; Han et al. 2010; Swati et al. 2012).
Fusobacterium nucleatum is an oral pathogen
that is frequently found in diagnostic cultures
following PTB, PPROM, and stillbirth (Romero
et al. 1989; Watts et al. 1992; Han et al. 2004,
2010; Cahill et al. 2005). Our ﬁnding of Fuso-
bacteria to be a relatively abundant taxon in the
placenta supports the hypothesis of hematoge-
nous spread from the oral cavity to the placenta
(Aagaard et al. 2014), and this theory is further
buttressed by the ﬁnding of bacteria in cord
blood of normal pregnancies (Jime´nez et al.
2005). Along these lines, bacteria can spread
from the intra-amnion outward to the chorion,
which indicates that hematogenous spread from
mother to infant may be occurring via cord

blood (Kim et al. 2009). Thus, hematogenous
spread may promote colonization of the placen-
ta and the fetus, but further studies are needed
to examine this phenomenon. However, a po-
tential mechanism to compromise the ma-
ternal– fetal barrier has been illuminated. In a
mechanism akin to Listeria monocytogenes (Ba-
kardjiev et al. 2006; Le Monnier et al. 2007),
F. nucleatum expresses adhesin FadA that in-
teracts with E-cadherin, which compromises
cell– cell adhesion and membranes (Lecuit et
al. 2004; Ikegami et al. 2009; Fardini et al.
2011). However, further studies are necessary
to show deﬁnitively that hematogenous spread
from the oral cavity is possible for colonization
or infection of the placenta.

Ongoing and future study of the complex
origins of neonatal bacteria should consider
oral and placental microbiomes in addition to
the vaginal microﬂora. This need is exempliﬁed
by studies involving infants born preterm with
early-onset neonatal sepsis showing the pres-

16

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

ence of Fusobacterium, Ureaplasma, and Myco-
plasma in the cord blood, amniotic ﬂuid, and
neonatal blood (Wang et al. 2013). Additionally,
neonates with late onset sepsis or necrotizing
enterocolitis have been found to have intestinal
microbial dysbiosis that precedes clinical diag-
nosis (Mai et al. 2011, 2013). Although the vag-
inal microbiome may be implicated in these
neonatal diseases, signiﬁcant differences in
the abundance of placental bacteria have been
found when comparing preterm and term pla-
centas (Jones et al. 2009; Stout et al. 2013; Aa-
gaard et al. 2014). Thus, we speculate that seed-
ing of the neonatal microbiome with bacteria
from the placenta, which arose through hema-
togenous spread, may facilitate early coloniza-
tion. Thus, this early colonization in combina-
tion with variable, modifying host factors (King
et al. 2007; Zeldovich and Bakardjiev 2012) may
conceivably provide the initial seeding of a dys-
biotic microbiome that may render susceptibil-
ity to neonatal disease in a preterm or stressed
infant.

CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL
SIGNIFICANCE

Here we have described the current state of the
science on several aspects of the female repro-
ductive microbiome, as well as their current as-
sociation with perinatal disorders of both the
mother and her offspring. What we understand
today is far more complex and confounded than
was appreciated less than a decade ago, and is
much simpler than what we will come to realize
in coming years. The vaginal microbiome varies
from one woman to the next, across the lifespan,
and in association with both health and disease
states. Simpliﬁed views of “less diversity and less
rich vaginal microbiomes are equivalent to dis-
ease states” have been challenged and discount-
ed, and concepts of clearly delineated CSTs
remain to be fully validated. Previously as-
sumed to be “sterile” reproductive tract tissues
have been shown to harbor low biomass micro-
biomes, and yet we remain unclear as to what,
how and when the infant is colonized. What will
serve as decisive determinants of community
structure is still unknown, and the relative in-

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

ﬂuence of antibiotics, prebiotics, and probiotics
(as well as early in life diet and exogenous ex-
posures) has yet to be robustly characterized.
A systemic analysis of the microbiome across
the reproductive health spectrum (adolescence,
pregnancy, postnatal and perimenopausal/
menopausal/postmenopausal) will undoubt-
edly shed light on the most signiﬁcant and per-
plexing common disorders of our time. Al-
though this is a challenging area of research,
the advent of metagenomics, combined with
integrative multi’omics, will enable reproduc-
tive scientists and physician scientists to unravel
the mysteries plaguing not only our generations’
health and disease, but will likely shed light on
human and primate coevolution of host and
microbe.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported in part by a
grant to Baylor College of Medicine from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the
Med into Grad Initiative. For ﬁnancial sup-
port, the authors acknowledge the National In-
stitutes of Health (NIH) Director’s New Inno-
vator Award (K.A., DP2 DP21DP2OD001500),
the Burroughs Wellcome Fund Preterm Birth
Initiative (K.A., 1008819.01),
the National
Institute of Nursing Research Grant (K.A.,
R01NR014792), National Institute of General
Medical Sciences (T32GM088129), Medical
Scientist Training Program (T32GM007330),
and the Human Microbiome Project funded
through the NIH Director’s Common Fund at
the National Institutes of Health (as part of NIH
RoadMap 1.5).

REFERENCES

Aagaard K, Petrosino J, Keitel W, Watson M, Katancik J,
Garcia N, Patel S, Cutting M, Madden T, Hamilton H,
et al. 2012a. The Human Microbiome Project strategy for
comprehensive sampling of the human microbiome and
why it matters. FASEB J 27: 1012– 1022.

Aagaard K, Riehle K, Ma J, Segata N, Mistretta T-A, Coarfa
C, Raza S, Rosenbaum S, Van den Veyver I, Milosavljevic
A, et al. 2012b. A metagenomic approach to characteri-
zation of the vaginal microbiome signature in pregnancy.
PLoS ONE 7: e36466.

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

17

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al.

Aagaard K, Ganu R, Ma J, Hu M, Miller L, Jobe A, Kallapur
S, Chougnet C. 2013. 506: Intraamniotic interleukin-1
(IL1b) induces histologic chorioamnionitis and alters
the microbiome in a primate model of inﬂammatory
preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208: S218.

Aagaard K, Ma J, Antony KM, Ganu R, Petrosino J, Versa-
lovic J. 2014. The placenta harbors a unique microbiome.
Sci Transl Med 6: 237ra65.

Abubucker S, Segata N, Goll J, Schubert AM, Izard J, Can-
tarel BL, Rodriguez-Mueller B, Zucker J, Thiagarajan M,
Henrissat B, et al. 2012. Metabolic reconstruction for
metagenomic data and its application to the human mi-
crobiome. PLoS Comput Biol 8: e1002358.

Azad MB, Konya T, Maughan H, Guttman DS, Field CJ,
Chari RS, Sears MR, Becker AB, Scott JA, Kozyrskyj AL.
2013. Gut microbiota of healthy Canadian infants: Pro-
ﬁles by mode of delivery and infant diet at 4 months.
CMAJ 185: 385 –394.

Ba¨ckhed F, Manchester JK, Semenkovich CF, Gordon JI.
2007. Mechanisms underlying the resistance to diet-in-
duced obesity in germ-free mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci 104:
979–984.

Bakardjiev AI, Theriot JA, Portnoy DA. 2006. Listeria mono-
cytogenes trafﬁcs from maternal organs to the placenta
and back. PLoS Pathog 2: e66.

Biasucci G, Benenati B, Morelli L, Bessi E, Boehm G. 2008.
Cesarean delivery may affect the early biodiversity of in-
testinal bacteria. J Nutr 138: 1796S–1800S.

Booijink CCGM, Boekhorst J, Zoetendal EG, Smidt H,
Kleerebezem M, de Vos WM. 2010. Metatranscriptome
analysis of the human fecal microbiota reveals subject-
speciﬁc expression proﬁles, with genes encoding proteins
involved in carbohydrate metabolism being dominantly
expressed. Appl Environ Microbiol 76: 5533– 5540.

Boskey ER, Telsch KM, Whaley KJ, Moench TR, Cone RA.
1999. Acid production by vaginal ﬂora in vitro is consis-
tent with the rate, extent of vaginal acidiﬁcation. Infect
Immun 67: 5170– 5175.

Boskey ER, Cone RA, Whaley KJ, Moench TR. 2001. Origins
of vaginal acidity: High D/L lactate ratio is consistent
with bacteria being the primary source. Hum Reprod
16: 1809–1813.

Brocklehurst P, Gordon A, Heatley E, Heatley E, Milan SJ.
2013. Antibiotics for treating bacterial vaginosis in preg-
nancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1: CD000262.

Brotman RM, Klebanoff MA, Nansel TR, Yu KF, Andrews
WW, Zhang J, Schwebke JR. 2010. Bacterial vaginosis
assessed by gram stain and diminished colonization re-
sistance to incident gonococcal, chlamydial, and tricho-
monal genital infection. J Infect Dis 202: 1907–1915.
Buhimschi CS, Dulay AT, Abdel-Razeq S, Zhao G, Lee S,
Hodgson EJ, Bhandari V, Buhimschi IA. 2009. Fetal in-
ﬂammatory response in women with proteomic bio-
markers characteristic of intra-amniotic inﬂammation
and preterm birth. BJOG 116: 257– 267.

Butler J, Maccallum I, Kleber M, Shlyakhter IA, Belmonte
MK, Lander ES, Nusbaum C, Jaffe DB. 2008. ALLPATHS:
De novo assembly of whole-genome shotgun microreads.
Genome Res 18: 810–820.

Cahill RJ, Tan S, Dougan G, O’Gaora P, Pickard D, Kennea
N, Sullivan MHF, Feldman RG, Edwards AD. 2005. Uni-
versal DNA primers amplify bacterial DNA from human

fetal membranes and link Fusobacterium nucleatum with
prolonged preterm membrane rupture. Mol Hum Reprod
11: 761– 766.

Cani PD, Neyrinck AM, Fava F, Knauf C, Burcelin RG,
Tuohy KM, Gibson GR, Delzenne NM. 2007. Selective
increases of biﬁdobacteria in gut microﬂora improve
high-fat-diet-induced diabetes in mice through a mech-
anism associated with endotoxaemia. Diabetologia 50:
2374–2383.

Cao B, Mysorekar IU. 2013. Intracellular bacteria in placen-
tal basal plate localize to extravillous trophoblasts. Pla-
centa 35: 139– 142.

Caporaso JG, Kuczynski J, Stombaugh J, Bittinger K, Bush-
man FD, Costello EK, Fierer N, Pen˜a AG, Goodrich JK,
Gordon JI, et al. 2010. QIIME allows analysis of high-
throughput community sequencing data. Nat Methods
7: 335– 336.

Claud EC, Walker WA. 2001. Hypothesis: Inappropriate col-
onization of the premature intestine can cause neonatal
necrotizing enterocolitis. FASEB J 15: 1398–1403.

Combs CA, Gravett M, Garite TJ, Hickok DE, Lapidus J,
Porreco R, Rael J, Grove T, Morgan TK, Clewell W, et al.
2014. Amniotic ﬂuid infection, inﬂammation, and colo-
nization in preterm labor with intact membranes. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 210: 125.e1–125.e15.

Darmasseelane K, Hyde MJ, Santhakumaran S, Gale C,
Modi N. 2014. Mode of delivery and offspring body
mass index, overweight and obesity in adult life: A sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS ONE 9: e87896.
DeSantis TZ, Hugenholtz P, Larsen N, Rojas M, Brodie EL,
Keller K, Huber T, Dalevi D, Hu P, Andersen GL. 2006.
Greengenes, a chimera-checked 16S rRNA gene database
and workbench compatible with ARB. Appl Environ
Microbiol 72: 5069– 5072.

Devaraj S, Hemarajata P, Versalovic J. 2013. The human gut
microbiome and body metabolism: Implications for obe-
sity and diabetes. Clin Chem 59: 617–628.

Ding T, Schloss PD. 2014. Dynamics and associations of
microbial community types across the human body.
Nature 509: 357 –360.

Dominguez-Bello MG, Costello EK, Contreras M, Magris
M, Hidalgo G, Fierer N, Knight R. 2010. Delivery mode
shapes the acquisition and structure of the initial micro-
biota across multiple body habitats in newborns. Proc
Natl Acad Sci 107: 11971– 11975.

Eschenbach DA. 1993. History and review of bacterial vag-

inosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 169: 441 –445.

Eschenbach DA, Davick PR, Williams BL, Klebanoff SJ,
Young-Smith K, Critchlow CM, Holmes KK. 1989.
Prevalence of hydrogen peroxide-producing Lactobacillus
species in normal women and women with bacterial vag-
inosis. J Clin Microbiol 27: 251 –256.

Fardini Y, Chung P, Dumm R, Joshi N, Han YW. 2010.
Transmission of diverse oral bacteria to murine placenta:
Evidence for the oral microbiome as a potential source of
intrauterine infection. Infect Immun 78: 1789–1796.
Fardini Y, Wang X, Te´moin S, Nithianantham S, Lee D,
Shoham M, Han YW. 2011. Fusobacterium nucleatum
adhesin FadA binds vascular endothelial cadherin and
alters endothelial integrity. Mol Microbiol 82: 1468–1480.

18

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

Faro S, Martens M, Maccato M, Hammill H, Pearlman M.
1993. Vaginal ﬂora and pelvic inﬂammatory disease. Am
J Med 333: 1732–1736.

Faust K, Sathirapongsasuti JF, Izard J, Segata N, Gevers D,
Raes J, Huttenhower C. 2012. Microbial co-occurrence
relationships in the human microbiome. PLoS Comput
Biol 8: e1002606.

Fettweis JM, Serrano MG, Sheth NU, Mayer CM, Glascock
AL, Brooks JP, Jefferson KK, Buck GA. 2012. Species-level
classiﬁcation of the vaginal microbiome. BMC Genomics
13: S17.

Fortner KB, Grotegut CA, Ransom CE, Bentley RC, Feng L,
Lan L, Heine RP, Seed PC, Murtha AP. 2014. Bacteria
localization and chorion thinning among preterm pre-
mature rupture of membranes. PLoS ONE 9: e83338.
Gajer P, Brotman RM, Bai G, Sakamoto J, Schutte UME,
Zhong X, Koenig SSK, Fu L, Ma Z, Zhou X, et al. 2012.
Temporal dynamics of the human vaginal microbiota. Sci
Transl Med 4: 132ra52.

Ganu RS, Ma J, Aagaard KM. 2013. The role of microbial
communities in parturition: Is there evidence of associ-
ation with preterm birth and perinatal morbidity and
mortality? Am J Perinatol 30: 613– 624.

Gevers D, Knight R, Petrosino JF, Huang K, McGuire AL,
Birren BW, Nelson KE, White O, Methe´ BA, Huttenhower
C. 2012. The Human Microbiome Project: A community
resource for the healthy human microbiome. PLoS Biol
10: e1001377.

Ghartey JP, Smith BC, Chen Z, Buckley N, Lo Y, Ratner AJ,
Herold BC, Burk RD. 2014. Lactobacillus crispatus dom-
inant vaginal microbiome is associated with inhibitory
activity of female genital tract secretions against Escher-
ichia coli. PLoS ONE 9: e96659.

Glass EM, Wilkening J, Wilke A, Antonopoulos D, Meyer F.
2010. Using the metagenomics RAST server (MG-RAST)
for analyzing shotgun metagenomes. Cold Spring Harb
Protoc doi: 10.1101/pdb.prot5368.

Goldenberg RL, Hauth JC, Andrews WW. 2000. Intrauterine
infection and preterm delivery. N Engl J Med 342: 1500–
1507.

Gonc¸alves LF, Chaiworapongsa T, Romero R. 2002. Intra-
uterine infection and prematurity. Ment Retard Dev Dis-
abil Res Rev 8: 3–13.

Gophna U, Sommerfeld K, Gophna S, Doolittle WF, Veld-
huyzen van Zanten SJO. 2006. Differences between tis-
sue-associated intestinal microﬂoras of patients with
Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. J Clin Microbiol
44: 4136–4141.

Gosalbes MJ, Durba´n A, Pignatelli M, Abellan JJ, Jime´nez-
Herna´ndez N, Pe´rez-Cobas AE, Latorre A, Moya A. 2011.
Metatranscriptomic approach to analyze the functional
human gut microbiota. PLoS ONE 6: e17447.

Gravett MG, Nelson HP, DeRouen T, Critchlow C, Eschen-
bach DA, Holmes KK. 1986. Independent associations of
bacterial vaginosis and Chlamydia trachomatis infection
with adverse pregnancy outcome. JAMA 256: 1899–
1903.

Gregoire AT, Kandil O, Ledger WJ. 1971. The glycogen con-
tent of human vaginal epithelial tissue. Fertil Steril 22:
64–68.

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

Gro¨nlund MM, Lehtonen OP, Eerola E, Kero P. 1999a. Fecal
microﬂora in healthy infants born by different methods
of delivery: Permanent changes in intestinal ﬂora after
cesarean delivery. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 28: 19–25.
Gro¨nlund MM, Salminen S, Mykka¨nen H, Kero P, Lehtonen
OP. 1999b. Development of intestinal bacterial enzymes
in infants—Relationship to mode of delivery and type of
feeding. APMIS 107: 655 –660.

Guthrie SO, Gordon PV, Thomas V, Thorp JA, Peabody J,
Clark RH. 2003. Necrotizing enterocolitis among neo-
nates in the United States. J Perinatol 23: 278– 285.
Ha¨llstro¨m M, Eerola E, Vuento R, Janas M, Tammela O.
2004. Effects of mode of delivery and necrotising entero-
colitis on the intestinal microﬂora in preterm infants.
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 23: 463–470.

Han YW, Wang X. 2013. Mobile microbiome: Oral bacteria
in extra-oral infections and inﬂammation. J Dent Res
92: 485– 491.

Han YW, Redline RW, Li M, Yin L, Hill GB, McCormick TS.
2004. Fusobacterium nucleatum induces premature and
term stillbirths in pregnant mice: Implication of oral bac-
teria in preterm birth. Infect Immun 72: 2272–2279.
Han YW, Shen T, Chung P, Buhimschi IA, Buhimschi CS.
2009. Uncultivated bacteria as etiologic agents of intra-
amniotic inﬂammation leading to preterm birth. J Clin
Microbiol 47: 38–47.

Han YW, Fardini Y, Chen C, Iacampo KG, Peraino VA, Sha-
monki JM, Redline RW. 2010. Term stillbirth caused by
oral Fusobacterium nucleatum. Obstet Gynecol 115: 442–
445.

Hauth JC, Goldenberg RL, Andrews WW, DuBard MB,
Copper RL. 1995. Erythromycin in women with bacterial
vaginosis. N Engl J Med 333: 1732–1736.

Herna´ndez-Rodrı´guez C, Romero-Gonza´lez R, Albani-
Campanario M, Figueroa-Damia´n R, Meraz-Cruz N,
Herna´ndez-Guerrero C. 2011. Vaginal microbiota of
healthy pregnant Mexican women is constituted by four
Lactobacillus species and several vaginosis-associated
bacteria. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 2011: 851485.

Hillier SL, Martius J, Krohn M, Kiviat N, Holmes KK, Esch-
enbach DA. 1988. A case-control study of chorioam-
nionic infection and histologic chorioamnionitis in
prematurity. N Engl J Med 319: 972–978.

Hillier SL, Krohn MA, Klebanoff SJ, Eschenbach DA. 1992.
The relationship of hydrogen peroxide-producing lacto-
bacilli to bacterial vaginosis and genital microﬂora in
pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 79: 369 –373.

Hillier SL, Krohn MA, Rabe LK, Klebanoff SJ, Eschenbach
DA. 1993. The normal vaginal ﬂora, H2O2-producing
lactobacilli, and bacterial vaginosis in pregnant women.
Clin Infect Dis 16: S273–S281.

Hillier SL, Krohn MA, Cassen E, Easterling TR, Rabe LK,
Eschenbach DA. 1995a. The role of bacterial vaginosis
and vaginal bacteria in amniotic ﬂuid infection in women
in preterm labor with intact fetal membranes. Clin Infect
Dis 20: S276– S278.

Hillier SL, Nugent RP, Eschenbach DA, Krohn MA, Gibbs
RS, Martin DH, Cotch MF, Edelman R, Pastorek JG, Rao
AV. 1995b. Association between bacterial vaginosis and
preterm delivery of a low-birth-weight infant. The Vagi-
nal Infections and Prematurity Study Group. N Engl
J Med 333: 1737– 1742.

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

19

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al.

Human Microbiome Project. 2012a. A framework for hu-

man microbiome research. Nature 486: 215– 221.

Human Microbiome Project. 2012b. Evaluation of 16S
rDNA-based community proﬁling for human micro-
biome research. PLoS ONE 7: e39315.

Human Microbiome Project. 2012c. Structure, function and
diversity of the healthy human microbiome. Nature 486:
207–214.

Hummelen R, Fernandes AD, Macklaim JM, Dickson RJ,
Changalucha J, Gloor GB, Reid G. 2010. Deep sequencing
of the vaginal microbiota of women with HIV. PLoS ONE
5: e12078.

Huse SM, Ye Y, Zhou Y, Fodor AA. 2012. A core human
microbiome as viewed through 16S rRNA sequence clus-
ters. PLoS ONE 7: e34242.

Hyman RW, Fukushima M, Jiang H, Fung E, Rand L, John-
son B, Vo KC, Caughey AB, Hilton JF, Davis RW, et al.
2014. Diversity of the vaginal microbiome correlates with
preterm birth. Reprod Sci 21: 32– 40.

Ikegami A, Chung P, Han YW. 2009. Complementation of
the fadA mutation in Fusobacterium nucleatum demon-
strates that the surface-exposed adhesin promotes cellu-
lar invasion and placental colonization. Infect Immun
77: 3075–3079.

Jime´nez E, Ferna´ndez L, Marı´n ML, Martı´n R, Odriozola
JM, Nueno-Palop C, Narbad A, Olivares M, Xaus J, Ro-
drı´guez JM. 2005. Isolation of commensal bacteria from
umbilical cord blood of healthy neonates born by cesar-
ean section. Curr Microbiol 51: 270– 274.

Jonasson J, Olofsson M, Monstein H-J. 2007. Classiﬁcation,
identiﬁcation and subtyping of bacteria based on pyro-
sequencing and signature matching of 16s rDNA frag-
ments. 2002. APMIS 115: 678– 679.

Jones HE, Harris KA, Azizia M, Bank L, Carpenter B, Hart-
ley JC, Klein N, Peebles D. 2009. Differing prevalence and
diversity of bacterial species in fetal membranes from very
preterm and term labor. PLoS ONE 4: e8205.

Joossens M, Huys G, Cnockaert M, De Preter V, Verbeke K,
Rutgeerts P, Vandamme P, Vermeire S. 2011. Dysbiosis of
the faecal microbiota in patients with Crohn’s disease and
their unaffected relatives. Gut 60: 631 –637.

Jost T, Lacroix C, Braegger CP, Chassard C. 2012. New in-
sights in gut microbiota establishment in healthy breast
fed neonates. PLoS ONE 7: e44595.

Katz J, Chegini N, Shiverick KT, Lamont RJ. 2009. Localiza-
tion of P. gingivalis in preterm delivery placenta. J Dent
Res 88: 575– 578.

Kim MJ, Romero R, Gervasi MT, Kim J-S, Yoo W, Lee D-C,
Mittal P, Erez O, Kusanovic JP, Hassan SS, et al. 2009.
Widespread microbial invasion of the chorioamniotic
membranes is a consequence and not a cause of intra-
amniotic infection. Lab Invest 89: 924– 936.

King AE, Paltoo A, Kelly RW, Sallenave J-M, Bocking AD,
Challis JRG. 2007. Expression of natural antimicrobials
by human placenta and fetal membranes. Placenta 28:
161–169.

Klebanoff SJ, Coombs RW. 1991. Viricidal effect of Lactoba-
cillus acidophilus on human immunodeﬁciency virus
type 1: Possible role in heterosexual transmission. J Exp
Med 174: 289– 292.

Klebanoff SJ, Hillier SL, Eschenbach DA, Waltersdorph AM.
1991. Control of the microbial ﬂora of the vagina by
H2O2-generating lactobacilli. J Infect Dis 164: 94–100.
Klindworth A, Pruesse E, Schweer T, Peplies J, Quast C,
Horn M, Glo¨ckner FO. 2013. Evaluation of general 16S
ribosomal RNA gene PCR primers for classical and next-
generation sequencing-based diversity studies. Nucleic
Acids Res 41: e1.

Koenig JE, Spor A, Scalfone N, Fricker AD, Stombaugh J,
Knight R, Angenent LT, Ley RE. 2011. Succession of mi-
crobial consortia in the developing infant gut micro-
biome. Proc Natl Acad Sci 108: 4578– 4585.

Koren O, Goodrich JK, Cullender TC, Spor A, Laitinen K,
Ba¨ckhed HK, Gonzalez A, Werner JJ, Angenent LT, Knight
R, et al. 2012. Host remodeling of the gut microbiome
and metabolic changes during pregnancy. Cell 150: 470–
480.

Koren O, Knights D, Gonzalez A, Waldron L, Segata N,
Knight R, Huttenhower C, Ley RE. 2013. A guide to
enterotypes across the human body: Meta-analysis of mi-
crobial community structures in human microbiome da-
tasets. PLoS Comput Biol 9: e1002863.

Krohn MA, Hillier SL, Lee ML, Rabe LK, Eschenbach DA.
1991. Vaginal Bacteroides species are associated with an
increased rate of preterm delivery among women in pre-
term labor. J Infect Dis 164: 88– 93.

Kurki T, Sivonen A, Renkonen OV, Savia E, Ylikorkala O.
1992. Bacterial vaginosis in early pregnancy and pregnan-
cy outcome. Obstet Gynecol 80: 173–177.

Larsen B, Monif GR. 2001. Understanding the bacterial ﬂora
of the female genital tract. Clin Infect Dis 32: e69–e77.
Larsen N, Vogensen FK, van den Berg FWJ, Nielsen DS,
Andreasen AS, Pedersen BK, Al-Soud WA, Sørensen SJ,
Hansen LH, Jakobsen M. 2010. Gut microbiota in human
adults with type 2 diabetes differs from non-diabetic
adults. PLoS ONE 5: e9085.

Lecuit M, Nelson DM, Smith SD, Khun H, Huerre M,
Vacher-Lavenu M-C, Gordon JI, Cossart P. 2004. Target-
ing and crossing of the human maternofetal barrier by
Listeria monocytogenes: Role of internalin interaction
with trophoblast E-cadherin. Proc Natl Acad Sci 101:
6152–6157.

Ledger WJ. 1993. Historical review of the treatment of bac-
terial vaginosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 169: 474– 478.
Lepage P, Ha¨sler R, Spehlmann ME, Rehman A, Zvirbliene
A, Begun A, Ott S, Kupcinskas L, Dore´ J, Raedler A, et al.
2011. Twin study indicates loss of interaction between
microbiota and mucosa of patients with ulcerative colitis.
Gastroenterology 141: 227 –236.

Leviton A, Allred EN, Kuban KCK, Hecht JL, Onderdonk
AB, O’shea TM, Paneth N. 2010. Microbiologic and his-
tologic characteristics of the extremely preterm infant’s
placenta predict white matter damage and later cerebral
palsy. The ELGAN study. Pediatr Res 67: 95–101.

Ley RE, Ba¨ckhed F, Turnbaugh P, Lozupone CA, Knight RD,
Gordon JI. 2005. Obesity alters gut microbial ecology.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 102: 11070–11075.

Li K, Bihan M, Yooseph S, Methe´ BA. 2012. Analyses of the
microbial diversity across the human microbiome. PLoS
ONE 7: e32118.

20

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

Liu Z, Lozupone C, Hamady M, Bushman FD, Knight R.
2007. Short pyrosequencing reads sufﬁce for accurate
microbial community analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 35:
e120.

Liu B, Faller LL, Klitgord N, Mazumdar V, Ghodsi M,
Sommer DD, Gibbons TR, Treangen TJ, Chang Y-C, Li
S, et al. 2012. Deep sequencing of the oral microbiome
reveals signatures of periodontal disease. PLoS ONE 7:
e37919.

Ma J, Coarfa C, Qin X, Bonnen PE, Milosavljevic A, Versa-
lovic J, Aagaard K. 2014a. mtDNA haplogroup and single
nucleotide polymorphisms structure human micro-
biome communities. BMC Genomics 15: 257.

Ma J, Prince AL, Bader D, Hu M, Ganu R, Baquero K,
Blundell P, Alan Harris R, Frias AE, Grove KL, et al.
2014b. High-fat maternal diet during pregnancy persis-
tently alters the offspring microbiome in a primate
model. Nat Commun 5: 3889.

Macklaim JM, Fernandes AD, Di Bella JM, Hammond J-A,
Reid G, Gloor GB. 2013. Comparative meta-RNA-seq of
the vaginal microbiota and differential expression by Lac-
tobacillus iners in health and dysbiosis. Microbiome 1: 12.
Macones GA, Parry S, Nelson DB, Strauss JF, Ludmir J,
Cohen AW, Stamilio DM, Appleby D, Clothier B, Sammel
MD, et al. 2010. Treatment of localized periodontal dis-
ease in pregnancy does not reduce the occurrence of pre-
term birth: Results from the Periodontal Infections and
Prematurity Study (PIPS). Am J Obstet Gynecol 202:
147.e1–147.e8.

Mai V, Young CM, Ukhanova M, Wang X, Sun Y, Casella G,
Theriaque D, Li N, Sharma R, Hudak M, et al. 2011. Fecal
microbiota in premature infants prior to necrotizing en-
terocolitis. PLoS ONE 6: e20647.

Mai V, Torrazza RM, Ukhanova M, Wang X, Sun Y, Li N,
Shuster J, Sharma R, Hudak ML, Neu J. 2013. Distortions
in development of intestinal microbiota associated with
late onset sepsis in preterm infants. PLoS ONE 8: e52876.
Mangin I, Bonnet R, Seksik P, Rigottier-Gois L, Sutren M,
Bouhnik Y, Neut C, Collins MD, Colombel J-F, Marteau P,
et al. 2004. Molecular inventory of faecal microﬂora in
patients with Crohn’s disease. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 50:
25–36.

Manichanh C, Rigottier-Gois L, Bonnaud E, Gloux K, Pel-
letier E, Frangeul L, Nalin R, Jarrin C, Chardon P, Mar-
teau P, et al. 2006. Reduced diversity of faecal microbiota
in Crohn’s disease revealed by a metagenomic approach.
Gut 55: 205 –211.

Marchesi JR, Dutilh BE, Hall N, Peters WHM, Roelofs R,
Boleij A, Tjalsma H. 2011. Towards the human colorectal
cancer microbiome. PLoS ONE 6: e20447.

Martin HL, Richardson BA, Nyange PM, Lavreys L, Hillier
SL, Chohan B, Mandaliya K, Ndinya-Achola JO, Bwayo
J, Kreiss J. 1999. Vaginal lactobacilli, microbial ﬂora,
and risk of human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 and
sexually transmitted disease acquisition. J Infect Dis 180:
1863– 1868.

Martius J, Krohn MA, Hillier SL, Stamm WE, Holmes KK,
Eschenbach DA. 1988. Relationships of vaginal Lactoba-
cillus species, cervical Chlamydia trachomatis, and bacte-
rial vaginosis to preterm birth. Obstet Gynecol 71: 89– 95.
McHardy IH, Goudarzi M, Tong M, Ruegger PM, Schwager
E, Weger JR, Graeber TG, Sonnenburg JL, Horvath S,

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

Huttenhower C, et al. 2013. Integrative analysis of the
microbiome and metabolome of the human intestinal
mucosal surface reveals exquisite inter-relationships.
Microbiome 1: 17.

Meis PJ, Goldenberg RL, Mercer B, Moawad A. 1995. The
preterm prediction study: Signiﬁcance of vaginal infec-
tions. Am J Obstet Gynecol 173: 1231– 1235.

Michalowicz BS, Hodges JS, DiAngelis AJ, Lupo VR, Novak
MJ, Ferguson JE, Buchanan W, Boﬁll J, Papapanou PN,
Mitchell DA, et al. 2006. Treatment of periodontal disease
and the risk of preterm birth. N Engl J Med 355: 1885–
1894.

Milisavljevic V, Garg M, Vuletic I, Miller JF, Kim L, Cun-
ningham TD, Schro¨der I. 2013. Prospective assessment of
the gastroesophageal microbiome in VLBW neonates.
BMC Pediatr 13: 49.

Le Monnier A, Autret N, Join-Lambert OF, Jaubert F, Char-
bit A, Berche P, Kayal S. 2007. ActA is required for cross-
ing of the fetoplacental barrier by Listeria monocytogenes.
Infect Immun 75: 950–957.

Morgan XC, Huttenhower C. 2014. Meta’omic analytic
techniques for studying the intestinal microbiome. Gas-
troenterology 146: 1437–1448.e1.

Morgan XC, Tickle TL, Sokol H, Gevers D, Devaney KL,
Ward DV, Reyes JA, Shah SA, LeLeiko N, Snapper SB,
et al. 2012. Dysfunction of the intestinal microbiome in
inﬂammatory bowel disease and treatment. Genome Biol
13: R79.

Ness RB, Kip KE, Soper DE, Hillier S, Stamm CA, Sweet RL,
Rice P, Richter HE. 2005. Bacterial vaginosis (BV) and the
risk of incident gonococcal or chlamydial genital infec-
tion in a predominantly black population. Sex Transm
Dis 32: 413–417.

Nieburgs HE. 1947. Gestational changes in the vaginal
epithelium and their relation to the sex of the foetus.
J Obstet Gynaecol Br Emp 54: 653 –655.

Nygren P, Fu R, Freeman M, Bougatsos C, Klebanoff M,
Guise J-M. 2008. Evidence on the beneﬁts and harms
of screening and treating pregnant women who are
asymptomatic for bacterial vaginosis: An update review
for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern
Med 148: 220–233.

Offenbacher S, Katz V, Fertik G, Collins J, Boyd D, Maynor
G, McKaig R, Beck J. 1996. Periodontal infection as a
possible risk factor for preterm low birth weight. J Perio-
dontol 67: 1103– 1113.

Offenbacher S, Beck JD, Jared HL, Mauriello SM, Mendoza
LC, Couper DJ, Stewart DD, Murtha AP, Cochran DL,
Dudley DJ, et al. 2009. Effects of periodontal therapy on
rate of preterm delivery: A randomized controlled trial.
Obstet Gynecol 114: 551– 559.

Olomu IN, Hecht JL, Onderdonk AO, Allred EN, Leviton A.
2009. Perinatal correlates of Ureaplasma urealyticum in
placenta parenchyma of singleton pregnancies that end
before 28 weeks of gestation. Pediatrics 123: 1329–1336.
Onderdonk AB, Delaney ML, DuBois AM, Allred EN, Lev-
iton A. 2008a. Detection of bacteria in placental tissues
obtained from extremely low gestational age neonates.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 198: 110.e1–110.e7.

Onderdonk AB, Hecht JL, McElrath TF, Delaney ML,
Allred EN, Leviton A. 2008b. Colonization of second-

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

21

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al.

trimester placenta parenchyma. Am J Obstet Gynecol
199: 52.e1– 52.e10.

Paavonen J. 1983. Physiology and ecology of the vagina.

Scand J Infect Dis Suppl 40: 31–35.

Palmer C, Bik EM, DiGiulio DB, Relman DA, Brown PO.
2007. Development of the human infant intestinal micro-
biota. PLoS Biol 5: e177.

Penders J, Thijs C, Vink C, Stelma FF, Snijders B, Kummel-
ing I, van den Brandt PA, Stobberingh EE. 2006. Factors
inﬂuencing the composition of the intestinal microbiota
in early infancy. Pediatrics 118: 511– 521.

Perla ME, Ghee AE, Sa´nchez S, McClelland RS, Fitzpatrick
AL, Sua´rez-Ognio L, Lama JR, Sa´nchez J. 2012. Genital
tract infections, bacterial vaginosis, HIV, and reproduc-
tive health issues among Lima-based clandestine female
sex workers. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 2012: 739624.
Pettker CM, Buhimschi IA, Magloire LK, Sfakianaki AK,
Hamar BD, Buhimschi CS. 2007. Value of placental mi-
crobial evaluation in diagnosing intra-amniotic infec-
tion. Obstet Gynecol 109: 739 –749.

Pop M. 2009. Genome assembly reborn: Recent computa-

tional challenges. Brief Bioinform 10: 354 –366.

Prakash T, Taylor TD. 2012. Functional assignment of meta-
genomic data: Challenges and applications. Brief Bioin-
form 13: 711– 727.

Pruesse E, Quast C, Knittel K, Fuchs BM, Ludwig W, Peplies
J, Glo¨ckner FO. 2007. SILVA: A comprehensive online
resource for quality checked and aligned ribosomal
RNA sequence data compatible with ARB. Nucleic Acids
Res 35: 7188–7196.

Pybus V, Onderdonk AB. 1999. Microbial interactions in the
vaginal ecosystem, with emphasis on the pathogenesis of
bacterial vaginosis. Microbes Infect 1: 285 –292.

Qin J, Li Y, Cai Z, Li S, Zhu J, Zhang F, Liang S, Zhang W,
Guan Y, Shen D, et al. 2012. A metagenome-wide associ-
ation study of gut microbiota in type 2 diabetes. Nature
490: 55–60.

Ravel J, Gajer P, Abdo Z, Schneider GM, Koenig SSK,
Mcculle SL, Ault K, Peralta L, Forney LJ. 2010. Vaginal
microbiome of reproductive-age women. Proc Natl Acad
Sci 108: 4680–4687.

Redline RW. 2007. Villitis of unknown etiology: Noninfec-
tious chronic villitis in the placenta. Hum Pathol 38:
1439– 1446.

Redondo-Lopez V, Cook RL, Sobel JD. 1990. Emerging role
of lactobacilli in the control and maintenance of the vag-
inal bacterial microﬂora. Rev Infect Dis 12: 856 –872.
Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, Cheng J, Duncan AE, Kau AL,
Grifﬁn NW, Lombard V, Henrissat B, Bain JR, et al. 2013.
Gut microbiota from twins discordant for obesity mod-
ulate metabolism in mice. Science 341: 1241214.

Riehle K, Coarfa C, Jackson A, Ma J, Tandon A, Paithankar S,
Raghuraman S, Mistretta T-A, Saulnier D, Raza S, et al.
2012. The Genboree Microbiome Toolset and the analysis
of 16S rRNA microbial sequences. BMC Bioinformatics
13: S11.

Rogier EW, Frantz AL, Bruno MEC, Wedlund L, Cohen DA,
Stromberg AJ, Kaetzel CS. 2014. Secretory antibodies in
breast milk promote long-term intestinal homeostasis by
regulating the gut microbiota and host gene expression.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 111: 3074–3079.

Romero R, Sirtori M, Oyarzun E, Avila C, Mazor M, Call-
ahan R, Sabo V, Athanassiadis AP, Hobbins JC. 1989.
Infection and labor. V: Prevalence, microbiology, and
clinical signiﬁcance of intraamniotic infection in women
with preterm labor and intact membranes. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 161: 817–824.

Romero R, Hassan SS, Gajer P, Tarca AL, Fadrosh DW, Bieda
J, Chaemsaithong P, Miranda J, Chaiworapongsa T, Ravel
J. 2014a. The vaginal microbiota of pregnant women who
subsequently have spontaneous preterm labor and deliv-
ery and those with a normal delivery at term. Microbiome
2: 18.

Romero R, Hassan SS, Gajer P, Tarca AL, Fadrosh DW, Nikita
L, Galuppi M, Lamont RF, Chaemsaithong P, Miranda J,
et al. 2014b. The composition and stability of the vaginal
microbiota of normal pregnant women is different from
that of non-pregnant women. Microbiome 2: 4.

Ruiz-Pesini E, Lott MT, Procaccio V, Poole JC, Brandon MC,
Mishmar D, Yi C, Kreuziger J, Baldi P, Wallace DC. 2007.
An enhanced MITOMAP with a global mtDNA muta-
tional phylogeny. Nucleic Acids Res 35: D823– D828.
Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, Hall JR, Hartmann M,
Hollister EB, Lesniewski RA, Oakley BB, Parks DH, Rob-
inson CJ, et al. 2009. Introducing mothur: Open-source,
platform-independent, community-supported software
for describing and comparing microbial communities.
Appl Environ Microbiol 75: 7537–7541.

Schmieder R, Lim YW, Edwards R. 2012. Identiﬁcation and
removal of ribosomal RNA sequences from metatran-
scriptomes. Bioinformatics 28: 433– 435.

Schultz M, Go¨ttl C, Young RJ, Iwen P, Vanderhoof JA. 2004.
Administration of oral probiotic bacteria to pregnant
women causes temporary infantile colonization. J Pediatr
Gastroenterol Nutr 38: 293– 297.

Schwiertz A, Gruhl B, Lo¨bnitz M, Michel P, Radke M, Blaut
M. 2003. Development of the intestinal bacterial compo-
sition in hospitalized preterm infants in comparison with
breast-fed, full-term infants. Pediatr Res 54: 393–399.
Schwiertz A, Taras D, Scha¨fer K, Beijer S, Bos NA, Donus C,
Hardt PD. 2010. Microbiota and SCFA in lean and over-
weight healthy subjects. Obesity (Silver Spring) 18: 190–
195.

Segata N, Waldron L, Ballarini A, Narasimhan V, Jousson O,
Huttenhower C. 2012. Metagenomic microbial commu-
nity proﬁling using unique clade-speciﬁc marker genes.
Nat Methods 9: 811 –814.

Sellitto M, Bai G, Serena G, Fricke WF, Sturgeon C, Gajer P,
White JR, Koenig SSK, Sakamoto J, Boothe D, et al. 2012.
Proof of concept of microbiome-metabolome analysis
and delayed gluten exposure on celiac disease autoimmu-
nity in genetically at-risk infants. PLoS ONE 7: e33387.
Shi Y, Tyson GW, Eppley JM, DeLong EF. 2011. Integrated
metatranscriptomic and metagenomic analyses of strati-
ﬁed microbial assemblages in the open ocean. ISME J 5:
999 –1013.

Sobhani I, Tap J, Roudot-Thoraval F, Roperch JP, Letulle S,
Langella P, Corthier G, Van Nhieu JT, Furet JP. 2011.
Microbial Dysbiosis in Colorectal Cancer (CRC) Patients.
PLoS ONE 6: e16393.

Steel JH, Malatos S, Kennea N, Edwards AD, Miles L, Dug-
gan P, Reynolds PR, Feldman RG, Sullivan MHF. 2005.

22

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

Bacteria and inﬂammatory cells in fetal membranes do
not always cause preterm labor. Pediatr Res 57: 404 –411.
Stout MJ, Conlon B, Landeau M, Lee I, Bower C, Zhao Q,
Roehl KA, Nelson DM, Macones GA, Mysorekar IU.
2013. Identiﬁcation of intracellular bacteria in the basal
plate of the human placenta in term and preterm gesta-
tions. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208: 226.e1–226.e7.

Swati P, Thomas B, Vahab SA, Kapaettu S, Kushtagi P. 2012.
Simultaneous detection of periodontal pathogens in sub-
gingival plaque and placenta of women with hyperten-
sion in pregnancy. Arch Gynecol Obstet 285: 613 –619.
Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, Magrini V, Mardis
ER, Gordon JI. 2006. An obesity-associated gut micro-
biome with increased capacity for energy harvest. Nature
444: 1027–1031.

Turnbaugh PJ, Ba¨ckhed F, Fulton L, Gordon JI. 2008. Diet-
induced obesity is linked to marked but reversible alter-
ations in the mouse distal gut microbiome. Cell Host
Microbe 3: 213– 223.

Turnbaugh PJ, Hamady M, Yatsunenko T, Cantarel BL,
Duncan A, Ley RE, Sogin ML, Jones WJ, Roe BA, Affour-
tit JP, et al. 2009. A core gut microbiome in obese and lean
twins. Nature 457: 480– 484.

Vermeulen GM, Bruinse HW. 1999. Prophylactic adminis-
tration of clindamycin 2% vaginal cream to reduce the
incidence of spontaneous preterm birth in women with
an increased recurrence risk: A randomised placebo-con-
trolled double-blind trial. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 106: 652 –
657.

Verstraelen H, Verhelst R, Claeys G, De Backer E, Temmer-
man M, Vaneechoutte M. 2009. Longitudinal analysis
of the vaginal microﬂora in pregnancy suggests that
L. crispatus promotes the stability of the normal vaginal
microﬂora and that L. gasseri and/or L. iners are more
conducive to the occurrence of abnormal vaginal micro-
ﬂora. BMC Microbiol 9: 116.

Walther-Anto´ nio MRS, Jeraldo P, Berg Miller ME, Yeoman
CJ, Nelson KE, Wilson BA, White BA, Chia N, Creedon
DJ. 2014. Pregnancy’s stronghold on the vaginal micro-
biome. PLoS ONE 9: e98514.

Wang Q, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM, Cole JR. 2007. Naive Baye-
sian classiﬁer for rapid assignment of rRNA sequences

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

into the new bacterial taxonomy. Appl Environ Microbiol
73: 5261–5267.

Wang T, Cai G, Qiu Y, Fei N, Zhang M, Pang X, Jia W, Cai S,
Zhao L. 2012. Structural segregation of gut microbiota
between colorectal cancer patients and healthy volun-
teers. ISME J 6: 320– 329.

Wang X, Buhimschi CS, Temoin S, Bhandari V, Han YW,
Buhimschi IA. 2013. Comparative microbial analysis of
paired amniotic ﬂuid and cord blood from pregnancies
complicated by preterm birth and early-onset neonatal
sepsis. PLoS ONE 8: e56131.

Watts DH, Krohn MA, Hillier SL, Eschenbach DA. 1992. The
association of occult amniotic ﬂuid infection with gesta-
tional age and neonatal outcome among women in pre-
term labor. Obstet Gynecol 79: 351–357.

Wiesenfeld HC, Hillier SL, Krohn MA, Landers DV, Sweet
RL. 2003. Bacterial vaginosis is a strong predictor of Neis-
seria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis infection.
Clin Infect Dis 36: 663 –668.

Willing B, Halfvarson J, Dicksved J, Rosenquist M, Ja¨rnerot
G, Engstrand L, Tysk C, Jansson JK. 2009. Twin studies
reveal speciﬁc imbalances in the mucosa-associated mi-
crobiota of patients with ileal Crohn’s disease. Inﬂamm
Bowel Dis 15: 653– 660.

Wu X, Ma C, Han L, Nawaz M, Gao F, Zhang X, Yu P, Zhao C,
Li L, Zhou A, et al. 2010. Molecular characterisation of
the faecal microbiota in patients with type II diabetes.
Curr Microbiol 61: 69– 78.

Yee WH, Soraisham AS, Shah VS, Aziz K, Yoon W, Lee SK.
2012. Incidence and timing of presentation of necrotizing
enterocolitis in preterm infants. Pediatrics 129: e298–
304.

Zeldovich VB, Bakardjiev AI. 2012. Host defense and toler-
ance: Unique challenges in the placenta. PLoS Pathog 8:
e1002804.

Zhang W, Li F, Nie L. 2010. Integrating multiple “omics”
analysis for microbial biology: Application and method-
ologies. Microbiology 156: 287– 301.

Zhu W, Lomsadze A, Borodovsky M. 2010. Ab initio gene
identiﬁcation in metagenomic sequences. Nucleic Acids
Res 38: e132.

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

23

