4964 C . P . Z O L N I K E T A L .

(Kueneman et al. 2014), reptiles (Keenan et al. 2013),
birds (Roggenbuck et al. 2014) and mammalian carni-
vores (Menke et al. 2014). Among invertebrates, studies
of microbiome effects on insect behaviour (e.g. Weiss &
Aksoy 2011, are especially noteworthy given their
emphasis on aspects of the host’s biology other than
digestive physiology. Research on the microbiome of
ticks is of particular importance, considering the role
that many of these species play as pathogen vectors
and parasites of humans and other vertebrates.

Studies utilizing PCR ampliﬁcation of clones, coupled
with Sanger sequencing or denaturing gradient gel elec-
trophoresis, have attempted to explore internal micro-
bial communities or identify endosymbionts in tick
species (Noda et al. 1997; Schabereiter-Gurtner et al.
2003; Benson et al. 2004; Moreno et al. 2006; Clay et al.
2008; Van Overbeek et al. 2008; Heise et al. 2010). These
studies have provided valuable information as to the
general bacterial diversity and identity of common
internal bacteria and potential endosymbionts of some
tick species. However, cloning is of limited throughput
and requires a high amount of effort and cost to iden-
tify rare bacteria and assess relative abundances. High-
throughput
have
allowed for in-depth research on microbial community
composition and diversity, and inference of microbial
relationships (Hovatter et al. 2011; Costello et al. 2012).

technologies

sequencing

(HTS)

A preliminary report by the Institute of Medicine
Committee on Lyme Disease and Other Tick-Borne Dis-
eases examined the diversity of prokaryotes in three
tick species (Amblyomma americanum, Dermacentor vari-
abilis and Ixodes scapularis) using 454 pyrosequencing
technology (Clay & Fuqua 2010). Although the report
provided useful insight into the microbiomes of adults
of these three species, it primarily emphasized the over-
all gap in knowledge regarding the identity of microor-
ganisms and the roles that microbial communities play
in pathogen transmission, infectivity and pathogenicity
within tick vectors (Clay & Fuqua 2010). Since then,
studies using HTS technologies to classify microbiomes
in tick species have been conducted on Ixodes ricinus in
Italy (Carpi et al. 2011) and France (Vayssier-Taussat
et al.
2013); A. americanum, Amblyomma maculatum,
Rhipicephalus microplus and D. variabilis in the United
States (Yuan 2010; Andreotti et al. 2011; Hawlena et al.
2013; Menchaca et al. 2013; Budachetri et al. 2014; Pon-
nusamy et al. 2014; Rynkiewicz et al. 2015); I. ovatus,
I. persulcatus and Haemaphysalis ﬂava in Japan (Qiu et al.
2014); R. turanicus in Israel (Lalzar et al. 2012); and
I. persulcatus in China (Zhang et al. 2014).

Given the

importance of

the blacklegged tick
(I. scapularis) as a pathogen vector
in the United
States, responsible for >30 000 reported cases of Lyme
disease each year (CDC 2015), studies on its internal

microbial community have also been increasing in
recent years (Hawlena et al. 2013; Narasimhan et al.
2014; Rynkiewicz et al. 2015; Van Treuren et al. 2015).
Although the role of the blacklegged tick as a vector
the Lyme disease spirochete (Borrelia burgdorferi)
of
and the babesiosis protozoan (Babesia microti) has been
known since the late 1970s (Spielman 1976; Steere
et al. 1978; Spielman et al. 1979), its ability to transmit
Anaplasma phagocytophilum and Borrelia miyamotoi has
been known only for the past 15–20 years (Pancholi
et al. 1995; Scoles et al. 2001). The 2001 discovery of
B. miyamotoi
in blacklegged ticks (Scoles et al. 2001),
only recently determined to be a human pathogen
(Platonov et al. 2011; Krause et al. 2013), underscores
how little is currently known about
the variety of
microbial species occurring in this vector and the
potential for more of these species ultimately to be
identiﬁed as pathogens.

that

Studies

symbiotic

investigate

relationships
between internal microorganisms and I. scapularis have
focused on commonly studied human pathogens. For
example, infection of blacklegged ticks by A. phagocy-
tophilum (the causative agent of granulocytic anaplas-
mosis in humans) has been shown to induce protein
expression that increases cold tolerance and, depend-
ing on weather patterns, may aid in tick survival
(Neelakanta et al. 2010). Furthermore,
infection with
B. burgdorferi has been shown to affect questing beha-
viour and movement of
this tick, possibly affecting
survival and/or pathogen transmission (Lefcort &
Durden 1996). However, little is known regarding the
range of microbes the tick comes in contact with or
maintains throughout
its entire life cycle. This tick
experiences a 2-year life cycle, feeding once per life
stage (larva, nymph, and adult) on vertebrate blood.
These bloodmeals are necessary for
the immature
stages (larva, nymph) to moult to the next stage and
for adult females to lay eggs (Needham & Teel 1991;
there are numerous opportunities
Fish 1993). Thus,
for this tick to acquire microbes either during any of
its three bloodmeals or possibly from the environ-
ment, as it spends 98% of its life cycle off-host in a
forested setting (Needham & Teel 1991; Fish 1993).
for additional symbioses
Consequently,
I. scapularis may be
involving microbes that beneﬁt
quite high.

the potential

Most studies of tick microbiomes have focused on
whole ticks (Yuan 2010; Carpi et al. 2011; Hawlena et al.
2013; Menchaca et al. 2013; Vayssier-Taussat et al. 2013;
Narasimhan et al. 2014; Ponnusamy et al. 2014; Zhang
et al. 2014; Rynkiewicz et al. 2015; Van Treuren et al.
2015), while only a few have examined speciﬁc tissues
and organs (Andreotti et al. 2011; Budachetri et al. 2014;
Qiu et al. 2014); all have been limited to one or two

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

developmental stages. This is the ﬁrst study to assess
the bacterial community proﬁle of blacklegged ticks
across all developmental stages (larvae, nymphs, and
adults). Our comparison of the microbial community in
ﬁeld-collected larvae and freshly hatched,
laboratory-
reared, unfed larvae allowed us to examine the tick
microbiome prior to exposure to the ﬁeld environment,
thus examining the potential for transovarial transmis-
sion of bacteria. In addition to investigating the internal
microbial communities found within whole ticks, we
focused on the microbiomes within two speciﬁc tissues
in adult female ticks, salivary glands and the midgut,
as these are important for maintenance and transmis-
sion of many tick-borne pathogens associated with
I. scapularis (Spielman et al. 1987; De Silva & Fikrig
1995; Telford et al. 1996; Piesman et al. 2001; Liu et al.
2011).

A more comprehensive approach to the tick micro-
biome, exploring all developmental stages and speciﬁc
organs, will allow for a greater understanding of the
bacteria that share the same internal environment with
the heavily studied pathogenic species that have domi-
nated previous research efforts.

Materials and methods

Tick collection

Host-seeking blacklegged ticks were collected in the
summer and fall of 2014 at Fordham University’s Bio-
logical Field Station in Armonk, NY, an area where
blacklegged ticks are highly prevalent
(Diuk-Wasser
et al. 2006, 2012). Nymphs were collected in June and
July, larvae in August and adult females and males in
October and November, corresponding to each life
stage’s peak activity season (Fish 1993). Ticks were col-
lected by dragging a 1-m2 cloth along the forest ﬂoor in
randomly selected 20-m transects. After each transect,
ticks were removed from the cloth, placed into a glass
vial and brought back to the laboratory for taxonomic
and life stage identiﬁcation before being stored at
(cid:1)80 °C until further processing.

To obtain freshly hatched larvae, engorged female
blacklegged ticks were collected from hunter-killed
white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) in November
2013. Deer were harvested in Bedford, NY (~16 km from
Armonk, NY), and were examined for ticks at a butcher
shop the same day. Engorged females were placed sepa-
rately into individual culture tubes and stored in an incu-
bator at 20 °C and a 12:12 [L:D]-h photoperiod until they
laid eggs. Eggs were transferred to a sterile vial and kept
in the same incubator until they hatched, at which time
the new larvae were sacriﬁced immediately by placing
them in (cid:1)80 °C and stored until processed.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

M I C R O B I O M E O F B L A C K L E G G E D T I C K S 4965

DNA isolation

All laboratory procedures were performed under a lam-
inar ﬂow hood (AirClean Systems)
to ensure that
microorganisms from the surrounding environment did
not contaminate the samples; negative controls were
used throughout. Prior to DNA isolation, each tick was
surface-sterilized in three washes of 90% ethanol fol-
lowed by one wash of sterile, nuclease-free, deionized
water to remove any external/surface microbes that
might be present from plant or soil matter. Whole ticks
were grouped into three pools of 10 individuals each,
for the following ﬁve classiﬁcations: freshly hatched lab-
oratory-reared larvae and ﬁeld-collected larvae (here-
larvae, respectively, for
after termed ‘lab’ and ‘ﬁeld’
brevity), ﬁeld-collected nymphs, ﬁeld-collected adult
females and ﬁeld-collected adult males. A total of 30
ticks per life stage were tested. Pooling was carried out
to maximize microbial yield and provide a representa-
tive sample of microbial taxonomic diversity for each
life stage.

ticks were bisected and adult

Larvae were physically disrupted using Lysing
Matrix S (MP Biomedicals) on a Benchmark Bead Blas-
ter 24 (Benchmark Scientiﬁc) for 3 min at 4 m/s. Nym-
ticks were
phal
quadrisected using a sterile scalpel blade,
following
recent work by our group (Ammazzalorso et al. 2015).
An additional 30 adult
females were dissected to
remove midguts and salivary glands. Organs were then
combined into three pools of 10 per organ type. DNA
isolation was performed using the DNeasy Blood and
Tissue kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s pro-
tocol, with the addition of an overnight incubation at
56 °C in ATL buffer and proteinase K, and a ﬁnal elu-
tion in 100 lL of ddH2O after a 5 min, room tempera-
ture incubation step.

16S rRNA PCR ampliﬁcation

PCR was conducted for the hypervariable regions V3
and V4 of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene using primers
Bakt_341F and Bakt_805R,
following Illumina’s 16S
Metagenomic Sequencing Library Preparation protocol
(Illumina) and a review by Klindworth et al. 
This primer set, resulting in a 450- to 550-bp PCR pro-
duct, was determined to be the best candidate among
512 sets tested in terms of domain and phylum cover-
age for use in 16S rRNA bacterial sequencing (Klind-
worth et al. 2013).
Illumina adaptor sequences were
attached as tails to the PCR primers. The PCRs were
performed in triplicate with 25 lL Phusion High-Fide-
lity PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), 2.5 lL
(ﬁnal concentration of 0.5 mM) for both primers, 15 lL
nuclease-free PCR-grade water and 5 lL of DNA

4966 C . P . Z O L N I K E T A L .

template. Based on Illumina’s protocol and the out-
comes of preliminary PCR optimization procedures, the
thermal cycling conditions consisted of an initial denat-
uration at 98 °C for 3 min, followed by 30 cycles of
98 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 30 s, fol-
lowed by a ﬁnal extension for 5 min at 72 °C on a
Techne Prime Elite Thermal Cycler (Bibby Scientiﬁc).
The three PCR product replicates for each sample pool
were combined before running 10 lL of each combined
pooled product on a 1.5% w/v agarose gel at 120 V for
40 min. The ~460-bp bands were excised from the gel
and puriﬁed using QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qia-
gen), with elution in 40 lL of nuclease-free, PCR-grade
ddH2O.

thus

samples

allowing all

Library preparation. Library preparation of the puriﬁed
PCR products was performed using Illumina’s Nex-
tera XT Index Kit, providing unique dual indices for
each sample,
to be
sequenced on the same Illumina MiSeq reagent car-
tridge and ﬂow cell. Prior to indexing, a supplemen-
tary quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed to
determine the optimal number of cycles for the index-
ing reaction. A subset of
the PCR products for all
sample pools and the one negative were indexed
using 25 lL KAPA SYBR FAST qPCR Master Mix
(Kapa Biosystems), 10 lL sdH2O, 5 lL Nextera XT
Index 1 Primer, 5 lL Nextera XT Index 2 Primer and
5 lL puriﬁed PCR product. This subset was run on
an ABI 7300 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosys-
tems, Inc.) with an initial denaturation of 95 °C for
3 min followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 10 s and
55 °C for 30 s, and a plate read after each cycle. The
optimal cycle number for each sample was deter-
mined based on the number of cycles needed for the
qPCR ampliﬁcation curve to begin to peak.

Samples were indexed using 25 lL KAPA HiFi HotS-
tart Ready Mix (Kapa Biosystems), 10 lL sdH2O, 5 lL
Nextera XT Index 1 Primer, 5 lL Nextera XT Index 2
Primer and 5 lL puriﬁed PCR product as suggested by
Illumina. The thermal cycling conditions for the index-
ing PCR consisted of an initial denaturation at 95 °C for
3 min, followed by the optimal number of cycles of
98 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 30 s on a
Techne Prime Elite Thermal Cycler. Indexed amplicons
were puriﬁed with Agencourt AMPure XP beads (Beck-
man Coulter Genomics) following Illumina’s protocol.
The indexed and puriﬁed amplicons were quantiﬁed
using a High Sensitivity dsDNA Assay on a QUBIT 2.0
Fluorometer (Life Technologies) with 3 lL of gDNA.
The size integrity of the amplicons was validated on a
(Agilent Technologies). Equimolar
2100 Bioanalyzer
amplicon quantities were pooled, denatured and com-
loading
bined with denatured 20% PhiX at

a

concentration of 5.5 pM. High-throughput amplicon
sequencing was conducted on a MiSeq instrument (Illu-
mina) using the v3 Reagent Kit 600-cycle format and
2 9 300 bp paired-end reads at
the Epige-
nomics Core Facility of Weill Cornell Medicine (New
York, NY, USA).

Data analysis. The sequence processing workﬂow is
depicted in Fig. S1 (Supporting information). Sequences
were demultiplexed and converted to fastq ﬁles in CASAVA
V1.8.2 FASTQ Filter (Illumina) before removing reads that
did not pass the Illumina chastity ﬁlter using ‘fastq_illu-
mina_ﬁlter 0.1’
(http://cancan.cshl.edu/labmembers/
gordon/fastq_illumina_ﬁlter). The USEARCH pipeline
was used to merge the ﬁltered fastq ﬁles with a minimum
overlap of 10 nucleotides and length between 250 and
500 bp (Edgar 2010). Merged fastq ﬁles were ﬁltered
using USEARCH to remove sequences with >0.5 pre-
= 0.5), as
dicted estimated errors per nucleotide (Emax
well as removing the ﬁrst 50 nucleotides to trim indices
and primer sequences (Edgar 2010). After dereplication,
sequences were sorted according to abundance, opera-
tional taxonomic units (OTUs) were clustered de novo
using UPARSE (Edgar 2013) with a minimum pairwise
identity threshold of 97% (Stackebrandt & Goebel 1994;
Huse et al. 2010; Kunin et al. 2010), and singletons were
removed. The UPARSE pipeline includes de novo chi-
mera removal, followed by referenced-based chimera
removal using the UCHIME algorithm and the GOLD
16S rRNA gene database (Reddy et al. 2014). The ﬁnal set
of sequences was submitted to NCBI under SRA submis-
sion SUB1534507.

The OTU table was processed in QIIME (MACQIIME
V1.9.0) (Caporaso et al. 2010b; Kuczynski et al. 2012).
OTUs were assigned taxonomy using the RDP CLASSIFIER
(Wang et al. 2007) against the Greengenes 16S rRNA
database v13_8 (McDonald et al. 2012; Werner et al.
2012), and relative OTU abundances were summarized
from phylum to genus.
across
Representative sequences were aligned and ﬁltered
using PYNAST (Caporaso et al. 2010a), and a phylogenetic
tree was estimated from the alignment with FASTTREE
(Price et al. 2009). OTU tables in BIOM format were
accessioned to Dryad (

taxonomic

levels

To test for sufﬁcient sequencing coverage, the condi-
tional uncovered probability was calculated for all sam-
ples with a conﬁdence interval of 0.95. Multiple
rarefactions were performed in QIIME with 100 iterations
every 1000 sequences without replacement from a depth
of 1000 to 100 000 sequences. Sufﬁcient sequencing
depth was determined based on rarefaction curves for
observed number of OTUs. In this study, four measures
of a-diversity were calculated including the observed
number of OTUs, Shannon’s diversity index, Simpson’s

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

index and Faith’s phylogenetic diversity (PD) measure.
The observed number of OTUs is a species richness
estimator, while PD takes into account phylogenetic
information (Faith 1992). Both the Shannon’s index and
Simpson’s index include abundance information, with
Shannon’s giving more weight per individual to rare
OTUs than common ones, while Simpson’s is more sen-
sitive to changes in the dominant taxa (Hill et al. 2003).
All four measures were calculated based on sequences
rareﬁed at a depth of 100 000 among life stage cate-
gories and a depth of 200 000 for whole adult females,
female midguts and salivary glands based on the lowest
minimum sequence depth for each category. Due to
small sample size of replicates, descriptive statistics are
presented for comparisons of a-diversity measures. Box-
plots were created in R v3.1.2 (R Core Team 2014).

phylogenetically

informed weighted

b-Diversity was calculated using jackkniﬁng (use of
subsets of available data) at a rarefaction depth of
100 000 sequences for developmental stage categories
and a depth of 200 000 for whole adult females and
their organs in QIIME. The rareﬁed data were used to cal-
culate
and
unweighted UniFrac measures (Lozupone & Knight
2005). The adonis function, that performs a permuta-
tional multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA),
was used, with 999 permutations, to determine the per
cent variation explained by developmental stages, as
well as
size for both
weighted and unweighted UniFrac distance matrices.
Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) was used to com-
pare differences among groups of samples based on
both UniFrac distance matrices.

the signiﬁcance and effect

After analysing the taxonomic summaries for all sam-
ple pools, the genus Rickettsia was found to be the most
abundant. To gauge the identity and potential diversity
of Rickettsia species and strains in blacklegged ticks, we
carried out a phylogeny-informed assessment. First, we
isolated 4 315 478 sequences matching the genus Rick-
ettsia using the ‘ﬁlter_fasta.py’ script in QIIME and col-
lapsed them into 91 519 unique sequences using FASTX-
(Gordon 2011). We aligned those unique
TOOLKIT
sequences to an alignment of 241 full-length, reference
16S rRNA Rickettsia sequences retrieved from GenBank,
while accounting for their phylogenetic relationships.
This was achieved by aligning the 241 reference
sequences in MAFFT (Katoh & Standley 2013) with
default parameters
closely related nucleotide
sequences. Then, a maximum-likelihood (ML) phyloge-
netic tree was estimated in RAXML v8.2.8 (Stamatakis
2014) using the general time-reversible nucleotide sub-
stitution model and among-site rate heterogeneity mod-
elled by the Γ distribution and four discrete rate
categories (Yang 1994). The ﬁnal alignment employed
the reference alignment and tree along with the shorter

for

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

M I C R O B I O M E O F B L A C K L E G G E D T I C K S 4967

sequences and was carried out in PAPARA v2.5 (Berger &
Stamatakis 2011). The reference ML tree and the large
alignment of 91 760 sequences were used to place the
shorter sequences onto internal, that is internode, or
external, that is terminal, branches on the reference ML
tree. This was carried out using the evolutionary place-
ment analysis (EPA) procedure in RAXML. In an effort to
reach a good trade-off between speed and accuracy, we
restricted the number of candidate branches for place-
ment to 10% of the total 479 branches using a heuristic.
The phylogenetic placements were visualized on the
iToL webserver (Letunic & Bork 2016)
(http://itol.
embl.de). The PAPARA alignment and the JPLACE tree
10.5061/
accessioned to Dryad (doi:
ﬁle were
dryad.mt6m0).

Results

A total of 21 samples – three pools for each of the ﬁve
life stage categories (lab-reared larvae, ﬁeld-collected
larvae, ﬁeld-collected nymphs, ﬁeld-collected adult
females, and ﬁeld-collected adult males), and three
pools for female salivary glands and female midguts –
generated 10 896 297 raw reads on one Illumina MiSeq
ﬂow cell. A total of 6 908 532 sequences passed ﬁlter
and were assigned taxonomy. This resulted in 116 941–
452 654 (mean = 328 977, SD = 96 960) high-quality,
merged sequences per sample (Table S1, Supporting
information). The negative control resulted in <0.001%
(n = 606) of all sequences and was excluded from fur-
ther analysis. The conditional uncovered probability of
the samples, on average,
indicated a high likelihood
that over 99.9% of the bacterial taxa in the samples was
covered. Rarefaction curves from a depth of 1000 to
100 000 sequences indicated sufﬁcient sequencing cov-
erage, as demonstrated by observed OTU accumulation
curves reaching a plateau (Fig. S2, Supporting informa-
tion).

Developmental stages

In all, 1652 distinct OTUs were clustered across the ﬁve
developmental stage classiﬁcations. Lab-reared larvae
had the lowest a-diversity across measures, followed by
adult females (Table S2, Supporting information, Fig. 1).
Field-collected larvae, nymphs and males exhibited sim-
ilar levels of a-diversity, but males contained the richest
bacterial communities when abundance was taken into
consideration (Table S2, Supporting information, Fig. 1).
OTUs were assigned to 332 taxa (Table S3, Supporting
information).

Proteobacteria represented the phylum with the high-
est relative abundances across all develop-
mental stage sample pools. The remaining OTUs were

Larvae  
(Lab) 

Larvae  
(Field) 

Nymphs

Males

Females

Larvae  
(Lab) 

Larvae  
(Field) 

Nymphs

Males

Females

(B)

50

40

30

20

10

0

Phylogenetic diversity

(D)

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Simpson's index

4968 C . P . Z O L N I K E T A L .

(A)

800

600

400

200

0

Observed OTUs

(C)

4

3

2

1

0

Shannon’s index

Larvae  
(Lab) 

Larvae  
(Field) 

Nymphs

Males

Females

Nymphs

Males

Females

Larvae  
(Lab) 

Larvae  
(Field) 

Fig. 1 Measures of a-diversity for each development stage. Each a-diversity measure (A), observed number of OTUs, (B) Faith’s phy-
logenetic diversity, (C) Shannon’s index and (D) Simpson’s index were calculated at a rarefaction depth of 100 000 sequences.

classiﬁed into the phyla Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria,
Armatimonadetes, Bacteroidetes, Chlamydiae, Chlo-
roﬂexi, Cyanobacteria, Firmicutes, Gemmatimonadetes,
Planctomycetes, Spirochaetae, Verrucomicrobia, the can-
didate phyla BRC1, FBP, GN02, OD1, TM6, TM7, WPS-
2 and Thermi, or were unassigned at the phylum level.
At the genus level, Rickettsia had the highest relative
abundance across all developmental stage
samples. In all, 13 genera (and one family-level taxon)
were present with a relative abundance of 1% or greater
in at least one sample . The relative abundance
of non-Rickettsia taxa increased along developmental
stages (i.e. larvae to nymphs to adults) with the excep-
tion of adult females, which displayed the highest rela-
tive abundance of Rickettsia of all ﬁeld-collected life
stages . Freshly hatched larvae also had a high
relative abundance of Rickettsia . Seven taxa were
found in all female and all freshly hatched larvae sam-
ples (matching to the genera Rickettsia, Phyllobacterium,
Burkholderia, Sphingomonas, Pseudomonas and the families
Comamonadaceae
and Oxalobacteraceae); however,
females harboured more observed OTUs than freshly
hatched larvae . Adult males had the lowest pro-
portion of Rickettsia and thus had more genera
with a relative abundance of ≥1% of any developmental
stage. Wolbachia was the genus with the second highest

relative abundance in males (mean = 8.4%) and was
found in all other life stages, but not in all samples,
with a low relative abundance (<0.1%). All ﬁeld-col-
lected developmental stages contained Sphingomonas,
Methylobacterium, Hymenobacter, Pseudomonas, Rhizobium,
Agrobacterium, Luteibacter, Mycobacterium and Curtobac-
terium. Both Borrelia and Anaplasma were only found in
nymphs and adults.

across

Bacterial

F = 9.33,

R2 = 0.79,

communities

P = 0.001).

the developmental
stages were signiﬁcantly different according to a PER-
MANOVA (unweighted F = 4.16, R2 = 0.62, P = 0.001,
weighted
The
unweighted UniFrac (which does not account for abun-
dance data) PCoA explained 41.78% (Axis 1) and
12.03% (Axis 2) of the variation among developmental
stages and showed clustering separation for lab-raised
larvae and females . The weighted UniFrac
PCoA explained 82.36% (Axis 1) and 9.55% (Axis 2) of
the variation, with two male
clustering
together .

samples

We placed 91 519 sequences on a phylogenetic tree
composed of 241 full-length 16S rRNA reference
sequences using the EPA ML procedure. The vast
majority (i.e. >89 000) of our sequences were placed on
the Ixodes tick endosymbiont clade, and its component
endosymbionts
subclades

composed of

rickettsial

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

M I C R O B I O M E O F B L A C K L E G G E D T I C K S 4969

Curtobacterium 

Enterobacteriaceae (family) 

Mycobacterium 

Luteibacter 

Agrobacterium 

Rhizobium 

Pseudomonas 

Hymenobacter 

Methylobacterium 

Sphingomonas 

Wolbachia 

Borrelia 

Anaplasma 

Rickettsia 

Larvae (Lab) 

Larvae (Field) 

Nymphs 

Males 

Females 

Fig. 2 Relative abundance of genera occurring in whole ticks pooled by developmental stage. Only taxa with a relative abundance
≥1% in at least one sample were considered. Taxonomic classiﬁcation includes genus when possible. Rickettsia represents the most
abundant genus for all samples, but decreased in relative abundance from larvae to nymphs to adult males. The notable exception is
adult females with a high relative abundance of Rickettsia.

[Colour ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

(B)

1.0 

0.9 

0.8 

0.7 

0.6 

0.5 

0.4 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0.0 

Relative abundance 

(A)

Larvae (Lab) 

Larvae (Field) 

Nymphs 

Males 

Females 

Fig. 3 Principal coordinate analysis of b-diversity measures for all developmental stages. A sequence depth of 100 000 was used. (A)
Unweighted Unifrac distances, abundance is ignored; (B) weighted Unifrac distances, abundance is considered. Conﬁdence ellipsoids
around samples display degree of variation.

isolated from Ixodes scapularis ticks, their relatives in the
western U.S.A. I. paciﬁcus and the European tick I. rici-
nus. Fewer sequences in the order of a few hundred

were placed on other clades related to Ixodes ticks, for
example Rickettsia monacensis (Simser et al. 2002), non-
Ixodes ticks, that is Rickettsia sibirica found primarily in

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

4970 C . P . Z O L N I K E T A L .

Dermacentor and Haemaphysalis ticks (Piesman & Gage
2004), Rickettsia amblyommii isolated from the American
lone star tick Amblyomma americanum (Stromdahl et al.
2008), Rickettsia conorii and Rickettsia rhipicephali isolated
from the brown dog tick Rhipicephalus sanguineus (Hayes
& Burgdorfer 1979; Parola et al. 2009). Overall, short
sequences could not be unambiguously placed on single
branches, but were rather assigned along a clade, which
lends a certain degree of conﬁdence. Global placement
uncertainty was elevated, as captured by the EPA’s
entropy measure (mean = 0.7767, SD = 0.0699). The
placement of our sequences on the reference tree can be
explored interactively on the iToL webserver (http://
itol.embl.de/tree/286234201192691468834200).

Whole female adult ticks, salivary glands and midguts

A total of 392 OTUs was found across whole females,
female salivary glands and female midguts. At a rar-
efaction depth of 200 000 sequences, whole females
exhibited the highest a-diversity for observed number
of OTUs and phylogenetic diversity, with female mid-
guts exhibiting the lowest measures . However,
female salivary glands exhibited the highest a-diversity

out of all three categories for both Shannon’s and Simp-
son’s indices .

Rickettsia was the most abundant genus found in
whole females and their organs. Other than that, no
bacterial genera were found with a relative abundance
≥3%, although 47 taxonomic classiﬁcations – genus
being the lowest – were present. In salivary glands, the
predominant genera after Rickettsia were Anaplasma,
Borrelia and Wolbachia, with average relative abundances
of 12.5%, 7.2% and 1.9%, respectively. Anaplasma and
Borrelia were also the most prominent genera found in
midgut tissue, after Rickettsia, but at low average rela-
tive abundance (0.3% and 0.8%, respectively; Fig. S3,
Supporting information).

Whole females and female organs differed signiﬁ-
cantly for both unweighted (F = 5.044, R2 = 0.63,
P = 0.01) and weighted UniFrac measures (F = 2.04,
R2 = 0.41, P = 0.001) according to a PERMANOVA. Distinct
clustering was observed for each organ and the whole
tick when abundance data were not considered (un-
weighted UniFrac PCoA) explaining 39.53% (Axis 1)
and 22.35% (Axis 2) of the variation . Cluster-
ing of whole females and midguts away from salivary
abundance
gland

observed when

samples was

Whole females 

Female salivary glands   Female midguts

Whole females 

Female salivary glands   Female midguts

(B)

20

15

10

5

0

Phylogenetic diversity

(D)

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Simpson's index

(A)

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

Observed OTUs

(C)

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Shannon’s index

Whole females 

Female salivary glands   Female midguts

Whole females 

Female salivary glands   Female midguts

Fig. 4 Measures of a-diversity for whole female ticks, midguts and salivary glands. Each a-diversity measure (A) observed number
of OTUs, (B) Faith’s phylogenetic diversity, (C) Shannon’s index and (D) Simpson’s index were calculated at a rarefaction depth of
200 000 sequences.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

(A)

(B)

M I C R O B I O M E O F B L A C K L E G G E D T I C K S 4971

Whole females 

Female salivary glands 

Female midguts

Fig. 5 Principal coordinate analysis of b-diversity measures in females. Measures were rareﬁed at a depth of 200 000 sequences. (A)
Unweighted Unifrac distances, abundance is ignored. (B) Weighted Unifrac distances, abundance is considered. Conﬁdence ellipsoids
around samples display degree of variation. [Colour ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

information was considered in a weighted UniFrac
PCoA, which explained 93.1% (Axis 1) and 5.14% (Axis
2) of the variation .

Discussion

This study is the ﬁrst to examine the bacterial micro-
biome across all developmental stages of the black-
legged tick, the most important disease vector in the
United States. This is also the ﬁrst study of tick micro-
biomes, to our knowledge, to target both V3 and V4
hypervariable regions of
the 16S rRNA gene with
longer 300 9 300 bp paired-end reads, thus enhancing
our ability to establish OTUs and their taxonomic iden-
tity. Many of the previous studies on tick microbiome
have used Roche’s 454 pyrosequencing technology
(Yuan 2010; Hawlena et al. 2013; Budachetri et al. 2014;
Narasimhan et al. 2014; Ponnusamy et al. 2014; Qiu et al.
2014; Rynkiewicz et al. 2015) that has a lower read
throughput yield (most studies produced 2500–8000
sequences/sample), very likely limiting the ability to
sequence rare bacterial taxa and reducing the rarefac-
tion level for diversity analyses.

Our results support previous ﬁndings of Proteobacte-
ria being the most abundant phylum in tick species
(Yuan 2010; Hawlena et al. 2013; Narasimhan et al. 2014;
Rynkiewicz et al. 2015; Van Treuren et al. 2015), with
Rickettsia occurring in the highest proportion in

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

blacklegged ticks (Moreno et al. 2006; Yuan 2010; Haw-
lena et al. 2013; Rynkiewicz et al. 2015; Van Treuren et al.
2015). Rickettsia are obligate, intracellular bacteria associ-
ated with eukaryotes,
including arthropods (Perlman
et al. 2006). Although many Rickettsia species are non-
pathogenic (Ahantarig et al. 2013), a number of them are
including Rickettsia rick-
known tick-borne pathogens,
ettsii, R. conorii, R. sibirica, R. japonica, R. australis and
R. akari (Azad & Beard 1998). The Rickettsia endosym-
biont of I. scapularis, presumed to be nonpathogenic, has
been identiﬁed in this tick in previous studies (Noda
et al. 1997; Benson et al. 2004; Moreno et al. 2006; Gille-
spie et al. 2012; Kurtti et al. 2015) and is believed to be
the only Rickettsia species found in this tick (Gillespie
et al. 2012; Kurtti et al. 2015). Recently, the name Rick-
ettsia buchneri has been proposed for this species (Kurtti
et al. 2015). The vast majority of our sequences were
assigned to the rickettsial clade isolated from Ixodes ticks
using a phylogenetic tree-guided procedure. Although
individual short sequences could not be assigned to sin-
gle tree branches with full conﬁdence, they were mostly
assigned to neighbouring branches within a clade of sis-
ter endosymbionts isolated from the same tick species.
We interpret this as an indication of sufﬁcient evolution-
ary informativeness
identiﬁcation of our
sequences at the clade level grosso modo, combined with
the observation of greater divergence patterns of this
locus in Rickettsia.

the

for

4972 C . P . Z O L N I K E T A L .

bacterial

community. More

We found similar a-diversity for ﬁeld-collected larvae
and nymphs, compared to freshly hatched larvae, for
all a-diversity measures . This implies that expo-
sure to the natural environment has a strong effect on
the microbiome, as the lab-raised larvae with no expo-
sure to the tick’s natural habitat contained a much less
diverse
interestingly,
nymphs that have taken a single bloodmeal were found
to harbour bacterial communities with diversities simi-
lar to those of ﬁeld-collected larvae, a life stage that has
not yet fed on a host. This suggests that host bloodmeal
has limited inﬂuence on the overall diversity of the bac-
terial community within these ticks, an interesting ﬁnd-
ing, as host bloodmeals are the only known source of
pathogens transmitted to ticks. A recent study by Ryn-
kiewicz et al.
found a signiﬁcant difference
between the bacterial communities of I. scapularis and
D. variabilis and their shared host bloodmeal source.
Further investigation of the inﬂuence of host bloodmeal
source on tick bacterial communities is warranted,
given the role that reservoir hosts play in maintaining
and transmitting tick-borne pathogens to feeding ticks.



than males

communities

The increase in the observed number of OTUs from
lab larvae to ﬁeld larvae, nymphs and adult males, as
well as the lower number of observed OTUs in adult
females, is concomitant with the relative abundance of
Rickettsia species throughout the life cycle. As Rickettsia
represented over 99% of the taxa in lab larvae and stea-
dily decreased to an average of 66% in adult males
throughout development, it seems likely that other bac-
teria replace Rickettsia. However, despite similar envi-
ronmental exposure, including the time off-host and the
number and types of host bloodmeals, host-seeking
adult male and female blacklegged ticks exhibited
markedly divergent bacterial communities from one
another. Female ticks harboured more homogeneous
bacterial
. A less
diverse microbiome in females has also been recently
documented in both the blacklegged tick (Van Treuren
et al. 2015) and the lone star tick, Amblyomma ameri-
canum (Ponnusamy et al. 2014). An earlier study identi-
ﬁed Rickettsia in only half of their I. scapularis nymphs
examined (n = 10) compared to all of the larval samples
(n = 10) and concluded that the decrease in Rickettsia
between the larval and nymphal stages was due to the
possibility that male ticks lose Rickettsia species through
each subsequent moult (Noda et al. 1997). This was sup-
ported by the lack of Rickettsia in the testes of adult
males and its presence in adult female ovaries (Noda
et al. 1997). However, although we found relatively less
Rickettsia in males compared to females, our study indi-
cates that Rickettsia sp. are found in whole I. scapularis
adults of both sexes, a ﬁnding also recently reported
(Van Treuren et al. 2015). If all external abiotic and

biotic interactions are the same between sexes of the
adult stage, it is plausible that internal factors such as
hormonal mechanisms leading to sexual maturation
and dimorphism in the adult stage may be driving
these sex-speciﬁc differences in bacterial community
diversity.

Although a recent study by Narasimhan et al. 
explored the microbiome of two different cohorts of lar-
vae hatched and reared in the lab (reared in sterile con-
ditions or so-called ‘normal’ containers), our study is
the ﬁrst to compare lab-hatched to ﬁeld-collected larvae.
The decrease in bacterial a-diversity observed in adult
females was also observed in freshly hatched, lab-raised
larvae. These larvae, having no exposure to the ﬁeld,
presumably contain only bacteria that were transovari-
ally transmitted. The high relative abundance of Rick-
ettsia observed in females (mean = 97.8%) was observed
at an even higher relative abundance in the lab-raised
larvae  potentially due to certain bacteria found
in females that are not transferred to their offspring.
Transovarial transmission of Rickettsia has been detected
in a number of tick species (Macaluso et al. 2001, 2002;
Horta et al. 2006; Perlman et al. 2006), including I. scapu-
laris (Narasimhan et al. 2014), which our results sup-
port. It is possible that environmental bacteria present
on the tick’s cuticle persisted into the DNA isolation
procedure, despite sterilization with ethanol. However,
this is unlikely, due to the large differences in Rickettsia
present in lab-raised larvae compared to ﬁeld-collected
larvae. Furthermore, if bacteria did persist on the tick
cuticle following ethanol washes, this would have been
observed across all tick developmental stages, including
adult females, which was manifestly not the case.

for

species,

tick-borne

example, were

In addition to Rickettsia, 12 bacterial genera and one
family-level taxon were found in at least 1% of ﬁeld-
collected developmental stages . Borrelia and
Anaplasma
found in
nymphs and adults. Within blacklegged ticks, known
B. burgdorferi
and
pathogens
human
A. phagocytophilum are not
transovarially transmitted
(Hodzic et al. 1998; Rollend et al. 2013), nor are they
believed to be acquired in any manner other than via
bloodmeals. Borrelia miyomotoi can be vertically trans-
mitted (Barbour et al. 2009; Rollend et al. 2013); how-
ever, the prevalence of this pathogen tends to be low
in natural populations (Barbour et al. 2009; Tokarz
et al. 2010), which may be why Borrelia species were
In male
not detected in our ﬁeld-caught
I. scapularis,
the average relative abundance of Wol-
bachia was 8.4%, but remained very low (<0.1%) in all
earlier developmental stages and adult females. Wol-
bachia is an invertebrate-associated genus of Rickettsi-
aceae endosymbionts that has radiated into various
(Noda et al. 1997). Many supergroup
supergroups

larvae.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

if any,

members have been shown to cause reproductive
manipulation in various arthropods (Perlman et al.
2006), while others engage in mutualistic relationships
with their hosts, such as wCle of supergroup F, an
obligate nutritional mutualist
in the hematophagous
bed bug Cimex lectularius (Hosokawa et al. 2010; Nikoh
et al. 2014). The inﬂuence that Wolbachia has on tick
species,
is poorly understood. Other bacterial
taxa (>1% relative abundance) found in at least one
sample were taxa that have species that are found in
water and soil habitats (Conn 1948; Janssen 2006). It is
likely that ﬁeld-collected ticks acquired these bacteria
in their host-seeking environment, where they spend
the majority of their life cycle, potentially via spiracle,
oral or genital openings (adults only), as opposed to
during a bloodmeal. Variations in tick microbiome
across different ﬁeld locations or geographic regions
may exist owing to differences in environmental bacte-
ria. Furthermore,
clustering of adult
females and freshly hatched larvae in the unweighted
UniFrac PCoA is likely due to the lower number of
OTUs present in these life stages , while the
more divergent cluster of males in the weighted Uni-
Frac PCoA is most likely due to the higher relative
abundance of non-Rickettsia genera compared to the
other life stages .

the distinct

and phylogenetic diversity

Both a- and b-diversity measures differed between
whole females,
female salivary glands and female
midguts. Both organs displayed lower a-diversity than
the entire female for measures of observed number of
, while
OTUs
female salivary glands displayed a higher a-diversity
than midguts or even the entire tick for Shannon’s
and Simpson’s index . This is due to these lat-
ter measures taking evenness into account and the
increased relative abundance of Borrelia and Ana-
plasma,
in the salivary gland samples. Furthermore,
the unique clustering displayed by all
three sample
the differences in taxa
types  suggests that
for each of these samples represent unique signatures.
When abundance was taken into account with the
weighted UniFrac distances , the midguts and
whole female ticks tended to cluster together, away
from the more divergent salivary gland samples, pre-
sumably due to the >98% relative abundance of Rick-
ettsia species in these two sample types. The higher
average relative abundance of Anaplasma and
Borrelia found in the salivary glands compared
to the midguts (<1% average relative abundance for
both bacterial genera) may be due to differences in
tissue tropism of known pathogens within these two
genera. B. burgdorferi spirochetes are localized in the
midgut (Piesman et al. 2001) and then migrate to the
salivary glands during tick blood feeding (Spielman

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

M I C R O B I O M E O F B L A C K L E G G E D T I C K S 4973

et al. 1987; De Silva & Fikrig 1995), while A. phagocy-
tophilum resides in the salivary glands (Telford et al.
1996) and then replicates during tick blood feeding
(Liu et al. 2011).

Overall,

this study successfully identiﬁed bacterial
genera and assessed bacterial diversity across all devel-
opmental stages of the blacklegged tick. We used pools
of ticks to examine large numbers of ticks for each
developmental stage, while maintaining a high sequenc-
ing depth for each group. Although pooling may
obscure variations between individual ticks, it remains
a solid strategy against PCR biases.

Our results indicate that much of the bacterial diver-
sity observed in these ticks is not acquired via a
bloodmeal, but transmission from female to offspring
(Rickettsia), as well as environmental acquisition, plays
important roles in shaping the microbial community
within I. scapularis. Further studies exploring the bacte-
rial composition in nymphal and adult stages are war-
ranted to understand when the decrease in bacterial
diversity observed in adult females occurs. Given the
hormonal changes that accompany female maturation
and subsequent egg production (Rees 2004), it is con-
ceivable that such changes alter the internal environ-
ment enough to signiﬁcantly restrict the growth and/
or survival of a large segment of the microbial com-
munity.

Given the overwhelming abundance of Rickettsia
across life stages and organs, we attempted to dissect
its subgeneric diversity using phylogenetic criteria and
found the vast majority of the sequences to cluster
with bona ﬁde Ixodes tick rickettsial endosymbionts. It
remains unknown whether this is indicative of a geno-
mewide pattern of conservation due to a bottleneck or
a massive selective sweep accompanying symbiosis, or
a mere localized snapshot of sequence conservation at
this locus. I. scapularis is known so far to harbour one
endosymbiotic rickettsial species (Gillespie et al. 2012;
Kurtti et al. 2015), but ﬁner taxonomic resolution using
more informative genetic markers at
the subgeneric
and strain levels may provide additional insight into
population-level variation and adaptation to intracellu-
lar
life in coexistence with pathogens. Our study
focused on an area with one of the highest pathogen
prevalence levels in blacklegged ticks. Future studies
examining the functional interplay between tick micro-
biomes and pathogens over a larger geographic region
are warranted.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Vanessa Vinci for help collecting tick
specimens and Christopher E. Mason (Weill Cornell Medicine)
for assistance with HTS. This work was partially funded by

4974 C . P . Z O L N I K E T A L .

IBM Research-Almaden and by Fordham University’s Research
John McCloskey Research Grant
Support Grant and Fr.
awarded to CPZ and intramural support by SOK. This manu-
script represents contribution #261 of the Louis Calder Center
– Biological Field Station, Fordham University. We thank the
editor and three anonymous reviewers for constructive com-
ments that improved our manuscript.
