The human vaginal microbiome maintains low diversity in low-pH conditions and
depends on host sugars as carbon sources, with less access to dietary and exogenous
nutrients than the gut, skin, or oral cavity. 2C), with Gardnerella
vaginalis being the most abundant in seven of eight samples 
and a Shuttleworthia taxon being most abundant in one sample (at 23% relative
abundance). Most of the reads classiﬁed as L. crispatus or L. iners mapped to a single metagenomic
assembled genome, with completeness of 95.7% and 97.1% and redundancy of 0% and
1.4%, respectively..

Highly abundant bacterial taxa were signiﬁcantly associated with community
composition. While some
individuals exhibited a relatively stable microbial community over time, others 
experienced shifts in composition, resulting in a statistically signiﬁcant change in
Bray-Curtis dissimilarity on PC axis 1 between trimesters ..

FIG 2 Legend (Continued)
absence of fungi, at the genus level, per sample. C) Evenness between samples dominated by Lactobacillus (n (cid:2) 34 samples) is signiﬁcantly lower than samples dominated by
Biﬁdobacteriaceae (n (cid:2) 7 samples). ( E and F) There was no change in evenness (E) or phylogenetic diversity (F) throughout pregnancy..

Metabolites have strong associations with vaginal microbial community struc-
tures. The CVF metabolome as
assessed by both mass spectrometry methods did not signiﬁcantly differ across trimes-
ters (LME; P (cid:2) 0.6378 for GC-TOF MS; P (cid:2) 0.3942 for liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry [LC-MS/MS]). Genes involved in mannitol metabolism were enriched in
communities where L. crispatus was highly abundant . In
this study, we followed the vaginal microbiome through the trimesters of pregnancy for
18 women, tracking changes in the bacterial communities with longitudinal samples
and capturing their functional potential with metagenomic sequencing and multiple
platforms to assess metabolomic proﬁles. The resolution provided by shotgun metag-
enomic sequencing allowed us to identify species and characterize the functional gene
content of CVF microbiomes. We aim to establish
how the metabolome develops in the ﬁrst year of life and how maternal-infant saliva
and urine metabolomes relate. Because indole-3-lactate can act as a ligand for AhR, we speculate that L. crispatus may. Whole-genome shotgun metagenomics allowed us to begin to address the func-
tional capacities of these microbiomes. The largest differences between functional
capacity appeared to be between communities where L. crispatus or G. vaginalis were
the most abundant bacterial taxon. Increased abundance of mannitol when L. crispatus was present is an important and
unexpected ﬁnding . Further, metabolomic analysis of
our CVF samples failed to capture signiﬁcant levels of the mannitol precursor fructose;
however, previous studies have indicated an appreciable amount of fructose within the
cervical mucus of humans and the capability of L. crispatus to utilize fructose as a
carbon source  We speculate that this high extracellular mannitol abundance
phenotype may underlie the cell’s need to regenerate NAD(cid:5) for use in glycolysis.