All epithelial surfaces that interface with the external world harbor microbes, but the most
dense microbial communities are those in the distal intestinal tract. Throughout most of a person’s life, this relationship is either symbiotic (mutually beneficial)
or commensal (providing benefit to one member without harming the other); pathogenic
host-microbe interactions are indeed the exception rather than the rule . published the complete genome sequence of the
gram-negative anaerobe Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, a prominent member of the normal
intestinal microbiota  Annotation and analysis of the genome revealed a sophisticated
apparatus for acquiring and digesting otherwise unusable dietary polysaccharides. This
apparatus, including a complex, multi-component, multi-enzyme complex starch utilization
system (SUS), consists of over 230 glycoside hydrolase and 15 polysaccharide lyase genes
 The genomic analysis demonstrated that B. thetaiotaomicron has evolved the
remarkable capacity to sense the availability of carbohydrates in its microenvironment, and
that it also has the ability to forage and utilize host-derived glycans (e.g., mucin and
heparin). They proceeded to provide
convincing evidence that the microbiota plays an integral role in fasting-induced hepatic
ketogenesis, an important energy source during stress and starvation. performed an innovative study in which they studied
the Burmese python, a vertebrate that consumes large meals between long intervals of
fasting  These authors also demonstrated an abundance of Bacteroidetes during fasting
that shifted towards a post-prandial abundance of Firmicutes. Species that were enriched in
the post-prandial state included Clostridium and Lactobacillus. In theory, manipulation of the gut microbiota could be used to improve energy
balance and decrease the incidence of infectious complications. As a result, interventions in this
field have been introduced with a limited scientific foundation. Some, such as the
recent description of fecal transplantation for Clostridium difficile colitis  will not be
discussed here. As a result, a precise understanding of
how decontamination protocols work is lacking. Nevertheless, enthusiasm for
decontamination protocols has diminished due to unacceptable increases in drug-resistant
bacterial strains within the ICU..

The practice of administering live microbes with putative health benefits to unhealthy
patients dates back to the early twentieth century. Interestingly, this led
almost instantly to commercial attempts to capitalize upon these ideas, hence the
development of probiotics. Most recently
we have shown that surgical injury causes a rapid depletion of mucus phosphate, thereby
inducing certain strains of pathogenic bacteria to upregulate their virulence against the
intestinal epithelial barrier  Most bacteria that cause serious infections in ICU patients
are equipped with exquisite sensory mechanisms to detect the level of local phosphate
concentration. Phosphate concentration is a key trigger by which bacteria activate their
virulence machinery to, in some cases, cause lethal sepsis. Therefore, providing therapies at the microenvironmental level
could be a novel approach to create molecular diplomacy between pathogen and host
through the course of severe physiologic stress such as that which occurs during human
critical illness.