in

use

symptomatic

including preterm birth (PTB).1–4 Antibiotics are effective
in eradicating BV during pregnancy5 and are recommended
The
for
consequences of antibiotic use during pregnancy have been
poorly studied,7 but
there are concerns that antibiotic-
related changes in the vaginal microbiota8 are associated
with short- and long-term morbidity in infancy and later
years.9

pregnant women.6

Probiotics might be a safe and effective alternative to
antibiotics in restoring the imbalance of the vaginal micro-
biota found in BV. The constituents of the preparation have been shown
to colonise the vagina in some non-pregnant women. Eligible
women were aged 16 years and above at consent and
between 9 and 14 weeks’ gestation as conﬁrmed by the dat-
ing ultrasound scan. There were no other exclu-
sion criteria. Participants were instructed to take one
capsule daily until delivery and self-report compliance at
each study visit.25

Outcomes
Our primary outcome was the rate of BV at 18–20 weeks’
gestation, measured using the Nugent
(Nugent
score ≥7 shows presence of BV). After conﬁrming eligibility,
informed consent was
obtained and baseline data recorded. Sample size
A sample size of 366 was calculated to estimate the propor-
tion of recruited women who would complete the study. The sequence was given to a trial support company,
Sharp Clinical Services (SCS, Crickhowell, Wales), which
labelled and packaged the probiotic and placebo capsules
into identical tamper-proof boxes for the study. Microbiology methodology
The double-headed swab was separated in the laboratory. The swab used
to prepare the slide was stored at (cid:1)70 °C and later used in
the vaginal microbiota DNA proﬁling. A dissimilarity theta-YC
matrix between the samples was constructed with the same
subsampling approach averaging over 1000 replicas. to the SOP available

taxonomic units

according

Statistical analysis
We used descriptive analysis to report baseline characteris-
tics of trial participants by allocated group. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

3

Husain et al. Otherwise, we reported the model without adjusting for
confounders. All analysis was carried out using STATA software ver-

sion 14.31

Patient and public involvement
Patient representatives provided input into the design, pro-
tocol development, and conduct of the study. We are planning to dis-
seminate ﬁndings in the form of a newsletter and PPI feed-
back session, following primary publication of these results
through our patient network.34

Results

We screened 1301 pregnant women between 3 May and 1
July 2016 for their eligibility to participate in the study. A
total of 997 women were excluded from the trial either
because they did not meet the inclusion criteria 
or they declined to participate. Self-reported compliance to the intervention at
18–20 weeks’ was 93% in the probiotic group
and 98% in the placebo group. No serious
adverse events related to the study interventions were
reported. The 16S rRNA genes were successfully
ampliﬁed and sequenced from these, and 6714 sequence
reads were sub-sampled from each sample. Flow chart showing numbers of participants at each stage of the trial. The stability of the microbiota within subjects
assessed by determining the theta-YC distance between the
baseline and 18–20 weeks’ gestation samples was not signif-
icantly different between the probiotic and placebo groups
(Wilcoxon). Previous observational studies and small-scale
randomised controlled trials in non-pregnant populations
have suggested that oral administration of probiotics can
alter the vaginal microbiota in a signiﬁcant number of
women where microbial imbalance exists.18–21 It is on this
basis that several commercial probiotic products are mar-
keted for the restoration and maintenance of a healthy
vaginal microbiota in both non-pregnant and pregnant
women.19,20 Our ﬁndings have not shown any effect on the
vaginal microbiota with the probiotic preparation used in
this trial. Fourthly, we had a
to follow up, which
higher than expected number lost
tends to affect the ability to detect a difference. Implications for clinical practice and research
The current study was part of a trial assessing the feasibility
of conducting a deﬁnitive trial on PTB prevention with
probiotics. PTB is the major determinant of adverse new-
born outcome. The rate of PTB is rising globally45 and cur-
rent strategies to stem its growth are ineffective.46 The
association between BV and PTB, and the reported beneﬁts
of probiotic therapy on BV, mainly in non-pregnant
women, have raised interest in the role of probiotics in the
prevention of PTB.47 The observed beneﬁt of dietary probi-
otic intake on the risk of spontaneous PTB48 supports this
concept. Completed disclosure of interests forms
are available to view online as supporting information. Contribution to authorship
The trial was conceived by MM and MW, and designed by
SH and KK. ZD coordinated the trial with supervision
from JA and JD. ST, CC, and BMT provided overall support to the conduct
and delivery of the trial.