Food & Function

Paper

total resveratrol administered was recovered in the form of
resveratrol, dihydroresveratrol and derived metabolites (65.1%
along the gastrointestinal tract, and 0.5% in other tissues).17 So,
it may be very diﬃcult to reach eﬀective concentrations in
metabolism regulating tissues in vivo, e.g. visceral adipose
tissues. Mice were killed by cervical
dislocation aer a 6 h period of fasting. Colonic sample collection, xation and uorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH)
The cell-xation procedure was adapted from Schwiertz et al.21
One volume of the colonic contents was suspended in 9 ml of
phosphate-buﬀered saline (PBS) and vortexed with glass beads
for 3 min; then 0.2 ml of the suspension was xed in 0.6 ml
fresh 4% paraformaldehyde at 4 (cid:3)C overnight. Ornithine carbamoyl-transferase frozen liver tissue was sectioned
at 3–5 mm thickness and stained with oil red O. Histological
assessment of the tissue morphology was performed using an
Olympus light microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). 2014, 5, 1241–1249

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Published on 01 April 2014. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. Fiaf

Lpl

Cyp7a1

Scd1

Ppar-g

Acc1

Fas

F: CAATGCCAAATTGCTCCAATT,
R: TGGCCGTGGGCTCAGT
F: ACTGCCACTTCAACCACAG,
R:CCCAATACTTCGACCAGG
F: CTAAGGAGGATTTCACTTGC, R:
ACTGGTCCAAAGGTGGACAT
F: AGGCTTCTGGGCCTTATGTG, R:
TGCTTCTCTCGCCAGGAATAC
F: ATGTCTCACAATGCCATCAGGTT,
R: GCTCGCAGATCAGCAGACTCT
F: AAGTCCTTGGTCGGGAAGTATACA,
R: ACTCCCTCAAAGTCATCACAAACA
F: TGGTGAATTGTCTCCGAAAAGA,
R: CACGTTCATCACGAGGTCATG

82

361

350

128

116

126

149

method.24 The total RNA was reverse transcribed (RT) and PCR
amplied using the AccuPower® Greenstar qPCR kit (Bioneer). b-Actin was
chosen as the housekeeping gene. Each assay was performed in
duplicate in the same run. All assays were performed in tripli-
cate with an ABI PRISM 7900HT Sequence Detection System
(Applied Biosystems). The data were expressed as
means with their standard errors. Analysis was performed using SPSS 11.5
(SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). However, RES
treatment signicantly inhibited increases in body and fat

weights in HF mice, which suggests that it exerts anti-obesity
eﬀects. View Article OnlineFood & Function

Paper

Fig. Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF
group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES. HDL-C, high density lipoprotein
cholesterol; LDL-C, low density lipoprotein cholesterol. Discussion

Although obesity arises from interactions of genetic and envi-
ronmental factors,26 a high-fat diet plays an important role in
the induction of visceral obesity in animal models.27 Most sets
of existing evidence on resveratrol suggest that this compound
has anti-obesity eﬀects.11,12,19 But the exact mechanisms of how
resveratrol shows anti-obesity eﬀects are not clear. A) The
division-level composition of gut microbiome comparing CT, HF, and
HF-RES animals (n ¼ 6). ( This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249 | 1245

Published on 01 April 2014. These ndings are consistent with
previous studies. Aer knockout of the Fiaf gene, the increased
total body fat content of CONV-D mice markedly attenuates.8 By
analysis of GF and conventionalized, normal and Fiaf knockout
mice, Backhed et al.8 showed that Fiaf is a circulating lipopro-
tein lipase inhibitor and that its suppression is essential for the
microbiota-induced deposition of triglycerides in adipocytes. Conversely, resveratrol signicantly promoted
the expression of Fiaf in the intestines of HF mice, which may
be associated with the prebiotic eﬀect of resveratrol on the
microbiota. View Article OnlinePaper

Food & Function

Fig. 5 Eﬀects of high-fat diet and RES supplementation on lipogenesis in visceral livers. ( Values are means, with their standard errors represented by vertical bars (n ¼ 6). Conclusion

The composition of gut microbiota regulated by resveratrol may
result in de novo lipogenesis, and systemically increasing
expression of the Fiaf gene in the intestine, in turn, suppressing
expressions of the lipoprotein lipase gene (Lpl) and the fatty
acid biosynthesis gene (Scd1)
in the liver, and inhibiting
expressions of adipogenesis or lipogenesis genes (Ppar-g, Acc1,
and Fas) in visceral adipose tissues. Non-conﬂict of interest statement
The authors conrm that there is no conict of interest with any
nancial organization regarding the results presented in this
research manuscript. JUDCF10058),
the 12th 5 Year Plan for Science and Technology Development
(no.