In this review, we describe the pronounced microbial
changes
female, as well as
in the pregnant
provide an overview of the initial exposure of the fetus to
microbiota—from the placenta,
through birth and infancy. While many consider pregnancy to be an
anti-inﬂammatory state, others consider pregnancy to be a multi-
stage process including inﬂammatory stages at implantation
and parturition, and anti-inﬂammatory stages in mid-pregnancy,
when the fetus grows rapidly (Mor and Cardenas, 2010)..

the ﬁrst to the third trimester, the gut microbiota composition
changes dramatically. The gut microbiota during pregnancy is inﬂuenced not only
by internal cues, but also by environmental factors, primarily by
diet. Interestingly, it was
shown that pre-pregnancy maternal body mass index (BMI)
correlated to neonatal gut microbiota composition in vaginally
delivered, but not C-section delivered oﬀspring (Mueller et al., 2011)..

As in the gut, the vaginal microbiome undergoes signiﬁcant
changes during pregnancy, including a signiﬁcant decrease in
overall diversity, increased stability (the community composition
changes over time), and enrichment with Lactobacillus species
(Aagaard et al., The dominant Lactobacillus species in
pregnancy varies according to ethnic group; while L. jensenii
is predominantly observed in women of Asian and Caucasian
ethnicity, L. gasseri is absent in samples from Black women
(MacIntyre et al., 2015)..

A study characterizing the vaginal microbiota of pregnant
and non-pregnant African-Americans reported that during
pregnancy, one of
the changes is dominance of a single
Lactobacillus species over others (Romero et al., Additionally, Candida levels were signiﬁcantly
higher during middle and late pregnancy compared to non-
pregnant women, further demonstrating a higher prevalence of
periodontal pathogens in pregnancy..

The placenta is one of the most poorly understood human organs,
particularly with regard to the presence of microbes within it. and
and Ureaplasma,
higher alpha diversity. 2015)..

and pregnancy
complications have been shown in various studies (Zi et al., EARLY BACTERIAL COLONIZATION OF
THE FETUS. However, direct proof for microbial colonization of the
fetus, as well as the potential mechanisms by which bacteria pass
from the mother to the fetus are still unknown. The notion of early microbial colonization of the fetus suggests
that from the very beginning of development, there are dual
interactions between the developing host and microbiota, and
that there is some type of early inheritance of the maternal
microbial components..

Just like the placenta and fetus, the meconium was considered
in the past to be sterile (Koleva et al., Moreover, the administration of probiotics (including
Lactobacillus sp.) Maternal weight was found to be a major inﬂuencing factor in
shaping milk bacterial composition.