Cultured human gastrointestinal microbiota

997

cus, and Peptococcus (Moore & Holdeman, 1974a). FEMS Microbiology Reviews
published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Moreover, it is evident that
different members of the Bacteroidetes phylum and not the
Bacteroides genus sensu stricto are dominant in the human
gastrointestinal tract. 2, Supporting information, Tables S1–
S3). The physiological and genetic characteris-
tics of these currently recognized gastrointestinal species
and their association with particular functions of the eco-
system or diseases are systematized in this review that
aims to provide the basis for future comparative and
functional metagenomic
and other high-throughput
approaches applied on the gastrointestinal microbiota. GenBank
Accession Numbers of the SSU rRNA gene sequence are provided for each species and the family names are indicated. FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 996–1047

ª 2014 The Authors. which based on the
SSU rRNA gene sequence cluster within distant phylogenetic groups are depicted in the gray area. There is no data about
the role of these bacteria in the gastrointestinal microbi-
ota, but it is noteworthy that several of these bacteria
were detected only in the SSU rRNA gene clone libraries
of the microbiota of inﬂammatory bowel disease patients
(Frank et al., Although highly important for the health, Lac-
tobacilli are rarely detected as markers of the gastrointes-
tinal microbiota dysbiosis, but such reports exist and

include a reduced abundance in patients suffering from
inﬂammatory bowel disease (Keighley et al., However, while molecular studies could conﬁrm their
presence in the upper intestinal tract, these also showed
that the Lactobacilli are quite variable and not as abun-
dant as other gastrointestinal genera at that location, such
as Streptococcus and Veillonella (Booijink, 2009; Booijink
et al., other related,

lactic
acid bacteria can be detected in the gastrointestinal tract. Phylogenetic tree of a fraction of the human gastrointestinal species that belong to the order of the Lactobacillales. are among the ﬁrst
tract
established species in the infant’s gastrointestinal
that can be detected already in the ﬁrst day of life (Sol(cid:1)ıs
et al., The species indicated in bold are
based on the SSU rRNA gene sequence clustering within the families that are designated on the ﬁgure in contrast to their ofﬁcial classiﬁcation. 1974), and
up 107 cells g
intestinal content of healthy infants
(Mevissen-Verhage et al., An interesting group within the Lachnospiraceae family
is the misclassiﬁed Ruminococcus spp., have been recognized as gastrointestinal
inhabitants, although a number of other species that are
ofﬁcially classiﬁed within different genera (predominantly
Clostridium) belong to the Peptostreptococcaceae family
according to their SSU rRNA gene sequence . Not much is known about the role of this
group of strictly anaerobic bacteria in the human gastro-
intestinal tract, but it is noteworthy that bacteria that
belong to the Christensenella/Catabacter group were
reported to be dramatically depleted in fecal
samples of ulcerative patients relative to controls (Rajili(cid:1)c-
Stojanovi(cid:1)c
(ﬁvefold)
depleted in fecal samples of patients with postinfectious
irritable bowel syndrome (Jalanka-Tuovinen et al., Phylogenetic tree the human gastrointestinal species that belong to families of the Peptostreptococcaceae and Clostridiales Family XI
Incertae Sedis. 2011), which could
indicate an increased transit of the ileal microbiota to the
lower part of the gastrointestinal tract. Concerning their function
in the gastrointestinal tract, a recent study has shown a
signiﬁcant positive correlation between the abundance of
the Tenericutes and the levels of trimethylamine-N-oxide,
which is a metabolite that is believed to accelerate athero-
sclerosis (Koeth et al., 2011), while the
increased abundance of Fusobacterium spp. Nevertheless, other representatives of
the true Alphaproteobacteria seem to be a part of the
normal gastrointestinal microbiota. The role of these bacteria in human
health has been a subject of a long-lasting debate result-
ing in a conclusion that at least four gastrointestinal spe-
cies (A. caviae, A. hydrophila, A. jandaei, and A. veronii),
are pathogenic (Janda & Abbott, 1998). are motile, spiral bacteria that are
implicated in the development of diarrhea (Malnick,
1997); while Succinatimonas and Succinivibrio representa-
tives are subdominant bacteria that were isolated from
healthy humans (Table S1). 2012),
(and most likely the entire bacterial group) to the gastro-
intestinal tract conditions. However, a retrospective review of cases
diagnosed as intestinal spirochetosis revealed that the pres-
ence of Spirochetes in the gastrointestinal biopsies is often
asymptomatic and may not have pathological signiﬁcance
(Carr et al., 2011), which indicates their wide distribution along the

FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 996–1047

ª 2014 The Authors. FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 996–1047

Cultured human gastrointestinal microbiota

1031

solfataricus, and another

from 2005 (Rieu-Lesme et al., Phylogenetic tree the human gastrointestinal microeukarya.