Variance and abundance of taxa across three microbiota
phases
Taxonomic analysis of all samples identified 16 phyla, 38
classes, 73 orders, 158 families, and 383 genera. Compos-
itional differences across the phases at all taxonomic levels
were characterized and pairwise comparisons were made
between phases. The average composition of the samples
in each phase at the genus level is shown in Fig. 1f, which
represents the abundance of genera relative to bar size. The most significantly differentially abundant taxa between
P2 and P3 were a variety of Clostridiales elevated in P3, in-
cluding the genera Veillonella, Finegoldia, Clostridium, and
Anaerococcus. The most significant differences between P1
and P3 were observed among Staphylococcaceae which
were elevated in P1, and among Clostridiales genera Fine-
goldia and Veillonella which were elevated in the P3. Abun-
dance of Bifidobacterium, an Actinobacterium most com-
monly linked with development and maintenance of the
healthy infant gut microbiota  is significantly asso-
ciated with lipid and protein intake in P3, with increased
Bifidobacterium abundance associated with increased lipid
in the diet and decreased abundance with greater amounts
of protein. Among the commonly used NICU medica-
tions, increased abundance of Bifidobacterium was signifi-
cantly associated with use of corticosteroids and H2
receptor antagonists in the past week in P3. A complete
list of nutrition and medication variables significantly
associated with changes in microbiota taxa in all the three
phases can be found in in Additional file 7: Table S6..

sought to identify dynamic aspects of host biology that
correspond to phase transition. In addition to amniotic fluid that has been con-
sumed, meconium is formed from sloughed off gastro-
intestinal epithelial cells which are generated as debris
during periods of rapid digestive tract development and
convolution of the intestinal epithelial surface. It has
in preterm infants, passage of
been established that
meconium as stool is both delayed and prolonged and is
observed well beyond the first stool, with final clearance
occurring up to several weeks after birth . Consistent with other studies, we determined that this
programmed, non-random developmental succession of
microbiota is largely determined by PMA  What
drives this patterned succession toward a homeostatic
relationship between the infant and colonizing microbiota
is not known, but likely involves complex interactions be-
tween the mucosal immune system as well as metabolic
interactions within the gut microbial community and the
surrounding tissue and microenvironment, which remain
dynamic during periods of gastrointestinal development in
early life. Genomic DNA extraction
Total genomic DNA was extracted with a modified
method using the QIAGEN Fecal DNA kit and FastPrep
mechanical
lysis (MPBio, Solon, OH). 16S ribosomal
RNA (rRNA) was amplified with Phusion High-Fidelity
polymerase (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and
dual indexed primers specific to the V3-V4 hypervari-
able regions (319F: 5′ ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG
3′; 806R: 3′ ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG 5′) 
Amplicons were pooled and paired-end sequenced on
an Illumina MiSeq (Illumina, San Diego, CA) in the
University of Rochester Genomics Research Center. Each sequencing run included positive controls con-
sisting of a 1:5 mixture of Staphylococcus aureus, Lacto-
coccus lactis, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Streptococcus
mutans, and Escherichia coli and negative controls
consisting of sterile saline.