The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, an indicator of dysbiosis, increased in the CAD patients
compared with the non-CAD controls. Last year, a metagenome-wide association
study of fecal samples from 218 CAD patients and 187 healthy subjects from China was reported 
The abundance of Enterobacteriaceae was signiﬁcantly higher in the CAD patients compared to the
healthy subjects. was also signiﬁcantly higher in the patients
with CAD than in the healthy subjects. This may be due to the use of proton pump inhibitors in
CAD patients  Consistent with our results, Bacteroides spp. may
have the potential to regulate atherosclerosis progression. Furthermore, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii,
which exhibits anti-inﬂammatory effects  was also signiﬁcantly depleted in the CAD patients. Of note, the co-abundance network structure differed between the two groups. On the other hand, the positive correlation between Bacteroides spp. These results implied that a peculiar inter-species relationship in
the gut microbiome may exist in CAD patients compared to healthy subjects..

Additionally, there are some studies that have demonstrated the relationship between the
gut microbiome and heart failure (HF). Moreover, older HF patients had a lower abundance of Bacteroidetes and
a higher abundance of Proteobacteria compared to the younger HF patients. Ruminococcus, Acinetobacter, and Veillonella increased in the HF patients,
whereas Alistipes, Faecalibacterium, and Oscillibacter decreased. In line with the previous report,
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii decreased in the HF patients compared to the controls. This evidence paves the way for further studies investigating the gut
microbiome in the prevention and management of CVD..

Collinsella ↑, Eubacterium ↓, Roseburia ↓ in patients
with symptomatic atherosclerosis..

Enterobacteriaceae ↑, Proteobacteria ↑, Escherichia/Shigella ↑, Bacteroidetes ↓,
Bacteroidales ↓, Bacteroidaceae ↓, Bacteroides ↓ in stroke/TIA patients..

Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio ↑, Lactobacillales ↑, Bacteroides + Prevotella ↓ in CAD..

Enterobacteriaceae (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., and Enterobacter aerogenes),
Streptococcus spp., Lactobacillus salivarius, Solobacterium moorei, Atopobium parvulum,
Ruminococcus gnavus, Eggerthella lenta ↑, Roseburia intestinalis ↓, Faecalibacterium cf. ↓, Prevotella copri ↓, Alistipes shahii ↓ in ACVD.