118

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 2012), modify the nervous system (Hsiao et al. 2013) and metabolize therapeutics into active compounds (Claus et al. Likewise, disease phenotypes
can be transferred by microbiota transplantation. Experimental variables that influence microbiome analysis. Along the gastrointestinal tract,
a gradient of pH, bile acid concentrations, oxygen levels and
antibacterial products exists. Adjacent to the
mucosa, facultative anaerobes are able to grow because of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

120

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. Given
careful experimental design, the microbiome can be controlled
and manipulated more easily in animal models compared to hu-
man studies. Although the microbiota similarity between mice and
humans at the phylum level is remarkable, at the species
level, many differences are found (Dethlefsen, McFall-Ngai and
Relman 2007). The age at which the treatment is adminis-
trated is important since antibiotic treatment of mice at the age
of weaning results in long-term alteration of their gut microbial
communities, which does not occur in adult animals (Cho et al. Despite the limitations, the use of antibiotics to study the role
of bacteria may lead to important insights. Intuitively, one
would treat such animals with antibiotics to allow the introduc-
tion of the donor microbiota. Transplantation has also been used in
mouse models of enteric infections. However, it is generally accepted that colonization
occurs after exposure to bacteria in the birth canal and by con-
tact with the skin, feces and other environmental sources. The development of the murine microbiota and the immune system over time. Emerging evidence demonstrates an important role of innate
signaling in preserving a healthy microbiome through the in-
teraction of PAMPs with NOD-like receptors (NLRs), Toll-like re-
ceptors (TLRs) and ILCs (Hooper, Littman and Macpherson 2012). To maintain the
SPF status, an increasing number of rodents are housed in indi-
vidually ventilated cages with limited shared environmental ex-
posure. When comparing different types of lactation, e.g. ar-
tificial vs. mother’s milk, significant differences in the develop-
ment of the gut microbiota were observed in the lactating pups
(Carlisle et al. 2007), but they produce increased adipos-
ity upon gavage with fecal matter from mice with DIO. Therefore, susceptibility to obesity requires an
intact mucosal immunity that guides diet-induced changes to
the microbiota. Diet-induced changes in bile acid composition can also be
an important cause of modifications to the gut bacterial com-
munity. Of
note, because autoclaving may differentially alter the presence
or structure of PAMPs, the duration and temperature of auto-
claving or irradiation parameters should also be mentioned in
publications. (Konturek, Brzozowski and Konturek 2011). This results in stress-induced
visceral hyperalgesia and increased cortisol levels. However, not all authors currently follow these guide-
lines and older studies often lack the necessary experimental in-
formation (Baker et al. Recently, as discussed above, it became clear that part of these
results may be explained by the presence of 129-derived pas-
senger mutations which remain associated with the transgene
locus of interest due to low recombination frequency of associ-
ated genes at short distance (Kayagaki et al. DESIGNING ANIMAL EXPERIMENTS TO
INVESTIGATE THE MICROBIOME

Selective breeding

In 1959, Russell and Burch published The Principles of Humane Ex-
perimental Technique in which they classified humane techniques
for animal experimentation under the headings of replacement,
reduction and refinement—now commonly known as the three
Rs, which became important principles of in vivo experimenta-
tion. The downside of this approach
could be increased deviation of results obtained with similar
strains in other laboratories due to increased genetic drift, which
may make it more difficult to reproduce experiments at another
location. However, cohousing of mice with dif-
ferent genotypes (e.g. wild type and knockout) has been shown
to change the gut microbial composition, affecting their natu-
ral immunological responses to a treatment or a disease trigger
(Garrett et al. This has only a minor logistical, technical and financial im-
pact on the receiving institution and should be seriously con-
sidered.