Defects in host genes controlling bacterial homeostasis or al-
terations of the gut microbiota composition have been associ-
ated with complex diseases, including inflammatory bowel dis-
ease (IBD), diabetes mellitus (Pflughoeft and Versalovic 2012)
and asthma (Maslowski et al. The identification and
manipulation of such disease-associated communities will un-
doubtedly be the topic of intensive research. 2013)..

light on bacterial functionality. Finally, since immune struc-
tures in GF mice remain immature, much of our understanding
of host–microbe interactions involved in the development of the
immune system arose from the study of GF animals and is dis-
cussed in more detail later in this review..

An important limitation in murine microbial studies is the dif-
ference in bacterial composition between mice and humans. As in humans, the two most abundant bacte-
rial phyla in C57BL6/J mice are the Firmicutes (60–80% of se-
quences) and the Bacteroidetes  however, 85% of the
murine sequences represent species that have not been detected
in humans (Ley et al. However,
microbial species seem to be critically adapted to specific hosts. Importantly, mice with mouse mi-
crobiota conferred better protection against Salmonella infection
than those with human microbiota. Intuitively, one
would treat such animals with antibiotics to allow the introduc-
tion of the donor microbiota. In fact, antibiotic pretreatment even worsened the ef-
ficiency of engraftment. Transplantation has also been used in
mouse models of enteric infections. 2013)..

Despite continuous exposure to bacteria and bacterial
constituents such as lipopolysaccharides and flagellin, the
intestinal mucosa maintains a homeostatic immunological en-
vironment. Mice deficient in Nod2 are not
able to control Helicobacter hepaticus infection. Of note, this difference is less prominent
in fecal samples (Robertson et al. As in-
nate sensors, they respond and divide rapidly upon stimulation. Con-
versely, if the litters were split among different cages at wean-
ing, a high divergence in microbiota profiles was observed after 3
weeks. 2002); however,
it is difficult to establish which is cause or consequence.