Among all mammals, the microbiota is extensively conserved at high taxonomic levels7, but
variation increases at progressively lower taxonomic levels30. Consequently, 85% of the
sequences obtained from the distal mouse gut represent genera that are not detected in
humans31. Even so, microbial inheritance can provide important
confirmation of human ancestry61..

Our knowledge of microbiome dynamics, especially age-related changes, during human
adulthood is limited. Analogous changes may be occurring in other body
sites as senescence advances. Residential microbes can contribute to somatic mutagenesis by causing
genotoxicity secondary to inflammation, increased cell proliferation, and production of pro-
mutagenic metabolites (e.g. butyrate)80. A related hypothesis is that co-evolved microbiota are
adaptive for the human species both by supporting early-in-life host functions and by
leading to later-in-life host demise 86..

The cutaneous microbiome is an obvious target in specific diseases, such as psoriasis, a
chronic, idiopathic inflammatory dermatologic condition87. In studies predating HTS, the
use of PCR and cloning led to observations that Firmicutes were significantly over-
represented and Actinobacteria were significantly under-represented in psoriatic lesions
compared to both unaffected skin in psoriasis patients and in normal controls88. Studies to
explore these findings using HTS are currently underway89. Atopic dermatitis, another
chronic inflammatory condition, has increased in incidence approximately three-fold over
the last 30 years in industrialized countries, suggesting a potential role for microbiome
alterations. Chronic skin ulcers, often secondary to venous stasis or diabetes, lead
to substantial morbidity. H.
pylori is a classical AMPHIBIONT; the presence (or absence) of an H. pylori dominated gastric
microbiota is strongly associated with particular diseases with important age-related
differences85. However, the
causal direction of the association has not yet been ascertained..

The microbiome is essential for the activation of host immune responses 104. The inflammatory bowel
diseases have long been considered to reflect interactions between microbes and the host. In humans, relative Bacteroidetes proportions increase with
weight loss122. Despite substantial taxonomic variation, functional
metagenomic differences were minor37. Antibiotic use in human
infancy, before age 6 months, was significantly associated with obesity development123.