First we explored in detail the in vitro inhibitory effects of a selection of LGC strains against growth and 
pathogenic properties (adhesion to vaginal cells and hyphae formation) of Candida albicans. As 
lactobacilli exhibit various levels of lactic acid production17, we rationalized here that the selected lactobacilli 
should have a strong intrinsic capacity to produce lactic acid, at least in the optimal growth conditions. The vaginal gel was developed to ensure 
maximal exposition of living bacteria to the vaginal wall through spreading after intravaginal application and 
maintain a high viability. proof-of-concept study in patients with VVc. No safety issues of the vaginal LGC gel 
were reported. 3a), particularly samples of the third and fourth visits. As for the 
estimated absolute abundances of lactobacilli in the samples, the total concentrations of combined endogenous 
and applied lactobacilli did not increase significantly from the first visit (mean visit 1 = 4.5.108 CFU/ml, mean 

Scientific RepoRtS  |         10:7976  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-64705-x

2

www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/Figure 1. The regular growth medium without 
any added microorganisms was used as a negative control. ( Twenty women with acute VVC were recruited for the 
proof-of-concept study where they were asked to use a vaginal gel containing lactobacilli once daily before 
bedtime over the course of 10 days. At each visit vaginal 
lavage fluid was collected for 16 S rRNA and ITS sequencing and qPCR. We also investigated the bacterial community present in the samples. This first ASV likely corresponds to L. pentosus KCA1, L. plantarum WCFS1 or 
both, which were supplemented in the gel, as this ASV was only found at visit 2 (16/20 samples, during treatment 
with the gel) and visit 3  Similarly, LGC 7, found in 12 of the 20 visit 2 samples and one visit 3 
sample, likely corresponded to L. rhamnosus GG, also supplemented in the gel. In most women the lactobacillus that 
dominated the bacterial community before treatment (visit 1) was also dominant at the end of the study, after the 
treatment (visit 4), indicating the applied lactobacilli had a temporary effect on the microbiome (Supplemental 
Fig. For the milder cases, it could be a stand-alone treatment. Evaluation of the microbiome of the samples through sequencing, microscopy and culture. concerning the vaginal microbiome also after clearing an episode of VVC. Materials and methods
culture of micro-organisms. An overview of the used micro-organisms can be found in Table 1. VK2/E6E7 cells were 
cultured to monolayers as described previously35. Primer sequences can be found in Supplementary Table 3. The lactobacilli-containing gel was devel-
oped in collaboration with the Belgian biotech company YUN nv (see ‘Competing interest’ statement). proof of concept study for evaluation of LGc-containing gel, ethical approval and informed 
consent. All methods were performed in accord-
ance with the relevant guidelines and regulations. RM was provided to patients to be used as necessary: oral fluconazole 3 × 200 mg. Two questionnaires were collected; at 
the entry visit (medical history and demographics) and at the last visit (satisfaction).