Feeding mode interacts with other perinatal factors to 
influence the infant gut microbiota. Fruit intake negatively associated with Ruminococcus . Moving beyond the first 1000 days of life, Berding and cow-
orkers investigated the temporal stability of the fecal 
microbiota and whether dietary patterns were associated 
with microbial taxa and composition in American 4–8-year-
olds at 3 time points over a 6-month period. These findings may 
reflect the higher consumption of complex carbohydrates in 
rural children. . Bifidobacterium and Collinsella were positively cor-
related with refined-sugar enriched foods, and Collinsella 
was also positively associated with fruit and curry intake . Additionally,  children  may  also  be 
more similar to each other than adults are. Two HMOs, 2′-fucosyllactose and lacto-N-ne-
oteraose (LNnT), are added to infant formula. ↑ relative abundances of Bifidobacterium and Lactoba-. They observed that infants whose 
mother received probiotics had lower counts of Bifidobacte-
rium and a higher percentage of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus 
than placebo at 6 months of age  In addition, several 
groups investigated the diversity of infant microbiota, report-
ing that administration of probiotics during pregnancy and 
lactation, or directly to infants after delivery have no or lim-
ited effects on alpha and beta diversity of infant microbiota 
(Table 3)..

Probiotics have been administrated directly to infants and 
children (Table 4). lactis HN019
L. rhamnosus HN001
Powder in capsules. ↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and . BT1 + B. longum BGT
BR3 + B. longum subsp. qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, V vaginal delivery, wk week, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
in situ hybridization, FOS fructooligosaccharides, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-Pro interspace profiling, mo month, OTU operational taxonomic unit, qPCR quantitative PCR, RT-
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. ↑relative abundance of Lacto-
↑ Proportion of Faecalibacterium. 4 × 1010 CFU/d
L. casei Shirota
4 × 108 CFU/d
LGG
Oily suspension. 1.6 × 1010 CFU/d
L. paracasei A
Fermented milk.