This 
chapter reviews the natural trajectory of the composition 
of  the  microbiota  during  pregnancy  and  early  life  and 
outlines  the  current  knowledge  on  the  interaction  be-
tween the microbiota and neurodevelopment. Early-Life Neurodevelopmental Plasticity and the 
Microbiota
Dramatic  structural  and  functional  changes  in  the 
brain are characteristic of the first years of life. There is a growing appreciation of the link between 
neurodevelopment and intestinal microbiota. The human female gut microbiota undergoes dynam-
ic  compositional  changes  across  gestation    As 
pregnancy progresses, a reduction in the diversity of the 
intestinal microbiota takes place, characterized by an en-
richment in Proteobacteria  This natural shift in the 
bacterial populations is functional to the increased meta-
bolic demands by the developing fetus. The vaginal microbiota composition also changes dur-
ing pregnancy towards a less diverse configuration  
As with gastrointestinal microbiota, the change in vaginal 
microbiota  has  a  specific  role  during  pregnancy. An  in-
crease in the presence of Lactobacilli helps maintain a low 
pH, limiting bacterial growth opportunity for other bacte-
ria  Furthermore, vaginal microbiota composition is 
critical in the context of vertical transmission of microbial 
populations  Whether interventions in the physiologi-
cal trajectory of maternal microbiota could alter the prena-
tal environment and, in turn, deviate normal brain devel-
opment is a key question in neuroscience that is starting to 
be addressed both in preclinical and clinical areas. In contrast, Bacteroides remain relatively elevated 
throughout  pregnancy    Interestingly,  microbiota 

compositional changes also occur post-partum. One of the most common macronutrient consumption 
imbalances during pregnancy is the consumption of high-
fat diets. Deficiency in B vi-
tamins, folate or ions, such as iron and zinc, exerts detri-
mental effects on neurocognitive development in humans 
and rodents  Folate deficiency is paradigmatic of 
the impact of micronutrient deficit on offspring neurode-
velopment. Administration of probiot-

19

Microbiota and Neurodevelopmental Trajectories Ann Nutr Metab 2019;74(suppl 2):16–27DOI: 10.1159/000499144Table 3. ics to pregnant women impact on immunity, reducing the 
risk of atopy but not of asthma  More preclinical 
and clinical research must be conducted to determine the 
impact  of  prenatal  probiotics  on  the  maternal  and  off-
spring microbiota. Administration  of  antibi-
otics to pregnant rats caused impairments in social be-
haviour and pre-pulse inhibition of the offspring  In 
mice, administration of non-absorbable antibiotics dur-
ing pregnancy reduced the exploratory behaviour in the 
offspring  These results warrant further research on 
the effect of microbiota. showed that a large amount 
of non-antibiotic human-targeted drugs have antimicro-
bial  properties. Bacteria have been found in the 
placenta    amniotic  fluid  and  meconium  of  hu-
mans  Moreover, the presence of specific bacteria 
in utero has been associated with pregnancy risks, includ-
ing  higher  rates  of  preterm  delivery    Nevertheless, 
the reliability of these findings is widely debated in the 
context of whether it is contamination or not  The 
existence of germ-free mice models further dismisses the 
idea of a prenatal microbiome  It is generally accept-
ed that the moment of birth is the first opportunity for 
large-scale bacterial colonization of the newborn. Thus, 
the mode of delivery has a tremendous impact on the es-
tablishment of the microbiota of infants. Mode of Nutritional Provision in Early Life
The stability and composition of the early-life gut mi-
crobiota community is also dependent on diet  Ac-
cumulating evidence suggests that breastfeeding and for-
mula-based nutrition leave a distinctive fingerprint in the 
intestinal  microbiota  (Table  2). Factors that determine the trajectory 
of the microbiota during early life. The gut 
and  vaginal  microbiome  of  the  mother  is 
altered by diet, drugs and stress. The mode 
of delivery determines the first colonizers 
of  the  newborn’s  gut. Early  in  life,  diet, 
drugs and stress can also affect the infant 
microbiota composition. Early-Life Stress
The impact of stress on the development of the HPA 
axis has been shown to contribute to the programming of 
brain  health  in  later  life    Interestingly,  evidence 
from preclinical studies shows that early-life stress also 
alters  the  microbiota. Although  plasticity  represents  an  opportunity  for 
adaptation, it is also a vulnerable stage. However, the evidence is still scarce, and 
further research is needed to understand the functional 
implications of these interactions. Further research is needed on the characterization of crit-
ical windows to modulate the microbiota and the conse-
quences of early intervention. Disclosure Statement

The writing of this article was supported by Nestlé Nutrition 
Institute. The  APC  Microbiome  Institute  is  funded  by  Science 
Foundation  Ireland  (SFI),  through  the  Irish  Government’s  Na-
tional Development Plan. The APC Microbiome Institute has con-
ducted research funded by many Pharmaceutical and Food Com-
panies. J.F.C., T.G.D. and C.S. are 
supported by SFI (Grant 12/RC/2273). T.G.D. has been an invited 
speaker at meetings organized by Servier, Lundbeck, Janssen and 
AstraZeneca and has received research funding from Mead John-
son, Cremo, Suntory Wellness, Nutricia and 4D Pharma. J.F.C. has 
been an invited speaker at meetings organized by Mead Johnson, 
Yakult, Alkermes and Janssen and has received research funding 
from Mead Johnson, Cremo, Suntory Wellness, Nutricia, Dupont 
and 4D Pharma. M.G.C., S.M.O. and C.S. have no other conflicts 
of interest to declare.