Mei Wang

Sharon M. Donovan

Introduction

Over the past decade, the essential role that the gut micro-
biota plays in the developmental programming of the neo-
nate, including growth trajectories, metabolism, and immune 
and cognitive development, has been demonstrated  
Thus, fostering the development of the microbiome in the 
first 1000 days of life is critical to supporting lifelong health. Thus, more work 
is needed to understand the functional ontogeny of the 
infant gut microbiota. Con-
tinued breastfeeding provides substrates necessary to sustain 
microbes such as Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Collinsella, 
Megasphera, and Veillonella (Table 1). Toddlers 

In Australian 2- to 3-year-olds, both habitual diet, as meas-
ured by a Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ), and recent 
dietary intake, as measured by a 24-h recall 3 days prior to 
fecal sample collection, influenced fecal microbiota com-
position  Dairy intake was negatively associated with 
species richness and diversity and Bacteroidetes abundance, 
but was positively associated with Erysipelatoclostridium 
spp. Residing in rural vs. urban environments can also affect 
food availability and choices, which has been investigated 
in a series of studies. Urban-dwelling children also con-
sumed a diet higher in meat, fat, and confectionaries, such 
as sweetened pastries and biscuits, and lower in complex 
carbohydrates compared to rural children. These findings may 
reflect the higher consumption of complex carbohydrates in 
rural children. Vegetables comprised < 1.0% of total cal-
orie intake in urban children compared to 7.3% in rural chil-
dren. The fecal microbiome of the rural children displayed 
significantly greater alpha diversity (Chao1 index). The 
microbiota of rural children was enriched by bacteria in the 
order Clostridiales, containing families such as Peptostrep-
tococcaceae and unclassified Ruminococcaceae, compared 
to higher proportions of Actinobacteria, Bacteroidales, and 
Selenomadales in urban dwellers. Additionally, rural chil-
dren had significantly higher fecal butyrate and propionate 
concentrations, suggesting that the fiber-rich diet in the rural 
children promotes a microbiota composition with greater 
fermentative capacity 

Greater Bifidobacterium abundance in 1- to 4-year-olds 
compared to adults has been reported  and recent stud-
ies have shown that the relative abundance of Bifidobac-
terium in older children is related to dietary intake and is 

1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

associated  with  metabolic  phenotypes. Additionally,  children  may  also  be 
more similar to each other than adults are. Nearly all studies are cross-sectional, they use differ-
ent types of questionnaires to collect dietary intake data, and 
many of the studies have compared children living in rural 
vs. urban settings. In the USA, 
the recommended dietary fiber intake is 14 g/1000 kcal or 
25 g for females and 38 g for males. Most prebiotics are DF, but not all DF 
are considered to be prebiotics. Further large-scale studies are 
needed with different fiber sources. Probiotic Interventions in Children on Gut 
Microbiota

Probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered 
in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” 
 The most commonly administered probiotic bacteria 
belong to the genera Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus, 
but can be provided either as single or mixtures of strains. The beneficial effects of probiotics in pediatric populations 
have  been  previously  reviewed    although  most 
studies have not been conducted in healthy children. For example, supplementation of pregnant and 
lactating women with L. rhamnosus GG (LGG), L. acidophi-
lus La-5 and B. animalis subsp. lactis BB-12 from 36-week 
gestation until 3 months postnatal during breastfeeding did 
not affect the proportions of bacteria classes and genera of 
the infants at 3 months and 2 years  In contrast, a Finish 
study evaluated the effect of administration of L. rhamnosus 
LPR and B. longum BL999 to mothers 2 months before and 
2 months after delivery. Probiotics have been administrated directly to infants and 
children (Table 4). Long-term consequences of such admin-
istration should be carefully evaluated 

Future Directions

There is a need for more dietary intervention studies in 
healthy populations, as the majority of currently published 
studies describe dietary interventions in the context of dis-
ease states, such as obesity, which is represented by micro-
bial dysbiosis  In particular, randomized, controlled 
clinical trials on the effects of DFs, prebiotics, and probiotics 
are needed in pediatric populations, particularly in adoles-
cence to young adulthood  where there is a 
paucity of data available. Additionally, long-term follow-
up studies of early-life dietary interventions are needed to 
determine long-term effects. For example, it is not known 
whether or not early-life acceleration toward an adult-like 
microbiome has negative downstream effects on health. 1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

year, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
interspace profiling, mo month, qPCR quantitative PCR, T-RFLP terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism, RT-qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, VD vaginally delivered, y 
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. •  The microbiome of BF infants is nurtured by human milk 
components, including HMO, and differs from that of FF 
infants. •  The addition of HMO and prebiotics to infant formula at 
concentrations found in human milk promotes the growth 
of bifidobacteria and narrows the differences between BF 
and FF infants. •  Prebiotics  and  dietary  fiber  at  doses  of  5–20  g/day 
modify the gut microbiome of children, increase SCFA 
production, and may exert other health benefits, includ-
ing increasing calcium absorption. •  Findings on probiotic administration to pregnant or 
lactating women or directly to the infant or child are 
inconsistent, likely due to the variation in the bacterial 
strains, doses, duration and methods of microbiome 
analysis. Funding  This work was supported in part by NIH R01 DK107561 
[SMD].

Compliance with Ethical Standards 

Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.