Analysis of both 16s rRNA and metagenomic sequencing 
has traditionally relied on comparing the relative abundance of 
various  genera,  species,  and  strains  between  different  groups. Fecal  samples  were  obtained  at  therapy  cessation,  2  months, 
6 months, and the end of follow-up. Cross-sectional compari-
sons  were  also  made  with  29  healthy  control  patients. Interestingly, although all patients were 
in clinical remission at study entry, a lower baseline abundance 
of F. prausnitzii (P = 0.014) and Bacteroides (P = 0.030) pre-
dicted relapse after therapy cessation in addition to biochem-
ical markers such as an elevated serum C-reactive protein. . A  subse-
quent study of a peptidomic analysis of F. prauznitzii culture 
supernatants  showed  7  peptides  derived  from  a  microbial  an-
ti-inflammatory  molecule  that  had  a  dose-dependent  effect 
on  reducing  the  activation  of  the  NF-κB  pathway.35  Luminal 
delivery  of  this  peptide  through  Lactococcus  lactis  alleviated 
colitis  in  dinitrobenzene  sulfonic  acid  mice  models.35  In  other 
experiments, F. prauznitzii or its supernatant also induced the 
production of IL-10 and transforming growth factor-β1.36. Abundance of Clostridiales, Veillonella, Bacteroides, and Anaerostipes at baseline . responders; several functional differences on pathway analysis
CD); greater abundance of R. inulinivorans and Burkholderiales at baseline in 
Higher baseline alpha diversity (species) in responders than in nonresponders (in . week 8 and Actinomyces abundance decreased. uncultured Clostridiales, and Vibrio and lower abundance of S. mitis . The primary outcome, remission at week 14, was attained by 31 
patients. This  difference  was  noted  primarily  at  the 
species  level. Stool sam-
ples were obtained at baseline and weeks 4, 6, and 22. In 
fact, the addition of clinical data did not add predictive value 
to  microbiome-only  predictive  models  (AUC  =  0.838). Patients  in  remission  at  week  6 
also had a higher alpha diversity at baseline than did those with 
active disease. Specifically,  fecal  abun-
dance  of  Rothia  and  Ruminococcus  was  associated  with  the 
development of stricturing complications and Collinsella abun-
dance was greater at baseline in patients who developed pene-
trating  disease. The  PROTECT  cohort  recruited  400  children .