Feeding mode interacts with other perinatal factors to 
influence the infant gut microbiota. Thus, more work 
is needed to understand the functional ontogeny of the 
infant gut microbiota..

Human milk (HM) contains nutrients, bioactive compo-
nents, and bacteria that drive the aforementioned differences 
in the gut microbiota of BF and FF infants. Fruit intake negatively associated with Ruminococcus . In Australian 2- to 3-year-olds, both habitual diet, as meas-
ured by a Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ), and recent 
dietary intake, as measured by a 24-h recall 3 days prior to 
fecal sample collection, influenced fecal microbiota com-
position  Dairy intake was negatively associated with 
species richness and diversity and Bacteroidetes abundance, 
but was positively associated with Erysipelatoclostridium 
spp. These findings may 
reflect the higher consumption of complex carbohydrates in 
rural children. . was negatively correlated with fish and beef 
intake . Bifidobacterium and Collinsella were positively cor-
related with refined-sugar enriched foods, and Collinsella 
was also positively associated with fruit and curry intake . ↑ relative abundances of Bifidobacterium and Lactoba-. They observed that infants whose 
mother received probiotics had lower counts of Bifidobacte-
rium and a higher percentage of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus 
than placebo at 6 months of age  In addition, several 
groups investigated the diversity of infant microbiota, report-
ing that administration of probiotics during pregnancy and 
lactation, or directly to infants after delivery have no or lim-
ited effects on alpha and beta diversity of infant microbiota 
(Table 3)..

Probiotics have been administrated directly to infants and 
children (Table 4). lactis BB-12, CFU colony-forming unit, CS cesarean section, d day, FISH fluorescent in situ hybridization, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-pro . lactis HN019
L. rhamnosus HN001
Powder in capsules. ↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and . ↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and Bacte-. ↓ Colonization rate of B. longum in ST11 + BL999
↓ Colonization rate of B. infantis in LPR + BL999
Bifidobacterium in LPR + BL999 at 6 mo of age. lus La-5 + BB-12 
LGG + L. acidophi-
Fermented milk
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. breve M16V + B. longum BB536
Powder in water, milk or formula
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d. ↑ prevalence of species belonging to B. longum group at . over the first y
related to B. fragilis and Blautia . BT1 + B. longum BGT
BR3 + B. longum subsp. ↑relative abundance of Lacto-
↑ Proportion of Faecalibacterium. 1.6 × 1010 CFU/d
L. paracasei A
Fermented milk.