This vast array of data has contributed
to a deeper understanding of the role of the gut microbiome in health and disease, the factors which
shape it, and the potential to harness its therapeutic potential for optimal health. In Part II, we focus on the potential use of the microbiome to prevent disease and promote health. Ageing has a signiﬁcant impact on the gut microbiota with dramatic compositional and functional
changes observed in the elderly microbiota (in general >65 years). It provides
essential nutrients and bioactive metabolites, which can be produced directly by the microorganisms
or indirectly by microbial conversion of host or environmental molecules. It is involved in energy
regulation (as discussed in Section 5). Furthermore, in the same study relative abundance levels of faecal Bacteriodes
negatively correlated with brain signatures associated with depression in patients with major depressive
disorder. Thuricin CD is an example
of a sactibiotic bacteriocin produced by a human gut isolate, Bacillus thuringiensis  While it has a
narrow spectrum of inhibition, thuricin CD is capable of killing a wide range of C. diﬃcile isolates, its
antimicrobial activity being as potent as the antibiotics vancomycin and metronidazole, but without the
concomitant damage to other members of the microbiota  Bacteriocin production can also aid niche
occupation of the producing strain. Obese individuals within the LGC group were found to gain more weight over time. longum or the ﬁbre inulin prevented
mucus defects. This observation was also corroborated by Turnbaugh et al. who also noted a higher proportion
of Actinobacteria in obese subjects. Furthermore, the study confirmed the link between elevated
TMAO plasma levels and increased risk of incident major adverse cardiovascular events. Indoxyl sulfate is another uremic toxin derived from gut microbial metabolism of the essential
amino acid, tryptophan  In this case, bacterial trytophanases generate indole from tryptophan
which is transported to the liver where it is hydroxylated and O-sulfated to produce the uremic
toxin. Like p-cresol, serum indoxyl sulfate is problematic for chronic kidney disease patients. In the same study, animals fed a high fat diet
supplemented with BCAAs had reduced food intake and weight gain compared to the high fat diet
alone but became equally insulin resistant as those on the high fat diet. In this case, consumption
of the Mediterranean diet for two years increased the abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which
make up the Bacteriodetes phylum, which has previously been reported to be reduced in obese
In addition, genera with saccharolytic activity, including Faecalibacterium, Roseburia
people 
and Ruminococcus were also increased. Overall, the
studies presented here strongly indicate that increased SCFA production as a result of gut microbiota
modulation on the Mediterranean diet plays a key role in its beneficial health effects. Indeed, we have already seen that an animal-based diet high in
fat and protein alters the gut microbiota resulting in an increase in the abundance of bile-tolerant
microorganisms, such as Bilophila, Alistipes and Bacteroides and long-term consumption selects for
a Bacteroides enterotype directly investigated if typically consumed
dietary fatty acids alone could sustain the growth of the human gut microbiota using an in vitro
multi-vessel simulator system of the human small intestine. Following 16 weeks
on the diet, mice revealed several neurovascular enhancements with potential to reduce the risk of
Alzheimer’s disease which could be associated with the observed gut microbiota changes which
included an increase in beneﬁcial bacteria, including Akkermansia muciniphila and Lactobacillus and a
reduction in pro-inﬂammatory microbes Desulfovibrio and Turicibacter. Additionally, in a mouse model of glioma, mice fed
the ketogenic diet had slightly increased survival compared to mice fed the control diet and showed
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in several key microorganisms  The ketogenic diet generally includes fats

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

22 of 45

of all chain lengths thus increases in blood ketone levels could be responsible for the observed
gut microbiota changes 

7.2. in the cecum compared to the milk protein isolate fed group. These eﬀects were abolished in germ free mice suggesting that the
metabolic beneﬁts of soy protein are due to the microbiota alterations which bring about increased bile
acid transformation and secretion of GLP-1. In contrast, non-starch polysaccharides (wheat bran) presented little evidence of changes to
the faecal microbiota, which the authors state may be attributable to the smaller increase achieved
for non-starch polysaccharides compared to a 4.8 fold increase in resistant starch 
Interestingly, of the 14 volunteers, >60% of the resistant starch remained undigested in two compared to
<4% in the remaining 12 volunteers highlighting the signiﬁcance of the initial microbiota composition. In three subjects, resistant starch type 4 induced
a 10-fold increase in biﬁdobacteria. rectales in almost half of these individuals. In this case, resistant starch degradation was
governed by Firmicutes whereby R. bromii degradation of the resistant starch provided fermentation
substrates and increased acetate concentrations to support the growth of major butyrate producers. investigated the impact of high fat/high sugar (sucrose), low fat/high
sugar and low fat/low sugar diets on Sprague-Dawley rats. Lactobacillales was also signiﬁcantly increased on the high sugar
diet. The increase in Clostridiales and decrease in Bacteroidales on the high sugar diet was related to
poor cognitive ﬂexibility. In this regard,
healthy eating patterns with adequate fruits and vegetables, ensuring a rich source of dietary ﬁbre,
along with healthy fats (MUFAs and PUFAs) and a trend towards more plant-derived proteins should

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

26 of 45

help promote gut microbiota diversity and functionality enabling it to eﬀectively serve its host. The consequence of this has been an alarming surge in non-communicable
diseases, including cancer and metabolic-related diseases.