The gut microbiota serves the host by interacting directly or indirectly with host cells, the latter of
which comes about through microbially-produced bioactive molecules, thus the microbiota is capable
of regulating numerous biological pathways involved in immunity and energy homeostasis, while also
protecting the host against pathogens through colonisation resistance. Although gut microbiota composition varies considerably between infants certain patterns have
been identiﬁed. F. prausnitzii is an important butyrate producer  More
recently, Haran et al. Increasing age was also associated with a decrease in the abundance of microbiome-encoded genes
and pathways associated with vitamin B, a nitrogenous base and essential amino acid production..

Interestingly, the centenarian microbiota has been shown to signiﬁcantly diﬀer from
that of young adults  being
characterised by an enrichment in facultative anaerobes, mainly pathobionts, and a rearrangement in the
Firmicutes population with a marked decrease in symbiotic species associated with anti-inﬂammatory
properties e.g., F. prausnitzii and relatives. Unsurprisingly, changes in
the production of these compounds as a result of disturbances to the gut microbiota can result in
pathological consequences for the host. an increase in the abundance of bile-tolerant microorganisms presumably owing to the increase in
bile acid secretion as a result of high fat intake  Indeed, the animal-based diet signiﬁcantly
increased the levels of faecal deoxycholic acid (DCA), a secondary bile acid produced by microbial
dehydroxylation of bile, and has been shown to promote liver cancer in mice  and inhibit the
growth of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes members in rats  Microbial genes required for DCA
production exhibited signiﬁcantly higher expression on the animal-based diet. An energy-restricted diet with increased ﬁbre intake for six weeks
resulted in an increase in microbial gene richness in the LGC group which approached but remained
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent to that of the HGC group. However, a recent study reported the presence. rodentium greater access to the epithelial cells, resulting in lethal colitis. longum or the ﬁbre inulin prevented
mucus defects. In this case, consumption
of the Mediterranean diet for two years increased the abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which
make up the Bacteriodetes phylum, which has previously been reported to be reduced in obese
In addition, genera with saccharolytic activity, including Faecalibacterium, Roseburia
people 
and Ruminococcus were also increased. Indeed, we have already seen that an animal-based diet high in
fat and protein alters the gut microbiota resulting in an increase in the abundance of bile-tolerant
microorganisms, such as Bilophila, Alistipes and Bacteroides and long-term consumption selects for
a Bacteroides enterotype directly investigated if typically consumed
dietary fatty acids alone could sustain the growth of the human gut microbiota using an in vitro
multi-vessel simulator system of the human small intestine. In humans at risk of metabolic syndrome, a high saturated fat diet, a high MUFA diet
combined with high glycemic index (GI) carbohydrates, or a high MUFA diet combined with low GI
carbohydrates caused a decrease in total bacteria and the high saturated fat diet increased faecal SCFA
concentrations which the authors suggest could be due to lower absorption in the gut . Likewise, tartary buckwheat protein proved capable of
preventing dyslipidemia in mice fed a high fat diet which was not observed for casein  The buck
wheat protein inhibited the growth of E. coli and promoted the growth of Lactobacillus, Enterococcus and
Biﬁdobacterium, the latter of which was closely related to plasma lipids. Lactobacillales was also signiﬁcantly increased on the high sugar
diet.