Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

2 of 49

is diet, an element which we can control. One feature of a poorly functioning microbiota that is incapable of serving its host to its
full potential is low microbial diversity. Synbiotics describe the
combination of probiotics and prebiotics which act synergistically. It has
been suggested that the reduced alpha diversity in T3 may not be due to loss of species but rather
lower relative abundance levels below the sequencing level of detection  The over-represented
OTUs in T1 mainly belonged to the Clostridiales order of the Firmicutes and included butyrate
producers such as Facalibacterium and Eubacterium  Members of the Enterobacteriaceae family and
the Streptococcus genus were over-represented in T3 samples. For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003)  However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes  It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism. However, in the case of both observations, causality
could not be established. Prebiotics have also proven eﬃcacious for preventing adverse health outcomes in preterm infants. The incidence of sepsis was also signiﬁcantly lower in the test group. Despite the
apparent success of synbiotics in this small number of studies, a drawback of synbiotics is the diﬃculty
predicting selectivity and speciﬁcity and the subsequent mechanisms of action; thus, future studies
should focus on unravelling how each component in the mixture, and the mixture as a whole, exerts its
(cooperative) eﬀects 

Caesarean section has been shown to inﬂuence the development and composition of the gut
microbiota. A decreased abundance of biﬁdobacteria has also been reported for
six week old infants born by caesarean section  However, the latter study also revealed that this
disturbance could be partially restored by exclusive breastfeeding. The study concluded that the probiotic strain in question is eﬀective for treating
colic but only in breast-fed infants. longum MM-2 for three weeks by elderly participants increased IL-10 concentrations
compared to the placebo  In addition, 48% of participants in the probiotic group had increased
faecal biﬁdobacteria compared to 30% in the placebo which was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (P < 0.05). Likewise, consumption of one probiotic-containing biscuit (Bif. Stress can be caused by a variety of events and life situations. In addition, the study recommended following traditional dietary patterns such as the Japanese,
Norweigan or Mediterranean diet, the latter of which has been discussed in detail in Part I of this
review in terms of its beneﬁcial impacts on the gut microbiota and host health  Thus, the impact
of diet on the gut microbiota undoubtedly inﬂuences our emotional state. Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

17 of 49

Table 1. The studies are discussed in this section and are summarized in Table 2. Impact of probiotics on overnutrition in human intervention studies. Probiotic

Subject Information

Duration

Eﬀect

Reference

Bif. breve B-3

Adult volunteers, aBMI 24
to 30 kg/m2

12 weeks

Bif. The probiotic

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

20 of 49

strain slightly decreased triglyceride levels and improved HDL cholesterol from baseline suggesting
potential for the strain to reduce body fat in healthy, pre-obese individuals. In overweight and obese
adults, six months consumption of Bif. longum, followed later on by absence of the HMAGM resulting
in deﬁcient energy harvest, immune protection and vitamin biosynthesis which are associated with
malabsorption, systemic pathogen invasion and diarrhoea used a
combination of culturomics and metagenomics to analyse the stool samples of healthy children and
kwashiorkor patients to identify potential probiotics to treat SAM. The authors propose that this cocktail
of probiotics oﬀers a deﬁned, reproducible, safe and convenient alternative to faecal transplantations
for the treatment of SAM in children. These studies indicate that dietary ﬁbre has a role to play in the control of obesity and its related
comorbidities. Another form of dietary ﬁbre may be more suited to the particular microbiota in these
individuals, or the synbiotic approach may be required. Consumer receives
personalized dietary, lifestyle and supplemental recommendations. However, in its favour, gut microbiome testing represents a useful tool in its
present state to increase awareness of the gut microbiome and its inﬂuence on overall health and the
more tests that are performed, the greater the opportunity to move towards precision microbiomics by
advancing our current knowledge base. Guidelines for Evaluating the Scientiﬁc Validity of Evidence for Providing Personalised
Microbiome-Based Dietary Advice

As noted in the previous section, there are risks associated with the rapid commercialisation of
microbiome testing including inconsistencies in results between laboratories as well as over-extrapolation of

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

32 of 49

results on the side of the service provider and over-interpretation of results on the side of the consumer. (i) Study Design and Quality
Considerations:
Type of microbe/diet/outcome interaction
•

•

A relatively “simple” interaction with a single strain of bacteria, measuring the outcome (e.g., glucose
response) over a number of weeks can give more conﬁdence of “cause and eﬀect.” Inevitably, any assessment of nutrition can
only be semi-quantitative at best.