Interventions involving probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and dietary ﬁbre also oﬀer opportunities
to “fertilize” our microbiota. For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003)  However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes  It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism. lactis)
from T2 of pregnancy to week 28 in overweight and obese women did not prevent GDM  These
contradictory results could be due to a number of factors including diﬀerences in probiotics and doses
used, timing and duration of supplementation as well as diﬀerences in host demographics, genetics
and baseline gut microbiota of each individual..

Given such promising results, the impact of maternal probiotic supplementation on breast
milk composition and the infant microbiome is an important area of research. Prebiotics have also proven eﬃcacious for preventing adverse health outcomes in preterm infants. Feeding caesarean-born infants formula supplemented with Bif. longum MM-2 for three weeks by elderly participants increased IL-10 concentrations
compared to the placebo  In addition, 48% of participants in the probiotic group had increased
faecal biﬁdobacteria compared to 30% in the placebo which was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (P < 0.05). Prebiotic supplementation in the elderly has generated promising results in terms of beneﬁcial
alterations to the gut microbiota and also frailty syndrome. Six weeks of
endurance exercise by overweight women was reported to alter the gut metagenome with an increase in
the health-promoting Akkermansia and a decrease in Proteobacteria  Notably, diets did not change
during the six weeks control period before the exercise intervention or during the six-week exercise
period. Administration of Lactobacillus fermentum (PCC. Consumption of Lactobacillus salivarius for four months in the spring by both men
and women (n = 66 in total) participating in endurance-based physical activities had no impact on
incidence of upper respiratory tract infections or mucosal immune markers  While probiotic. biﬁdum  Several metabolic parameters were also. improved including serum insulin levels and homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance. Glucose regulation was also improved
in the prebiotic group who self-reported a reduction in caloric intake. Body weight decreased signiﬁcantly
for both groups but did not diﬀer between groups. Placing the AMER communities into a model. In addition,
we have already mentioned that whole genome sequencing is more informative than 16s rRNA gene
sequencing and this is something the consumer should be made aware of.