The gut microbiota serves the host by interacting directly or indirectly with host cells, the latter of
which comes about through microbially-produced bioactive molecules, thus the microbiota is capable
of regulating numerous biological pathways involved in immunity and energy homeostasis, while also
protecting the host against pathogens through colonisation resistance. F. prausnitzii is an important butyrate producer  More
recently, Haran et al. Increasing age was also associated with a decrease in the abundance of microbiome-encoded genes
and pathways associated with vitamin B, a nitrogenous base and essential amino acid production..

Interestingly, the centenarian microbiota has been shown to signiﬁcantly diﬀer from
that of young adults  being
characterised by an enrichment in facultative anaerobes, mainly pathobionts, and a rearrangement in the
Firmicutes population with a marked decrease in symbiotic species associated with anti-inﬂammatory
properties e.g., F. prausnitzii and relatives. Thuricin CD is an example
of a sactibiotic bacteriocin produced by a human gut isolate, Bacillus thuringiensis  While it has a
narrow spectrum of inhibition, thuricin CD is capable of killing a wide range of C. diﬃcile isolates, its
antimicrobial activity being as potent as the antibiotics vancomycin and metronidazole, but without the
concomitant damage to other members of the microbiota  Bacteriocin production can also aid niche
occupation of the producing strain. an increase in the abundance of bile-tolerant microorganisms presumably owing to the increase in
bile acid secretion as a result of high fat intake  Indeed, the animal-based diet signiﬁcantly
increased the levels of faecal deoxycholic acid (DCA), a secondary bile acid produced by microbial
dehydroxylation of bile, and has been shown to promote liver cancer in mice  and inhibit the
growth of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes members in rats  Microbial genes required for DCA
production exhibited signiﬁcantly higher expression on the animal-based diet. Within the Bacteroidetes, the genera Prevotella and Xylanibacter were uniquely abundant in the African
children being absent in the European children.