Interventions involving probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and dietary ﬁbre also oﬀer opportunities
to “fertilize” our microbiota. For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003)  However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes  It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism. Prebiotics have also proven eﬃcacious for preventing adverse health outcomes in preterm infants. A decreased abundance of biﬁdobacteria has also been reported for
six week old infants born by caesarean section  However, the latter study also revealed that this
disturbance could be partially restored by exclusive breastfeeding. longum MM-2 for three weeks by elderly participants increased IL-10 concentrations
compared to the placebo  In addition, 48% of participants in the probiotic group had increased
faecal biﬁdobacteria compared to 30% in the placebo which was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (P < 0.05). Furthermore, the bacterial strain decreased fatigue accumulation during consecutive
high intensity exercise. Administration of Lactobacillus fermentum (PCC. biﬁdum  Several metabolic parameters were also. In overweight and obese
adults, six months consumption of Bif. longum, followed later on by absence of the HMAGM resulting
in deﬁcient energy harvest, immune protection and vitamin biosynthesis which are associated with
malabsorption, systemic pathogen invasion and diarrhoea used a
combination of culturomics and metagenomics to analyse the stool samples of healthy children and
kwashiorkor patients to identify potential probiotics to treat SAM. This resulted in the identiﬁcation
of 12 species in healthy children which were absent in kwashiorkor patients. Glucose regulation was also improved
in the prebiotic group who self-reported a reduction in caloric intake. Body weight decreased signiﬁcantly
for both groups but did not diﬀer between groups. Samples from G1 subjects were representative
of the superior diet while samples from G2 subjects represented the inferior diet. Interestingly, transplanting AMER microbiota
into gnotobiotic mice and feeding them the CRON diet resulted in community conﬁgurations but
which were weaker than their CRON counterparts.