Female infants are generally born smaller than male infants; however, in response to maternal asthma, the
Caucasian male fetus is more likely to have a lower birthweight and show growth retardation when
delivered at term than the female fetus recently reported less colonisation of stool
with Lactobacillus species at birth and during the first month of life among full-term male infants in
comparison to female infants. Second, we sought evidence for a fetal programming role of
maternal asthma that was independent of birth mode and related events, and was enhanced by maternal
comorbid conditions, such as overweight and atopic disease..

The abundance of Lactobacillus was significantly lower among infants born to women with non-Caucasian
ethnicity and to women with asthma during pregnancy (table 1). Data are presented as n (%),unless otherwise stated. Data are presented as median (interquartile range), unless otherwise stated. Comparisons were performed
using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. The false discovery rate (FDR) was used to adjust p-values for multiple
testing and crude p-values <FDR p-values are indicated by “#”. The p-values <0.1 are reported and
p-values <0.05 are indicated in bold. ¶: Based on the ART test, the p-value for the interaction term
between prenatal asthma and infant sex on Lactobacillus abundance was 0.003 for maternal atopy
comorbidity and 0.06 for overweight comorbidity. Firmicutes were much less abundant in females born to overweight mothers with asthma. Within
the Firmicutes phylum, the genus Megasphaera was less abundant in the infant gut following maternal
asthma comorbid with overweight or atopy, and this difference was statistically significant in females of
mothers with atopic asthma (table 4). Following atopic asthma during
pregnancy, Enterobacteriaceae were less common in the gut microbiota of offspring, more so in males than
females; only Bacteroidaceae enrichment survived correction for multiple testing. Statistical significance was confirmed in male (aOR,
0.26, 95% CI 0.07–0.89), but not female infants (aOR, 0.48, 95% CI 0.17–1.32). Only 2% of Caucasian infants received
probiotic products; their exclusion from analyses did not change any of the findings..

the species level (figure 1), an unclassified
Finally, using the LEfSe method to test differences at
Lactobacillus species was found to be less abundant in male Caucasian infants born to mothers with atopic
asthma (LDA score 2.93, p<0.05). While no prior evidence exists for maternal prenatal asthma,
these findings are compatible with the reduced Lactobacillales abundance observed in the meconium of
newborns of mothers with eczema, and lower faecal colonisation with Lactobacillus species in infants of
atopic parents  In our study, male infants born to mothers with prenatal asthma were one-third
(aOR 0.26, 95% CI: 0.07–0.89) as likely to be colonised with high levels of lactobacilli, independent of
maternal overweight or atopy status, birth mode or infant diet. This reduced response of the placenta heightened the risk for intrauterine growth restriction
in male newborns. Both
Megasphaera and Bacteroidaceae microbes produce propionate, but under opposing conditions.