+34-958-246187
† All the authors are the members of SAMID Network. Hence, the microbiome modulates the
inﬂammatory mechanisms related to physiological and pathological processes that are involved in
the perinatal progress through diﬀerent mechanisms. In addition, we approach some speciﬁc
pathological situations during the perinatal periods, as well as the inﬂuence of the type of delivery
and feeding. Keywords: microbiome; pregnancy; fetus; placenta; newborn; infancy; critical illness; sepsis; allergy

1. In addition, changes in speciﬁc pathological infancy situations have also been revised. However, published data
are not consistent, since a number of factors might inﬂuence the microbiota proﬁle such as the diet,
antibiotic, or other supplement intakes, as well as the methodology of research. Therefore, a holistic
approach is needed to understand all this information. Alpha-diversity changes in gut microbiota during pregnancy. Normal changes in
the vaginal ﬂora during pregnancy are transitions to another Lactobacillus community, and this stability
would protect against ascending infections through the genital tract. It has
been hypothesized that pregnancy creates a nutrient environment that is more favorable to some
sensitive strains  The presence of pathogenic bacteria Porphyromonas gingivalis and Aggregatibacter
actinomycotemcomitans in gingival sulcus were signiﬁcantly higher during early and middle stages
of pregnancy compared to non-pregnant women  The oral alpha-diversity index was higher
in the third trimester compared to non-pregnant women, and this may be related to the increase of
progesterone and estradiol. One underlying mechanism refers to estrogens being substituted
for vitamin K in bacterial anaerobic respiration, especially for black-pigmented Bacteroides such as
Bacteroides melaninogenicus and Prevotella intermedia 

2.4. They concluded that while there were distinctive microbial signatures

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

6 of 21

in oral and vaginal samples, they did not ﬁnd a characteristic placental microbiota, evidencing a sterile
environment  Therefore, conclusions remain unachievable, and more studies are needed in
this area. Changes in the Microbiome Related to the Type of Delivery

There is great controversy in the scientiﬁc community about the relationship of the meconium
and infant gut microbiota proﬁle, and the type of delivery. In accordance, epidemiological data show that atopic diseases appear more often in infants
born by C-section than after vaginal delivery 

Furthermore, bacterial richness and diversity were lower in the infant gut of babies born after
elective C-section and higher in emergency C-section, suggesting that colonization may be aﬀected
diﬀerently in both situations. It is important to highlight that emergency C-section and vaginal delivery
labor are frequently accompanied by rupture of fetal membranes, and exposing the fetus to maternal
vaginal bacteria 

Importantly, C-section may decrease the colonization of milk-digested bacteria including the
genus Lactobacillus in newborns during the ﬁrst months of life  In addition, the mode of delivery
has a relevant impact on the microbiota composition of colostrums and milk  which also may
be inﬂuenced by antibiotics administrated during C-section. might be related to a pro-inﬂammatory status in
these pregnancies. Thus, the higher sensitivity of fetal intestinal tissue to inﬂammatory stimuli may
induce labor due to an immune-mediated reaction. Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

9 of 21

Finally, a number of bacteria, viruses, and protozoa infections have been associated with pregnancy
complications. To our best knowledge, only one study has analyzed the microbiota in children in a pediatric ICU
(PICU)  These authors found that the skin, oral, and fecal microbiota diﬀers sharply from critically
ill children compared with healthy children and adults. On one hand, sedation and endotracheal intubation
decrease mucociliary clearance and cough, reducing the elimination of microorganisms. On the other
hand, mechanical ventilation, pneumonia, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) favor
alveolar edema, increasing the amount of nutrients available and decreasing the amount of oxygen
in some areas. Further studies are needed to tease out if the diﬀerences
observed in gut colonization in ICU patients predispose to sepsis or if they respond to other factors
such as the diet, site diﬀerences in initiating and advancing feeds, breastfeeding, the use of antibiotics,
or interpatient transmission within the neonatal intensive care units 

9. recently showed both lower microbiota alpha-diversity and altered gut microbiota composition
(an increased number of Firmicutes in detriment of Bacteroidetes) in children with food sensitization in
early life compared with children without these conditions. Microbiome and Infection in Infants

The role of microbiome diversity and its variations in the incidence and susceptibility to infection
has also aroused great interest beyond the neonatal period. As described in the neonatal period, in most infectious diseases
scenarios, a decrease in alpha and beta diversity of the microbiota seems to be present. Regarding
respiratory infections, diversity of the oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal microbiota in children
with pneumonia was lower compared with healthy controls. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This research was funded by the PN I+D+I 2008–2011 (Spain), ISCIII- Sub-Directorate General for
Research Assessment and Promotion and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), RETICS Maternal
and Child Health and Development Network, SAMID Network, Ref. Translational Research Network for Pediatric
Infectious Diseases (RITIP), Madrid, Spain. Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.