Round and Mazmanian

Page 2

and anti-inflammatory responses, and balances in the community structure of gut bacteria
may be intimately linked to the proper function of the immune system. These molecular interactions seem to direct the development of immune responses, and in
turn, the immune system shapes the composition of the microbiota. These inducible
structures seem to form normally following the introduction of gut bacteria, suggesting a
dynamic relationship between the immune system and the microbiota. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14. Expression and localization of pattern-
recognition receptors (e.g., Toll-like receptors; TLRs) by the epithelium is influenced by
bacterial colonization of the gut, and expression of defensins and other antimicrobial
proteins are deficient in germ-free animals (Table 1). Germ-free animals are deficient in the development of TH17 cells in the small
intestine39. However, ‘general’ bacterial products
appear to have immunomodulatory affects. Alternatively, the particular diet given to the animal might influence Treg subsets within the
intestine as most animal food, even if autoclaved, may have varying amounts of microbial
molecules (such as TLR ligands). Therefore, the equilibrium between

Nat Rev Immunol. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 6

inflammation and regulation in the gut may be due to the community structure of the
microbiota. In
addition, inflammatory lesions are more pronounced in areas of the intestine that contain the
greatest number of bacteria. This is demonstrated by familial aggregation of IBD and increased concordance for
IBD in monozygotic twins. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 8

In the early 1900s, Ilya Mechnikov was the first to propose the use of live microorganisms
to maintain bowel health and prolong life. The importance of B. fragilis in
maintenance of a healthy immune response was recently illustrated by the finding that
colonization by B. fragilis or treatment with purified PSA can protect from the induction of
experimental IBD66. It is now apparent that there is overlap between these two populations and that
IL-10-producing regulatory T cells can be found in the Foxp3+ T cell subset and are
imperative for the control of experimental colitis. The
current treatments for IBD are either ineffective in most patients or result in severe side
effects. The intestinal bacterial composition of IBD patients differs
greatly from that of healthy controls74. However, over many years, research to identify the
pathogenic organism(s) that elicit inflammation has repeatedly identified reactions only to
intestinal bacteria shared by all humans—healthy and ill. CD4+CD25+FOXP3+ TReg cells can prevent, and in some cases, treat these disorders in
laboratory animals. This consortium of bacteria contains tenfold more cells than the
human body, 100 times the number of genes than in the human genome and has the
metabolic capacity of the human liver91,92. Relman, Brown and co-workers recently examined the development
of the intestinal microbiota of infants93. They found that in the first few days to weeks of
life, the microbiota of newborns is highly variable and subject to waves of temporal
fluctuations, possibly representing a time of sampling, or ‘trial and error’, to coordinately
assemble a stable microbiota. Although pathogenic bacteria clearly
induce local inflammation during acute infections, have symbiotic bacteria evolved to
regulate those inflammatory processes that are harmful to the host (and therefore, harmful to
the existence of the symbiont)? Perhaps genetic and habitual factors shape the composition
of the microbiota, which in turn shapes the immune system of individuals predisposed to
inflammatory disease (Figure 3). An organism that lives in association with a host (usually for a
lifetime) without obvious benefit or harm to either member. A symbiotic association in which both members benefit from the
relationship. This term is
frequently used to describe a microorganism which benefits from an
association with no known effects on the host. From the Greek, pathos, meaning ‘suffering’. Groups of lymphoid nodules present in the small intestine (usually
the ileum). Small lymphoid aggregates located in the anti-mesenteric wall of the
small intestine and containing B cells, dendritic cells, stromal cells
and some T cells. A host receptor (such as Toll-like receptors) that can sense
pathogen-associated molecular patterns and initiate signaling
cascades (which involve activation of nuclear factor-κB) that lead to
an innate immune response.