Several studies have demonstrated modulation of colonic 
microbiota by prebiotic inulin or inulin-type fructans. Clostridium XIVa
E. halli R. hominis
Anaerostipes . Results suggested that PPIs 
diminished the gastric acid barrier, as species found in the 
oral microbiome of PPI users were more abundant in the gut 
than in non-users  It is increasingly observed that the 
use of PPIs is associated with an increase in the incidence of 
enteric infections like Clostridium difficile and Campylobac-
ter. Given the profound effect of PPIs on the gut microbiome 
and the fact that over 11% of population in The Netherlands 
and other European countries are using PPIs on prescription 
(not including over the counter use of PPIs) implies a major 
PPI-dependent influence on the gut microbiome taxonomy 
and function on a populational scale..

The human gut microbiota contains bacteria that are ben-
eficial to the host, and bacteria with pathogenic potential, 
termed ‘pathobionts’  An important role of beneficial 
bacteria is the metabolic production of SCFAs by cross-feed-
ing . Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is a Gram-negative obligate 
anaerobe which is difficult to culture, and taxonomically is in 
the Clostridia order of Firmicutes . The bar represents 10 µm (Photo, M. Sadaghian Sadabad). nitrate, which was generated as a byproduct of the inflamma-
tory host response, selectively enhanced growth of E. coli in 
the large intestine of mice  Moreover, F. prausnitzii pro-
duces a 15 kDa anti-inflammatory protein that inhibits the 
NF-κB pathway in intestinal epithelial cells and was shown 
to prevent colitis in a mouse model . Anti-oxidants  including  riboflavin  and  vitamin  C  are 
being investigated as new targets for intervention for the 
treatment of dysbiosis. Therefore, the maternal microbiome 
also seems to be important for the development of the neo-
natal microbiome. In healthy women, inges-
tion of a fermented milk product supplemented with pro-
biotics containing Bifidobacterium animalis, subsp. lactis, 
Streptococcus thermophiles, and two Lactobacillus spp. produced significant changes in brain activity assessed by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), in response 
to an emotional faces attention task. Many alcohol-dependent subjects have alterations in 
their intestinal permeability and gut microbiome. Increased 
intestinal permeability in these subjects was significantly 
associated with higher scores of depression, anxiety, and 
alcohol craving following 3 weeks of abstinence  A 
placebo-controlled RCT of patients with major depressive 
disorder showed that a probiotic containing two Lactobacil-
lus spp. RJMB, RAR, 
RKW, MF declare no conflict of interest.