Competing interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist. Only 14 out of 41 of the patients were compliant to dietary recom-
mendations. Data relative to the type of delivery, birth weight, gestational age and the type of feeding were
extracted from medical records. Containers were immediately
stored at −80 ˚C for DNA extraction. One microliter of RNase
(Illumina Inc. San Diego. Pairwise Spearman’s non-parametric correlations were
used to study the relationships between the infant relative abundance of microbial taxa and
maternal dietary and metabolic variables. Hierarchical clustering analysis at genus level (S1 Fig) showed a separation between the
infant microbiota and the mother microbiota (anosim P<0.01). α-diversity measures of fecal microbiota. Boxplots describe the relative abundance of phyla in GDM patients at enrolment (red
bars), in GDM patients at the study end (green bars) and in the infants (blue bars). Maternal oligosaccharides derived mainly from dairy products, cereals, fruit and vegetables,

while saturated fatty acids (SFA) derived mainly from meat and cheese. The direct association between maternal fasting glucose at enrolment and Enterococcus
(Rho = 0.49) was no longer confirmed in the multivariate model, while the inverse association
between Clostridiales and maternal changes across pregnancy (delta) in glycated hemoglobin
(HbA1c) levels was statistically significant (Table 1). Two out of 29 women were treated with insulin;
none received metformin. Only correlations with P-values <0.002 are shown. Data at enrolment (plot A) or at
study-end (Plot B). Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) of unweighted UniFrac distances matrix for 16S rRNA gene sequence data. We found 18 oligotypes for Bacteroides, 30 for Blautia, and 81 for Bifidobacterium. We observed that the relative

PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0226545 December 16, 2019

9 / 18

GDM offspring gut microbiota composition

abundance of the Blautia oligotypes increased during the pregnancy and were lower in the
infants (S4A Fig). A higher α-diversity was evident in the latter (for the Chao-1
diversity index, P = 0.001). The microbiota in the first days of life of our GDM offspring might be one of the contribut-

ing factors to the 2- to 8-fold increased future risk of dysmetabolic diseases of those offspring
when compared to offspring of healthy women  We observed that the infant gut micro-
biota composition is influenced by nutritional maternal habits. This hypothesis needs
to be confirmed by further studies. Contrasting data are available about this topic, since a different microbial pattern
have been reported between C-section-delivered infants
and vaginally-delivered infants. Many associations that we found to be not statistically signifi-
cant, could have become so if we had analyzed a larger sample. Heat-plot of the abundances of OTUs at genus level. Heatplot showing OTUs of
GDM patients at enrolment (red bars), study end (green bars) and their offspring (blue bars). Distribution of representative Bifidobacterium oligotypes in the offspring samples. Enrolment characteristics and pregnancy outcomes of the GDM women. Data curation: Ilario Ferrocino, Rosalba Rosato, Simona Bo. Investigation: Valentina Ponzo, Ilario Ferrocino, Adriana Zarovska, Maria Bernadette
Amenta, Filomena Leone, Clara Monzeglio, Marianna Pellegrini, Roberto Gambino,
Simona Bo. Methodology: Valentina Ponzo, Ilario Ferrocino, Rosalba Rosato, Simona Bo. Writing – original draft: Valentina Ponzo, Ilario Ferrocino, Simona Bo.