In studies on urinary microbiomes, the degree of concentration 
of  bacteria  habiting  in  urinary  systems  may  vary  according  to 
the sex, the method of urine collection, and the technique used 
to  study  UM. In  general,  Lactobacillus  and  Streptococcus  are 
the  most  frequently  observed  species  and  many  studies  have 
been performed on them. Both microorganisms are lactic acid 
bacteria and have protective roles against pathogens colonized 
in the urogenital region. Other less frequently found bacterial 
strains are Alloscardovia, Burkholderia, Jonquetella, Klebsiella, 
Saccharofermentans,  Rhodanobacter  and  Veillonella. Lactobacillus, Gardnerella, 
Corynebacterium, 
Enterobacteriaceae, Anaerococcus, 
Bifidobacterium, Streptococcus, 
Staphylococcus, Sneathia, 
Peptoniphilus, Atopobium, 
Rhodanobacter, Trueperella, 
Alloscardovia, Veillonella. are dominant bacteria and form UM 
which demonstrates antimicrobial activity. If  pathogenic  bacteria  can 
achieve this, then why Lactobacillus, an important component 
of  vaginal  colonization,  can  not  do  it? A  total  of  294  patients  from  5  published  studies  were 
evaluated  and  as  a  result  vaginally  administered  Lactobacillus . In the analysis, it was 
stated that the ovules containing combinations of L.crispatus CTV-
05 or  L. rhamnosus GR-1 and  L.fermentum B-54  were the most 
effective methods and that higher number of randomized clinical 
trials were needed for the evaluation of oral probiotic treatments..

Side  effects  due  to  Lactobacillus  prophylaxis  were  investi-
gated  in  7  of  the  studied  studies,  and  any  side  effects  were 
not observed in 4 of them and in the remaining 3 studies mild 
headache,  and  increased  appetite  or  fever  was  observed. In 
addition,  antibiotic  resistance  was  significantly  reduced  in  the 
probiotic  group  compared  to  the  control  group. Lactobacillus 
rhamnosus GR-1 
ve Lactobacillus 
reuteri B-54. Vajinal, 1x109 
CFU/L. rhamnosus 
GR-1 ve 
L.fermentum B-54. in UTIs devel-
oped as a result of changes in the balance of vaginal flora in sexu-
ally active women have been reported in the literature, studies with 
postmenopausal women have not seem to be at an adequate level..

In  UTI  use  of  mono-,  and  combination  treatments  with  probiot-
ics  has  been  published  (Table  3). In the 3rd and 6th month controls, the response rates to treat-
ment were 72.2% and 61.1%, respectively. Researchers noted that 
the combination was well tolerated and effective.