Abstract: Pregnancy induces a number of immunological, hormonal, and metabolic changes that are
necessary for the mother to adapt her body to this new physiological situation. Hence, the microbiome modulates the
inﬂammatory mechanisms related to physiological and pathological processes that are involved in
the perinatal progress through diﬀerent mechanisms. argued the weakness of evidence supporting the. A number of protective lactic
acid-producing Lactobacillus species dominates the healthy vaginal microbiota in most reproductive-age
women. In addition, they reported that
Lactobacillus communities vary depending on the ethnicity of the women conﬁrmed
that vaginal microbiota richness and diversity remained stable during the ﬁrst and second trimesters
of gestation in pregnancies ended at term, whereas in woman with preterm born, the richness and
diversity decreased early in pregnancy. It has
been hypothesized that pregnancy creates a nutrient environment that is more favorable to some
sensitive strains  The presence of pathogenic bacteria Porphyromonas gingivalis and Aggregatibacter
actinomycotemcomitans in gingival sulcus were signiﬁcantly higher during early and middle stages
of pregnancy compared to non-pregnant women  The oral alpha-diversity index was higher
in the third trimester compared to non-pregnant women, and this may be related to the increase of
progesterone and estradiol. However, it is unclear where the fetal microbiota comes from, and when is the ﬁrst fetal exposition. The presence of a diﬀerent placental microbiota compared to the vagina raises the possibility that
the infant may be ﬁrst seeded in utero from other sources. It is important to highlight that emergency C-section and vaginal delivery
labor are frequently accompanied by rupture of fetal membranes, and exposing the fetus to maternal
vaginal bacteria . This could explain the higher colonization
rates of these genera in vaginal compared to C-section-delivered infants  In fact, Sakwinska et
al. reported that only vaginal delivered and fully breastfed infants had gut microbiota dominated by
Biﬁdobacteria . might be related to a pro-inﬂammatory status in
these pregnancies. On one hand, sedation and endotracheal intubation
decrease mucociliary clearance and cough, reducing the elimination of microorganisms. On the other
hand, mechanical ventilation, pneumonia, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) favor
alveolar edema, increasing the amount of nutrients available and decreasing the amount of oxygen
in some areas. Furthermore, the slowing down of intestinal transit, frequent drugs (sedatives, opioids, catecholamines),
and the alteration of the mechanisms of microbial elimination (decreased production of bile salts and
IgA, pharmacological alkalinization of pH, etc.)