Page 2

environmental exposures (Brown et al., More specifically, the state of the science will 
then be presented regarding the maternal gut during pregnancy, related maternal-fetal health 
implications and evidence-based nursing care strategies to improve delivery of care and 
optimize health. The gut microbiome provides a broad range of functions. High permeability allows the leakage of 
bacteria, and/or bacterial components like the lipopolysaccharides (LPS) contained in the 
cell walls of gram-negative bacteria, thus inducing a deleterious systemic inflammatory 
condition called metabolic endotoxemia (Cani, Osto, Geurts, & Everard, 2012). Immunologic Changes of the Gut Microbiome in Pregnancy

During pregnancy, inflammatory states vary from higher inflammation at implantation and 
in labor to lower levels of inflammation in mid-pregnancy (Trevisanuto et al., 2016; Kim, Romero, 
Chaemsaithong, & Kim, 2015). Possible mechanisms of 

MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 01. Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Edwards et al. In a healthy 

MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. The bidirectional nature of 
the brain-gut axis, magnified by gut inflammation, can impact the central nervous system, 
body weight, immune status and behavior (Cepeda et al., The impact of stress on the neuroendocrine system, especially when chronic, can result in 
immunologic dysregulation and heightened risk and virulence of infection (Cepeda, Katz, & 
Blacketer, 2016). Appropriate 
type, duration and indication of prebiotic, probiotic and antibiotic use in the prevention and 
treatment of illness will become an important topic for discussion with clients in the future, 
since all act on the gut microbiome and may impact overall health and gestational weight 
gain (Griffin, 2015). There are no current clinical guidelines to facilitate these discussions 
pending further research. Dietary and lifestyle patterns that impact the brain-gut axis also need to be assessed. Identification of food 
sensitivities (gluten, dairy, and nuts are common) and elimination of those foods from the 
diet reduce systemic inflammation and improves gut health. Further, fiber can improve constipation and other gastrointestinal conditions 
common in pregnancy (Griffin, 2015). Conclusion

Diet and lifestyle practices are modifiable factors that can affect the brain-gut axis, and 
ultimately, the long-term health of women and infants.