S2 

European Journal of Nutrition S1–S14

Crohn’s disease (CD) or ulcerative colitis (UC); and irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS). This updated definition still requires a 
selective microbiota-mediated mechanism to be defined as 
a prebiotic. Real-
time  polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR)  identification  of 
selected bacterial species in the feces of human volunteers 
after inulin ingestion showed that the prevalence of Fae-
calibacterium prausnitzii and two Bifidobacterium species, 
B. adolescentis and B. bifidum, increased significantly  
In a placebo-controlled study, dietary inulin-type fructans 
increased the relative abundance of Bifidobacterium spp. Arrows indicate known cross-
feeding relationships between 
the principle microbial groups 
present. The increased feeling 
of satiety was accompanied by an increase in plasma gut 
peptide concentrations of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) 
and peptide YY in prebiotic supplemented subjects, which 
may have contributed to the change in appetite  suggest-
ing a potential for use in treating obesity. Prebiotics  have  been  used  in  several  studies  to  treat 
constipation. A meta-analysis of RCTs involving 252 sub-
jects (experimental group: n = 144, control group: n = 108) 

Fig. 2   Effect of prebiotics 
on gut function and health. In many cases the 
suggested mechanisms are 
speculative at the present time. Physiological functions are in 
purple and health outcomes 
are in green. In addition, we could 

1 3S6 

European Journal of Nutrition S1–S14

show that 4.5% of the variance in BMI is attributable to the 
gut microbiome 

Analysis of the gut microbiome revealed that the use of 
proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) was associated with a signifi-
cant decrease in gut microbiota diversity and with signifi-
cant changes of around 20% of bacterial taxa. Given the profound effect of PPIs on the gut microbiome 
and the fact that over 11% of population in The Netherlands 
and other European countries are using PPIs on prescription 
(not including over the counter use of PPIs) implies a major 
PPI-dependent influence on the gut microbiome taxonomy 
and function on a populational scale. The Microbiome working group within the UMCG has 
embarked recently on a large project within the LifeLines 
cohort: the 10K metagenome project. In addition to the genetic data, 
more than 2000 phenotypic details will be available for each 
individual. It is planned that the subjects will prospectively 
followed up every 5 years. Microbial  diversity  increases  dramatically  during 

first months of infancy . With the introduction of solid food, a more adult-like micro-
biome starts to develop as of 6 months of life, dominated by 
Firmicutes and Bacteriodetes 

Factors  promoting  a  healthy  microbiota  in  neonates 
include a vaginal delivery, delivery at term, breast feeding, 
and exposure to a variety of microorganisms. Also, 
the  mode  of  delivery  (either  vaginal  or  by  cesarean  section)  affects 

the early life microbiome. Central control of the gut is mediated through the HPA 
axis and the autonomic nervous system. There-
fore, the introduction of probiotic or symbiotic nutritional 
approaches are put forward by researches to prevent, delay, 
or ease neurological disorders in the future (see: . How-
ever, the underlying mechanisms of these interactions are 
largely unclear and, at the present time, it is not possible to 
differentiate between the microbes involved. Conclusions

The role of the human gut microbiota in health and disease 
is beginning to be understood. The composition of the gut 
microbiota is influenced by intrinsic mechanisms such as 
stress, and extraneous factors such as diet, prebiotics, probi-
otics, and drugs including PPIs and antibiotics. The dysbio-
sis of gut microbiota has been shown to be associated with 
IBD, IBS and depression. Microbial metabolites (such as 
SCFAs) affect gut-brain signaling. Taken together, the effects of gut microbiome on health 
are multifaceted and researchers and health professionals try 
to educate consumers by including new scientific informa-
tion into their practice, especially for benefits beyond diges-
tive health. Author contributions  MHM wrote this manuscript. Individual sections 
were corrected and complemented by RJMB, RAR, RKW, HJMH, 
MF. All co-authors reviewed and approved the manuscript before 
submission. RJMB, RAR, 
RKW, MF declare no conflict of interest. Open Access  This article is distributed under the terms of the Crea-
tive Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creat iveco 
mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.