rates of cell turnover in germ-free animals compared with wild-type animals13. Establishing an infection requires the initial task of colonizing the host. For intestinal
pathogens this can pose a difficult problem as all mammals are stably colonized by a
consortium of bacteria that can act as a barrier to infection (“colonization resistance”). These studies support the idea that enteric pathogens
such as S. typhimurium may have developed strategies to counter both the immune system
and the microbiota during the infectious process..

IBD involves a shift from a regulated intestinal immune responses to one that is driven by
unrestrained immune-cell activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine production474849. In
addition, inflammatory lesions are more pronounced in areas of the intestine that contain the
greatest number of bacteria. This is demonstrated by familial aggregation of IBD and increased concordance for
IBD in monozygotic twins. Additionally, experimental systems have demonstrated the importance
of host genetics during induction of IBD. It remains unclear whether dysbiosis directly causes
disease or is a result of the altered intestinal environment. Treatment of colitic mice with the
probiotic cocktail, VSL#3, increased the production of IL-10 and the percentage of TGFβ-
expressing T cells77. Depletion of
TGFβ-bearing CD4+ T cells from probiotic treated mice before the transfer of lamina
propria cells abolished the protective capacity of these cells77. Adoptive transfer of the CD4+CD25+ TReg-cell population from mice fed with B.
infantis inhibited inflammation-induced activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) in recipient
mice..

The first demonstration that a single molecule made by a commensal microorganism could
shape beneficial immune responses was provided by the identification of polysaccharide A
(PSA) produced by the human symbiont Bacteroides fragilis (Figure 1). The importance of B. fragilis in
maintenance of a healthy immune response was recently illustrated by the finding that
colonization by B. fragilis or treatment with purified PSA can protect from the induction of
experimental IBD66. B. fragilis has been shown to protect its host from inflammatory disease caused by H.
hepaticus in an animal model of experimental colitis66. The intestinal bacterial composition of IBD patients differs
greatly from that of healthy controls74. and higher levels of colonization by aerobic
microorganisms than did non-allergic children from either region85.