proﬁle identiﬁed based on sequencing different
variable regions. For example, V1V3 amplicons
may underestimate Acinetobacter and Escheri-
chia genera, but V3V5 provides both breadth
and depth of communities dominated by these
genera. The 16S rDNA gene is an ideal target for classifying bacteria. ( However, by the 1990s,
multiple other species were found in anaerobic
cultures of vaginal discharge from subjects with
symptoms consistent with BV (Faro et al. This study recruited nearly 400 women of
mixed ethnicities. showed that these types of clus-
ter analysis are sensitive to the distance metric
used for analysis and that multiple distance
metrics should be used to promote accuracy
in data. This metab-
olism of glycogen into lactic acid was historical-
ly thought to be performed by the vaginal
epithelium, because the vaginal lumen is sufﬁ-. And on
probing at the species level using supervised
machine learning approaches, such as linear
discriminate analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe)
and Boruta feature selection, we discovered that
the vaginal microbiome during pregnancy was
enriched in L. iners, L. crispatus, Lactobacillus
jensenii, and Lactobacillus johnsonii (Aagaard
et al. However, with a low
number and low ethnic diversity of subjects in
the study, further studies are needed to conﬁrm
these shifts of the vaginal microbiome toward
CSTs dominated by lactobacilli as pregnancy
progresses. 2010),
which was further shown by this recent study
(Romero et al. In a separate study, the
vaginal microbiome was examined longitudi-
nally during gestation using the V3V5 amplicon
of 16S rRNA in 12 subjects that were mostly
Caucasian (Walther-Anto´ nio et al. has examined
the vaginal microbiome in preterm birth. In contrast to
the study by Hyman et al., These ﬁnd-
ings suggest that the establishment of a stable. This is in contrast to
previous studies ﬁnding that Bacteroides relative
abundance differed based on mode of delivery
(Gro¨nlund et al. However, further studies are necessary
to show deﬁnitively that hematogenous spread
from the oral cavity is possible for colonization
or infection of the placenta.