bioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. 1A

1B

1D

1C

1E

2

Figure 1: Study Design and Population 
Characteristics

1A. The study cohort had 550 adult participants 
 Each study participant provided 
a stool sample, filled out questionnaires, and 
made an office visit. At the end of the study, all the 
data streams were fused, pre-processed, and 
analyzed as described in this paper. 1B. Age distribution with mean of 43.8 years (SD 
12.115). 1E. Waist-to-hip ratio distribution with mean of 
0.901 (SD 0.076) for men and 0.832 (SD 0.071) 
for women. The  distribution  of  macronutrients  (Figure  2C)  shows  the  coverage 
of the provided meals within the space of macronutrient proportions. This visualiza-
tion helped the study administrators to visually inspect the data and 
ensure that data was properly captured and lined up. Free meals that were within 30 
mins  were  merged,  and  those  within  90  minutes  of  each  other  dis-
carded. The actual iAUC values for all meals, the repeated meals from Figure 
2D, and the glucose drink are shown in Figure 3A. 

Figure 3B was constructed after modeling iAUC with standardized 
macronutrient values (i.e., z-scores). Meals 
with similar composition “types” 
were distributed across the sched-
ule, and schedule days 1 and 8 were 
repeated meal days. 2E. Data collected for a single par-
ticipant over 2 days (out of 14). The 
red histogram next to sleep bars is 
the tracked physical activity. 2A

2B

2E

Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Our experimental de-
sign calls for a multilevel model because of this repetition; each PPGR 
observation is at a lower level nested within one person and within one 
meal (higher levels), in a crossed or fully factorial experimental design 
(see Figure 4A). We removed effects not significant 
by likelihood ratio test at p<.05. 15  scores  showed  a  significant 
association taken alone and were tested in the full model. Several of the significant predictors were microbiome scores. One 
of the scores, named microbiome balance, is an aggregate assessment 
of  microbiome  balance  quantifying  overall  beneficial  and  harmful 
activities (based on the literature), as well as some diversity metrics. The fucose metabolism pathways activity score considers expres-
sion levels of all the genes that encode enzymes known to carry out 

5

biochemical reactions that result in processing and catabolic conver-
sions of fucose – a glycan that microbes may obtain from the host’s 
gut lining mucosal layer, or food components. 3B. Marginal effect of macronutrients on glucose response over time, across all meals, across all participants. X axis is the mean absolute difference in iAUC. 3D. Examples of individual variation in glycemic response. Averaging across 5 such random train/test splits of the data, 

the model achieves R=.80 (R2=.64) on training data, and R=.64 
(R2=.40) on held-out test data. The two meals where intra-person 
variability  is  close  to  inter-person  variability  are  meals  that  contain 
little to no carbohydrates. This may 
explain its association with higher PPGR. 4B. Fixed effect estimates for all predictors included in the 
final model. In the case of indole acetate production, the result 
shows that when such pathways score “High” in activity, the glycemic 
response  to  the  given  food  is  lower. Glutamine  production  pathways  score,  when  “Low,”  showed  a 
direct relationship with higher PPGR. Although it is challenging 
to  delineate  causal  mechanisms,  there  may  be  functional  patterns 

9

that connect the significant scores with gut health, intestinal barrier 
integrity,  and  inflammation. We seek to confirm and validate these mechanisms.