relationships
between internal microorganisms and I. scapularis have
focused on commonly studied human pathogens. However, little is known regarding the
range of microbes the tick comes in contact with or
maintains throughout
its entire life cycle. These bloodmeals are necessary for
the immature
stages (larva, nymph) to moult to the next stage and
for adult females to lay eggs (Needham & Teel 1991;
there are numerous opportunities
Fish 1993). for additional symbioses
Consequently,
I. scapularis may be
involving microbes that beneﬁt
quite high..

A total of 21 samples – three pools for each of the ﬁve
life stage categories (lab-reared larvae, ﬁeld-collected
larvae, ﬁeld-collected nymphs, ﬁeld-collected adult
females, and ﬁeld-collected adult males), and three
pools for female salivary glands and female midguts –
generated 10 896 297 raw reads on one Illumina MiSeq
ﬂow cell. This resulted in 116 941–
452 654 (mean = 328 977, SD = 96 960) high-quality,
merged sequences per sample (Table S1, Supporting
information). The conditional uncovered probability of
the samples, on average,
indicated a high likelihood
that over 99.9% of the bacterial taxa in the samples was
covered. S2, Supporting informa-
tion)..

classiﬁed into the phyla Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria,
Armatimonadetes, Bacteroidetes, Chlamydiae, Chlo-
roﬂexi, Cyanobacteria, Firmicutes, Gemmatimonadetes,
Planctomycetes, Spirochaetae, Verrucomicrobia, the can-
didate phyla BRC1, FBP, GN02, OD1, TM6, TM7, WPS-
2 and Thermi, or were unassigned at the phylum level. At the genus level, Rickettsia had the highest relative
abundance across all developmental stage
samples. Seven taxa were
found in all female and all freshly hatched larvae sam-
ples (matching to the genera Rickettsia, Phyllobacterium,
Burkholderia, Sphingomonas, Pseudomonas and the families
Comamonadaceae
and Oxalobacteraceae); however,
females harboured more observed OTUs than freshly
hatched larvae . Wolbachia was the genus with the second highest. relative abundance in males (mean = 8.4%) and was
found in all other life stages, but not in all samples,
with a low relative abundance (<0.1%). Both Borrelia and Anaplasma were only found in
nymphs and adults..

Dermacentor and Haemaphysalis ticks (Piesman & Gage
2004), Rickettsia amblyommii isolated from the American
lone star tick Amblyomma americanum (Stromdahl et al. Overall, short
sequences could not be unambiguously placed on single
branches, but were rather assigned along a clade, which
lends a certain degree of conﬁdence. Global placement
uncertainty was elevated, as captured by the EPA’s
entropy measure (mean = 0.7767, SD = 0.0699). 2015) and is believed to be
the only Rickettsia species found in this tick (Gillespie
et al. The vast majority of our sequences were
assigned to the rickettsial clade isolated from Ixodes ticks
using a phylogenetic tree-guided procedure.