Even though they have limitations
like all other models, they present some important
immunological and histopathological aspects of IBD in
humans  The most widely used and characterized
experimental model of erosion and inﬂammation related
to UC in mice is the dextran sulphate sodium (DSS)-
induced colitis, which is developed by DSS administration
either in the drinking water or via intragastric
catheter  The DSS induces a reproducible
acute colitis  however, there is some controversy
regarding the type of inﬂammation that is induced. For
some, the DSS model is recognized as a true model of
colitis, while for others the model represents a model of
epithelial erosion, but it is believed that DSS is directly
toxic to gut epithelial cells of the basal crypts and affects
the integrity of the mucosal barrier  However,
the model induces an acute colitis that is characterized
by ulceration and inﬁltration, and also reﬂects many
of the clinical features of IBD  For example,
among other features, changing the DSS concentration or
administration cycles can easily induce acute, chronic,
and relapsing colitis. The aim of the present study was to utilize Illumina
sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene and inferred meta-
genomics by open source software PICRUSt (Phyloge-
netic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of
Unobserved States  to investigate differences in
microbiome composition and function in the fecal and
colonic mucosa of mice treated with 5% DSS for 5 days. 2016, 56, 1–13

the animal care facility at the Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Manitoba. Controls were time-matched and consisted of
mice that received normal drinking water only. Blood was assessed using the Hemoccult II test
(Beckman coulter, Oakville, ON, Canada). DNA extraction
from colonic mucosa samples was done using ZR Tissue
and Insect DNA kit (Zymo Research Corp.). Amplicons were veriﬁed by agarose
gel electrophoresis. This was followed by multiple dilution steps using pre-
chilled hybridization buffer (HT1) (Illumina, San Diego,
CA, USA) to bring the pooled amplicons to a ﬁnal
concentration of 5 pM, measured by Qubit 2.0 Fluorom-
eter (Life technologies, Burlington, ON, Canada). The
sequencing data are uploaded into the Sequence Read
Archive (SRA) of NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra)
and are accessible through accession number SRR2830596. for further comparisons between
microbial communities. Data were presented in loading scatter
plots. The new OTU table
was then used to generate metagenomic data after
normalizing the data by copy numbers, and to derive
relative Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG) Pathway abundance  The KEGG data were
analyzed using STAMP (STatistical Analysis of Metage-
nomic Proﬁles) 

Statistical analysis
The UNIVARIATE procedure of SAS (SAS 9.3, 2012) was
used to test the normality of residuals for a-diversity
data. The differences between groups were
considered signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. loss, and the
presence of blood in the feces were increased whereas
stool consistency was decreased. Microbiota composition at phylum and lower
taxonomic levels in the fecal samples
A total of 259,126 sequences were generated after quality
ﬁltering steps with an average of 28,791 high-quality
sequences per sample, which resulted in identiﬁcation of
11 phyla and 86 taxa. Values are
shown as the mean (cid:4) SEM. (cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

6

Peris Mumbi Munyaka et al. The p values shown
on top of each bar were calculated using SAS. a) Fecal
samples clustered separately according to treatment status of the mice, suggesting that DSS and control mice samples are composed of
distinct bacterial communities; (b) colon mucosa samples have shared bacterial communities. The p values were determined using
PERMANOVA. Results of the relative abundances of
various phyla are summarized in Fig. Bacterial taxa with relative abundance of (cid:5)0.01% of
community were analysed using PLS-DA to identify
bacteria that were most characteristic of the DSS or
control treatments. 5a, Bacteroides
ovatus, Clostridium perfrigens, Helicobacter hepaticus, and
Parabacteroides distasonis; g. Desulfovibrio, Escherichia,
Helicobacter, Clostridium,
Parabacteroides,
Bacilli, Allobaculum, Coprobacillus, Bacteroides, rc4-4; and
unclassiﬁed members of f. Enterobacteriaceae, Clostri-
diaceae, Bacteroidaceae; o. RF39, RF32, Bacteroidales,
and Erysipelotrichales were positively correlated with
the DSS group but negatively correlated with the
control group. The low-abundance phyla (<1% of
included Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria,
community),
Cyanobacteria, Fibrobacteres, Lentisphaerae, Planctomy-
cetes, Spirochaetes, TM7, and Tenericutes. In this context, the fecal
microbiome of DSS-treated mice was associated with but
not limited to, increased fatty acid biosynthesis, lysine
degradation, pyruvate metabolism, propanoate metabo-
lism, replication, recombination and repair proteins,
and transcription machinery . From the macroscopic assessment of disease
severity in the colon, it was apparent that mice in the
DSS-induced colitis treatment exhibited overt features of
colitis compared to the healthy control group, which is
in agreement with previous results where a DSS model
was used  Also, analysis of the inﬂammatory
markers including serum CRP level, a marker of systemic
inﬂammation, showed signiﬁcant differences between
the two groups as DSS up-regulated this marker. This indicates that proﬁling of
fecal and colonic bacteria by Illumina sequencing may
be sensitive for investigating changes associated with

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. Lending support to these results,
Berry et al. Generally,
despite these differences in relative abundances of
speciﬁc phylotypes, there appear to be a consensus in
overall decrease in biodiversity in IBD patients and in
murine models of colitis 

The mechanisms by which DSS induced stronger
bacterial shifts in the feces than in the colon mucosa

are not fully understood.