The human vaginal microbiome maintains low diversity in low-pH conditions and
depends on host sugars as carbon sources, with less access to dietary and exogenous
nutrients than the gut, skin, or oral cavity. Historically, vaginal microbial communities
have been stratiﬁed based on hierarchical clustering of the taxa composition 
Keystone species include Lactobacillus crispatus and Lactobacillus gasseri, which have
been associated with maintenance of a simple vaginal microbiome by their production
of bacteriostatic and bactericidal compounds (e.g., lactic acid and hydrogen peroxide)
and maintenance of a low pH numerically and functionally dominating their
respective vaginal communities. Saliva and urine were collected at indicated intervals from each infant up until
1 year of age . The
bacterial taxa in samples with abundant Lactobacillus spp. were signiﬁcantly less evenly
distributed (linear mixed-effects [LME] modeling; P (cid:2) 0.001; Fig. Thirteen
individuals produced sufﬁcient sequence reads for taxonomic as-
signment, which was concordant with 16S rRNA gene sequence results . A nonmetric multidimensional scaling (nMDS) plot of Bray-Curtis
dissimilarities showed that vaginal communities clustered by their most abundant
bacterium . To account for repeated measures from longitudinal samples
from the same individual, we also performed an LME, which required dimensional
reduction (LME; R2 (cid:2) 69%; P (cid:3) 0.0001). The CVF metabolome as
assessed by both mass spectrometry methods did not signiﬁcantly differ across trimes-
ters (LME; P (cid:2) 0.6378 for GC-TOF MS; P (cid:2) 0.3942 for liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry [LC-MS/MS]). A constrained, distance-based ordination plot recapitulated 67% of the
community variation observed in the vaginal microbiota . Indole-3-lactate (ILA) accounted for
27% of the variation observed in the vaginal microbiota data and was found to be more
abundant in vaginal microbiota with abundant L. crispatus . In parallel, we found that
a pathway for mannitol-1-phosphate production is also more abundant in shotgun
metagenomic data sets of CVF samples dominated by L. crispatus . Detected
ions by MALDI were compared to those identiﬁed by GC-MS and LC-MS, and we found
that (cid:4)55% of the metabolites identiﬁed had corresponding ions in the MALDI analysis
(Table S1)..

Metagenomics and functional potential of communities. For instance, the vaginal microbiota of sub-
jects 1180 and 1222 had higher abundances of L. crispatus during the ﬁrst trimester, but
L. iners was more abundant in the remaining trimesters. Indeed,
L. crispatus has been shown to have anti-Candida activity of
samples that were Candida positive came from individuals whose vaginal microbiota
were dominated by an organism other than L. crispatus..

A few metabolites were highly indicative of the bacterial community present in each
subject and may be useful biomarkers for the type of vaginal microbiota present. To this end, reducing fructose 6-phosphate to
mannitol-1-phosphate may be an alternative and vital way L. crispatus regenerates
NAD(cid:5) for glycolysis  We did ﬁnd the gene mannitol-1-phosphate dehydroge-
nase, responsible for converting fructose 6-phosphate to mannitol-1-phosphate, was
highly correlated (R2 (cid:2) 0.9) with the relative abundance of L. crispatus.