Food & Function

Paper

total resveratrol administered was recovered in the form of
resveratrol, dihydroresveratrol and derived metabolites (65.1%
along the gastrointestinal tract, and 0.5% in other tissues).17 So,
it may be very diﬃcult to reach eﬀective concentrations in
metabolism regulating tissues in vivo, e.g. visceral adipose
tissues. Taken together,
in the present study, we
hypothesize that resveratrol exerts anti-obesity eﬀects partly
mediated by mechanisms of regulating the composition of gut
microbes and this, in turn, may aﬀect their functional rela-
tionships with host fat storage and metabolism. Biochemical analysis
Aer a 6 h fasting period, blood samples were collected and
were isolated by centrifugation at 1500 (cid:5) g at 4 (cid:3)C for 10 min. Colonic sample collection, xation and uorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH)
The cell-xation procedure was adapted from Schwiertz et al.21
One volume of the colonic contents was suspended in 9 ml of
phosphate-buﬀered saline (PBS) and vortexed with glass beads
for 3 min; then 0.2 ml of the suspension was xed in 0.6 ml
fresh 4% paraformaldehyde at 4 (cid:3)C overnight. (cid:4)1 Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 5 mmol l

Histology

Randomly selected epididymal fat and liver tissues obtained from
mice were washed with PBS and xed in 4% formaldehyde for 1 h
at 4 (cid:3)C. Paraﬃn-embedded epididymal fat tissue was sectioned at
3–5 mm thickness and stained with hematoxylin–eosin (HE). Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. b-Actin was
chosen as the housekeeping gene. Each assay was performed in
duplicate in the same run. Gene expression was calculated as DCT
using b-actin as a reference, and was expressed relative to the
control group normalised to a value of 1. Statistics
Diﬀerences between two groups were analyzed by the one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) test followed by the Tukey's test. The data were expressed as
means with their standard errors. Aer RES treatment, both
the levels of HDL-C and LDL-C in plasma were signicantly
improved. Moreover, the principal coordinate analysis scores plot
in Fig. 2B supports the presence of overlapping clusters between
HF-RES and CT groups, which illustrated the relative similarity
of CT and RES treated mice in microbiotal proles. View Article OnlineFood & Function

Paper

Fig. A) Average body weight, (B) liver weight (percentage of body weight) and (C) visceral
and subcutaneous adipose tissue weight (percentage of body weight). Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF
group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES. Eﬀect of RES on gene expressions in the liver

Glucose and insulin are known to induce the expression of
lipogenic enzymes in the liver.25 Oil Red O staining of liver
sections conrmed that there was severe steatosis seen in HF
mice compared with the CT group, which was well prevented in
RES treatment mice . Moreover, qRT-PCR anal-
yses of epididymal fat pad RNA revealed that the expressions of
key genes responsible for adipogenesis (Ppar-g) and lipogenesis

1244 | Food Funct., These ndings are in line with Cani et al. In addition, there was a decrease in the Lactobacillus
and Bidobacterium frequencies and an increase of Enterococcus
faecalis in HF mice compared with CT mice, which agree with
our previous studies that a high-fat diet signicantly decreases
the number of Lactobacillus and increases the number of
Enterococcus faecalis.30 Aer resveratrol intake, the numbers of
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium were signicantly increased. Similar results were reported by Larrosa et al. Recent studies
showed that polyphenols are associated with antimicrobial

Fig. Bacte-
rial quantities are expressed as a percentage of EUB338 (n ¼ 8). ( This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249 | 1245

Published on 01 April 2014. 3 Correlation between the body weight and the colonic bacterial content of (A) the Lactobacillus group, (B) the Biﬁdobacterium group, (C)
Enterococcus faecalis, and (D) the ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes. Bacterial quantities are expressed as relative abundance (%). Each relative mRNA expression was determined by the ratio of
intensity to b-actin production. 31201805), the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities (no.