Food & Function

Paper

total resveratrol administered was recovered in the form of
resveratrol, dihydroresveratrol and derived metabolites (65.1%
along the gastrointestinal tract, and 0.5% in other tissues).17 So,
it may be very diﬃcult to reach eﬀective concentrations in
metabolism regulating tissues in vivo, e.g. visceral adipose
tissues. Few studies have investigated the eﬀect of dietary resveratrol
on the complex gut microbiota in vivo, and they focused mainly
on a single bacterial population and polyphenols in red wine,
tea, and coﬀee. Mice were killed by cervical
dislocation aer a 6 h period of fasting. Biochemical analysis
Aer a 6 h fasting period, blood samples were collected and
were isolated by centrifugation at 1500 (cid:5) g at 4 (cid:3)C for 10 min. Aer hybridization, 150 ml of hybridization solution
4 ng ml
was added, centrifuged at 4000 (cid:5) g for 15 min at room
temperature and then incubated in 200 ml of washing solution
(cid:4)1
(65 mmol l
EDTA, pH 8.0, 0.01% SDS) at 37 (cid:3)C for 20 min. Ornithine carbamoyl-transferase frozen liver tissue was sectioned
at 3–5 mm thickness and stained with oil red O. Histological
assessment of the tissue morphology was performed using an
Olympus light microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. Each assay was performed in
duplicate in the same run. The data were expressed as
means with their standard errors. Moreover, the principal coordinate analysis scores plot
in Fig. View Article OnlineFood & Function

Paper

Fig. Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF
group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES. Eﬀect of RES on gene expressions in the liver

Glucose and insulin are known to induce the expression of
lipogenic enzymes in the liver.25 Oil Red O staining of liver
sections conrmed that there was severe steatosis seen in HF
mice compared with the CT group, which was well prevented in
RES treatment mice . Moreover, qRT-PCR anal-
yses of epididymal fat pad RNA revealed that the expressions of
key genes responsible for adipogenesis (Ppar-g) and lipogenesis

1244 | Food Funct., Gut microbes, as environmental factors, may regulate fat
storage and aﬀect energy metabolism homeostasis, by acceler-
ation of the processing of dietary polysaccharides and induction
of de novo lipogenesis.6,28 In the present study, both the relative
abundance of the major bacterial divisions and principal coor-
dinate analysis showed that, the HF diet induced the gut
microbiota dysbiosis. These ndings are in line with Cani et al. Bacte-
rial quantities are expressed as a percentage of EUB338 (n ¼ 8). ( This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Food Funct., 2014, 5, 1241–1249 | 1245

Published on 01 April 2014. 3 Correlation between the body weight and the colonic bacterial content of (A) the Lactobacillus group, (B) the Biﬁdobacterium group, (C)
Enterococcus faecalis, and (D) the ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes. Aer knockout of the Fiaf gene, the increased
total body fat content of CONV-D mice markedly attenuates.8 By
analysis of GF and conventionalized, normal and Fiaf knockout
mice, Backhed et al.8 showed that Fiaf is a circulating lipopro-
tein lipase inhibitor and that its suppression is essential for the
microbiota-induced deposition of triglycerides in adipocytes. Each relative mRNA expression was determined by the ratio of
intensity to b-actin production. 6 Eﬀects of high-fat diet and RES supplementation on adipocyte hypertrophy through the PPAR signaling pathway in OP mice. ( A) The
corresponding hematoxylin- and eosin-stained epididymal fat sections are shown. ( 31201805), the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities (no.