Brief Reviews

  e
Th

Journal of

Immunology

The Impact of Maternal Microbes and Microbial
Colonization in Early Life on Hematopoiesis

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

function of the immune system at distal tissues, including
primary lymphoid organs, such as the bone marrow (BM) and
thymus. However, recent evidence suggests that coloni-
zation may, in fact, precede birth. It
has been suggested that a placental microbiome, seeded from
the mother’s intestine and oral cavity, may develop to initiate
fetal colonization during gestation. The Journal of Immunol-
ogy, 2018, 200: 2519–2526. Microbes
are passed vertically from mother to child during birth and are
subsequently obtained via horizontal transfer from the envi-
ronment. Accepted for publication February 12,
2018. As a result,

these pups rapidly succumbed to experimental infection with
Escherichia coli or Klebsiella pneumoniae. In the experiments above, the effects of antibiotics could
reﬂect an inﬂuence on the microbiota of the mother, the
neonate, or both. To assess the impact of the maternal
microbiota alone, without any inﬂuence from microbial col-
onization of the pups after birth, Gomez de Ag€uero et al. transiently colonized germ-free dams during gestation with an
auxotrophic mutant strain of E. coli, termed HA107. This study revealed that
maternal Ab-mediated vertical transfer of maternal microbial
components vastly altered gene expression in the intestine of

The Journal of Immunology

2521

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

FIGURE 1. A child’s immune system can be modulated by microbial
signals at various stages in development. Postnatal maturation of the innate and adaptive immune
is driven by signals arising from the intestinal
systems
microbiota. If the
normal processes of establishing a microbiota are disrupted
during this period, it may have life-long consequences for the
host, leading to increased susceptibility to a number of dis-
orders, including autoimmune diseases, IBD, asthma, allergy,
obesity, and autism. Recent work shows that the dif-
ferentiation fate of an HSC clone down a particular lineage is
predetermined by epigenetic modiﬁcations that are thought to
arise early during its development  This begs the ques-
tion: could early life exposure to microbes generate epigenetic
memory in the BM that has a life-long impact on host immune
responses, subsequently inﬂuencing the risk for immune-mediated
pathologies? Whether early B cell development can occur in the
intestines of humans is not clear, although pre-B cells have
been found in the human fetal small intestinal lamina propria

 In mice, although early B cells that express RAGs are
absent from the small intestine at birth, they are found to
accumulate in the gut mucosa at weaning, coincident with
increasing microbial colonization in early life  This
suggests that microbes (and potentially dietary Ags) may play
an important role in shaping the primary Ab repertoire in
early life  and this may occur outside of the BM. ii) The host immune system responds to this intestinal colonization, leading to the local and/or systemic
production of growth factors, cytokines, and chemokines. Future work will unravel the impact that microbe-driven effects on BM homeostasis have on other tissues or immunopathologies. Recent
work showed that microbial dysbiosis caused by feeding mice
a high-fat diet was associated with a shift in hematopoiesis in
favor of myelopoiesis at the expense of the lymphoid lineage
 These changes appeared to reﬂect an increase in MPPs
and common myeloid progenitors and a concomitant re-
duction in common lymphocyte progenitors (CLPs) and
immature B cells. As a result, the host mice were less able to
regenerate leukocytes following BM ablation with 5-ﬂuoro-
uracil. Similarly, Ver-
rucomicrobia are Gram-negative and increased during van-
comycin treatment; in contrast to Proteobacteria, members of
this phylum, such as Akkermansia muciniphila, promote a
healthy gut, possibly through colonizing the outer mucous
layer and producing SCFAs  In contrast, Actinobacteria
are Gram-positive and depleted by vancomycin treatment. Exactly which bacteria may be playing a role is not clear,
because Actinobacteria are the third most dominant bacterial
phylum in humans and can be pathogens, like Mycobacterium,
or commensals, such as Biﬁdobacterium. Another study found
that feeding mice with a ﬁber-rich diet led to an outgrowth of
Bacteriodetes at the expense of Firmicutes, leading to an in-
crease in the levels of the SCFAs propionate and acetate in the
circulation  When challenged intranasally with house
dust mite Ag, mice on the high-ﬁber diet developed less severe
airway inﬂammation than mice fed regular chow. Many studies report a defect in myelopoiesis in animals
deﬁcient in TLRs or TLR-speciﬁc adapter molecules (42, 43,
50–52). By triggering a downregulation of
CXCL12, a surface-bound chemokine expressed by BM
stromal cells, and by activating neutrophil proteases, G-CSF
breaks the chemokine ligand–receptor bond that usually re-
tains neutrophils within the BM niche  Further,
G-CSF triggers the release of the neutrophil chemoattractants
CXCL1 and CXCL2 from vascular endothelial cells  By
binding to CXCR2 on neutrophils, these chemokines recruit
newly differentiated neutrophils to the bloodstream. A similar
process of CXCL12 regulation by the monocyte chemokine
receptor CCR2 has been proposed to regulate monocyte
egress from the BM under inﬂammatory conditions 
Activation of CCR2 by its cognate ligand CCL2 down-
regulates CXCR4 expression by BM monocytes, releasing
them from the BM niche. However, recent work cou-
pling functional studies with transcriptional and epigenetic
modiﬁcation assays suggests that HSCs are biased in their
differentiation potential and that speciﬁc HSC clones
may be impaired in their ability to differentiate down a par-
ticular lineage pathway by cell-autonomous epigenetic con-
straints generated the
transgenic HUe mouse strain, which allowed fate mapping of
endogenous HSCs in vivo, as well as isolation of distinct HSC
clones and transplantation into new hosts. Importantly, it is becoming clear that alterations in diet or
antibiotic treatment can alter BM hematopoiesis in adults,
resulting in profound effects on immune function. Elucidating

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

The Journal of Immunology

2525

the processes that allow the microbiota to shape immune
function early in life could provide a missing link in our
understanding of how immunopathologies develop and has
important implications for the use of antibiotics and dietary
manipulation in children and pregnant women.