Pregnancy and the Microbiome

that we are born germ free (Tissier, 1900) and is still the belief
of many physicians, numerous pieces of evidence now cast
doubt on this hypothesis, and suggest that a bacterial presence
already exists in the feto-placental unit (Hu et al., 2012), of which the dominant bacterial phyla are Firmicutes and
Bacteroidetes (Rajilic-Stojanovic et al., PHYSIOLOGICAL CHANGES DURING
PREGNANCY

During gestation,
the female body undergoes hormonal,
immunological, and metabolic changes to support fetal growth
and development (Kumar and Magon, 2012). In many ways,

the metabolic changes associated with
pregnancy are similar to those that occur in the metabolic
including weight gain, elevated fasting blood-
syndrome,
low-
insulin resistance, glucose intolerance,
glucose levels,
grade inﬂammation, and changes in metabolic hormone levels
(Fuglsang, 2008; Newbern and Freemark, 2011; Emanuela et al., this
These changes are discussed below, are the focus of
review and are summarized in Figure 1. However,
is
it
important to understand the microbiota changes in the full
context of all physiological changes occurring simultaneously,
since
regulation and cross-talk between pathways must
exist. Pregnancy and the Microbiome

third trimester of pregnancy. In an attempt to reveal the roles of the third trimester
microbial proﬁles, fecal transplantation was used to transfer
samples of ﬁrst- and third-trimester fecal microbiotas to germ-
free (GF) mice, and test
their physiological eﬀects. Only a few studies have
studied this timeframe, and it would therefore be of interest
to investigate how long the postpartum transition period lasts,
and whether a return to baseline microbial populations ever
occurs. The vaginal microbiome is dominated by many species
including Lactobacillus and members of
the Clostridiales,
Bacteriodales, and Actinomycetales (Aagaard et al., A study characterizing the vaginal microbiota of pregnant
and non-pregnant African-Americans reported that during
pregnancy, one of
the changes is dominance of a single
Lactobacillus species over others (Romero et al., It has been suggested that
the microbiota during
progesterone and estrogen aﬀect
pregnancy, but these eﬀects have not been fully deciphered nor
directly proven, other than the ﬁnding that estrogens enhance
Candida infections (Kumar, 2013; Fujiwara et al., It was believed that cases

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

5

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al. When studying the vaginal microbiome, Romero et al. and
and Ureaplasma,
higher alpha diversity. Mechanistically, abnormal changes in the
vaginal microbiota during pregnancy, such as decreased levels
of Lactobacillus sp., Alternatively, it was suggested that
hematogenous spread of oral microbes to the placenta might be
a driver of preterm birth (Aagaard et al., While some
of these studies indicate changes in bacterial composition of
the placenta correlating to preterm deliveries, more research is
needed to validate microbial placental signatures associated with
preterm birth. found no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between
the meconium microbiota of vaginal vs. Cesarean section (C-
section) delivered infants (Gosalbes et al., The infants born by C-section also exhibit delayed colonization
of the phylum Bacteroidetes, and lower alpha diversity during
the ﬁrst 2 years of life (Jakobsson et al., Interestingly, the mode of delivery has an eﬀect on the infant’s
oral microbiome, as well (Lif Holgerson et al., The

the microbiome
compositions of C-section vs. vaginal delivered infants have
led scientists to expose C-section born infants to vaginal ﬂuids
containing microbiota at birth and test the eﬀects on the infant’s
microbial composition up to 30 days later (Dominguez-Bello
et al., The most dominant bacteria in the colostrum (the ﬁrst milk
produced during late pregnancy, and contains antibodies)
included Weisella, Leuconostoc, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus,
and Lactococcus, whereas milk samples collected 1–6 months
post-partum harbored oral cavity related bacteria such as
Veillonella, Leptotrichia, and Prevotella, perhaps due to frequent
interaction with the infant’s oral microbiota (Cabrera-Rubio
et al., The source of the milk microbial populations is considered
to be from the gut, and the mechanism by which bacteria
travel from the gut into the mammary glands is thought to
be facilitated by hormonal changes that occur during and
following gestation. More speciﬁcally, elevation of progesterone
may increase gut permeability, which could assist in bacterial
transmission into the bloodstream and subsequently into the
mother’s mammary glands (Jeurink et al., Pregnancy and the Microbiome

FIGURE 2 | Microbiome changes in the newborn. A) Text refers to changes in vaginal birth vs. Caesarian section (B). The shift to solid food, as
well as increased exposure to xenobiotics, change the microbial
populations and enriches species which are able to utilize
nutrients such as carbohydrates, and are involved in vitamin
biosynthesis and xenobiotic degradation, thereby maturing the
gut microbiome (Backhed et al., throughout these developmental processes. the fetal

Another complex interconnection is found between the
microbiome and immune system. HN was supported by Ministry of Science, Technology &
Space, State of Israel.