The present-day view of the gastrointestinal microbiota
composition is quite different than prior to the molecular
revolution. The members of the Biﬁdobacterium genus are nonmotile,
anaerobic or microaerophilic bacteria that produce ace-
tate and lactate as major fermentation products from sug-
sugars by these bacteria is
ars. GenBank Accession Numbers of the
SSU rRNA gene sequence are provided for each species and the family names are indicated. However, while molecular studies could conﬁrm their
presence in the upper intestinal tract, these also showed
that the Lactobacilli are quite variable and not as abun-
dant as other gastrointestinal genera at that location, such
as Streptococcus and Veillonella (Booijink, 2009; Booijink
et al., Several previously misclassiﬁed Lac-
tobacillus spp. The Clostridium sensu stricto — the real
Clostridium spp. — belong
to different families within the Firmicutes phylum, while
Clostridium rectum belongs to the Fusobacteria phylum. In addition, a number of species that
are ofﬁcially classiﬁed into the genera Clostridium, Eubac-
terium, and Ruminococcus, cluster within the Lachnospira-
ceae based on their SSU rRNA gene sequence . which can be utilized by Blautia spp..

of important metabolic functions. have been reclassi-
ﬁed into novel genera within two bacterial phyla —
Actinobacteria and Firmicutes — of which six genera
(Dorea, Collinsella, Eggerthella, Flavonifractor, Mogibacteri-
um and Pseuodramibacter) can be members of the gastro-
intestinal microbiota (Willems & Collins, 1996; Kageyama
et al., Two of
these gastrointestinal bacteria,
namely Catabacter hongkongensis and C. minuta, form a
the
separate cluster within the Clostridiales order of
Clostridia class and are the only cultured representatives
of a phylogenetic group that was previously detected only
in various molecular studies and was in a previous review
designated as uncultured Clostridiales II (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojano-
vi(cid:1)c et al., Not much is known about the role of this
group of strictly anaerobic bacteria in the human gastro-
intestinal tract, but it is noteworthy that bacteria that
belong to the Christensenella/Catabacter group were
reported to be dramatically depleted in fecal
samples of ulcerative patients relative to controls (Rajili(cid:1)c-
Stojanovi(cid:1)c
(ﬁvefold)
depleted in fecal samples of patients with postinfectious
irritable bowel syndrome (Jalanka-Tuovinen et al., 1975), and this property that
may be detrimental to health as described below for the
Deltaproteobacteria..

Finally, Halanaerobaculum tunisiense has been identiﬁed
by pyrosequencing of the V6 variable region of the SSU
rRNA gene in a recent study that compared efﬁciency of
culturomics and pyrosequencing approach for studying
the gastrointestinal microbiota diversity (Lagier et al., Escherichia coli is the most preva-
lent representative of this family that is often the most
abundant facultative anaerobe in the gastrointestinal sam-
ples. 2012; Rajili(cid:1)c-
Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., 2008), but even when
tinal
present, these bacteria constitute an extremely minor frac-
tion, as indicated by the fact that only one of over 15 000
SSU rRNA gene sequences in the study of the microbiota
of inﬂammatory bowel disease patients and controls orig-
inated from a Gemmatimonadetes bacterium (Frank et al., The presence of the Planctomycetes in the human gas-
trointestinal tract was reported only in molecular-based
studies (Wilson & Blitchington, 1996; De Filippo et al., In an early cultivation study,
which dates from 1968, a single methanogenic species,
isolated from four of ﬁve individuals, was identiﬁed as
Methanobrevibacter ruminantium (Nottingham & Hun-
gate, 1968). classiﬁed within the Stramenopiles) are
single-celled protozoan organisms. Longitudinal study of
the
Eukarya in the human gastrointestinal tract has shown
that Blastocystis spp. Neobalantidium coli is the largest pro-
tozoan parasite that infects humans, but its natural hosts
are pigs.