Cho and Blaser

Page 2

Characterizing the microbiome

Tools for studying the metagenome

individuals, and possibly, their disease risks. This
method facilitates the assessment of interactions that occur within the microbiome, and
potentially between microbiome and host18. As sequencing and bioinformatics technologies continue to evolve (see ref 21 for a review of
the state-of-the-art technologies), scientific priorities will include elucidating the ‘core’
metagenome that occupies a specific human niche, and discerning the differences between
normal and diseased hosts.. As an example of the latter, Greenblum et al. By categorizing metagenomic sequences based on

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01. Because minor
such boundaries have not been established, but may REPRESENT NASH EQUILIBRIA
microbial populations have the potential to bloom, the temporal variation observed in a host
may be mirrored by the interindividual variation at a single time27; that the system is
dynamic suggests that there are greater interpersonal similarities than a snap-shot view
indicates. Nevertheless, the enormous bacterial biomass also
provides many unique or minimally redundant bacterial genes19. The human microbiome represents one or more complete ecosystems. As has occurred in the human stomach with the loss of a dominant species51,52,
body sites then can harbor alternative stable states. In many host species, paternal contributions to offspring traits have been well
documented57,58; these observations have been extended to the microbiome, where paternal
contributions to offspring H. pylori allele composition have been shown59, In any event,
there is evidence for extensive horizontal gene transfer (HGT) within human populations,
functional classes, and ecological niches60, indicating the site-specificity and dynamism of
selection on the human microbiome. We speculate that metagenome

Nat Rev Genet. A related hypothesis is that co-evolved microbiota are
adaptive for the human species both by supporting early-in-life host functions and by
leading to later-in-life host demise 86. Investigations are preliminary, but some observations are
promising. Chronic skin ulcers, often secondary to venous stasis or diabetes, lead
to substantial morbidity. The discovery that H. pylori was adapted to survive in the acidic gastric environment
overturned the dogma that the stomach is sterile. In H. pylori-negative individuals, gastric
microbiota diversity is high; most of the prominent gastric phylotypes (Streptococcus,
Actinomyces, Prevotella, Gemella) also are abundant in the oropharynx of these
individuals93; indicating that either many constituents are swallowed from more proximal
sites, or that close relatives of the oral microbiota colonize more distally. Further evidence of a link between colonic microbiota and colorectal cancer is suggested by
the ability of antibiotic administration to alter the composition of the colonic microbiota and
to affect the expression of host genes involved in cell cycle regulation, reducing epithelial
proliferation100. Compared to germ-free mice, the presence
of a microbiome in conventional mice leads to suppression of intestinal epithelium
angiopoietin-related protein 4, which inhibits lipoprotein lipase, increasing downstream
triglyceride accumulation in the hepatic parenchyma and adipocytes117. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 9

The gut microbiota and pbesity

exposure disturbs the gut microbiome118,119, but roles for the microbiome in steatosis are
unresolved. Changing exposures/selection pressures on the
early-life microbiome may contribute to development of obesity. Hill
developed criteria to address the questions: “In what circumstances can we pass from this
observed association to a verdict of causation? Standard models of inbred mice are limited by their uncontrolled
microbiome diversity. The principles of host interaction with
pathogens and commensals contain many parallel features, which can help tutor the new
field, but the nature of the selection for commensalism is more complex and highly
dynamic. examined top-scoring non-
linear abundance relationships133. Important questions to pursue are listed in Box 2. He is an Assistant Professor of Medicine at the NYU Langone Medical
Center, USA. His current research focuses on antibiotic-induced
changes in the human and mouse microbiome and their effects on disease development. Genetic differences between selected and
non-selected hosts are a source of selectable variation

The anatomic structure around each hair shaft that consists of the
hair shaft and follicle, the sebaceous gland, and the erector pili
muscle

An organism (e.g. microbe) that may have a pathogenic or symbiotic
relationship with another organism (e.g. its host), depending on
context. A more accurate term than commensal

A thin layer of loose connective tissue that lies underneath the
epithelium and with it constitutes the mucosa that lines various
lumens within the body; it is a dense locus of immunological and
inflammatory cells

The pathological accumulation and retention of lipids within liver
parenchymal cells. A type of gastric bypass surgery primarily used for the treatment of
morbid obesity. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 13

Operational
taxonomic unit
(OTU)

Noncoexistence

Prebiotics

The smallest phylogenetic unit described by variations in 16S rRNA
sequencing.