Ananthakrishnan
 
 

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

FIGURE 1. Analysis of both 16s rRNA and metagenomic sequencing 
has traditionally relied on comparing the relative abundance of 
various  genera,  species,  and  strains  between  different  groups. Fecal  samples  were  obtained  at  therapy  cessation,  2  months, 
6 months, and the end of follow-up. Cross-sectional compari-
sons  were  also  made  with  29  healthy  control  patients. Over 
follow-up, 19 patients relapsed and 14 remained in remission. Note  that  the  culture  supernatant  also  had  a  similar  effect  in 
reducing the severity of this particular colitis, suggesting that 
the  effect  of  F.  prauznitzii  may  be  mediated  in  part  through 
the  production  of  anti-inflammatory  metabolites. A small 
study of 12 patients with CD examined the microbiota profile 

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

Abbreviations: GA-map, genetic analysis; qPCR, quantitative polymerase chain reaction; RT-PCR, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. In contrast, response to therapy was not asso-
ciated with a change in fungal composition. Consistent with other observations, 
responders  had  a  less  dysbiotic  microbiome  at  baseline  than 
nonresponders. The  baseline  abundance  of  F.  prauznitzii  was 
higher  in  responders  than  in  nonresponders. The primary outcome, remission at week 14, was attained by 31 
patients. A total of 35% of the cohort remained in remission 
at week 54. This  difference  was  noted  primarily  at  the 
species  level. Note  that  patients  with  CD  who  had  endo-
scopic recurrence had a greater abundance of Enterococcus and 
Veillonella and that those who remained in postsurgical remis-
sion had a higher abundance of butyrate-producing Firmicutes, 
Bacteroides,  Prevotella,  and  Parabacteroides. Specifically,  the  exchange  of 
10  metabolites  was  less  frequent  at  baseline  among  patients 
who did not achieve remission compared with healthy control 
patients; these metabolites included butyrate, L-arginine, CO2, 
ammonium,  ornithine,  ethanol,  L-glutamine,  and  glycine. One prior study examined the role of microbial compo-
sition in predicting response to ustekinumab therapy. Patients  in  remission  at  week  6 
also had a higher alpha diversity at baseline than did those with 
active disease. The  PROTECT  cohort  recruited  400  children 

did not (q = 0.09 and 0.06, respectively). Zhou et al26 followed 16 Han Chinese patients with CD 
who were treated with infliximab for 30 weeks. A  model  of  gut  mi-
crobial  composition  at  baseline  predicted  infliximab  response 
at  week  30  with  an  87%  accuracy,  which  was  superior  to  the 
predictive  value  of  the  Crohn’s  Disease  Activity  Index  (58% 
accuracy) and calprotectin levels  The most in-
formative features in this model were the abundance of various 
Clostridiales and the abundance of Veillonella, Bacteroides, and 
Anaerostipes. Aden et al24 performed a prospective study of 12 patients 
with  IBD,  17  patients  with  rheumatic  disease,  and  19  healthy 
control  patients  who  provided  fecal  samples  at  baseline  and 
2,  6,  and  30  weeks  after  treatment  with  anti-TNF  therapy. Twenty-three  patients  who  were  treated  with  either  anti-TNF 
drugs  or  vedolizumab  acted  as  control  patients. Interestingly, 
patients with IBD but not with rheumatic disease demonstrated 
a shift in diversity toward that of the control patients with anti-
TNF therapy, suggesting that this effect was likely mediated in 
part  by  resolution  of  intestinal  inflammation  rather  than  di-
rect effect of the biologic agent.24 When compared to healthy 
control patients, 14 indicator phylotypes, notably Coprococcus 
and  R.  inulinivorans,  were  differentially  distributed  between 
patients with IBD and healthy control patients. All 14 species 
had a similar abundance to that of control patients at week 30 
that increased although none of these changes were specific to 
responders. Limitations of Existing Data and Suggestions for 
Future Research

1. A  second  important  challenge  with  existing  data  is  the  wide  vari-
 
ability in the definition of outcomes. Thus, it is important to formulate accepted 
definitions for each of the clinically relevant endpoints in the field 
to facilitate robust validation of identified signals. This in-
consistency complicates an understanding of the impact of the biologic 
parameter being studied and of such external influences. The  emergence  of  tools  such  as  paper-based  technology 
for microbiome profiling may prove to be cost-effective and appli-
cable to direct patient care.45

CONCLUSIONS

In summary, given the likely central role of the microbiome 
in the pathogenesis of IBD, it is intuitive that microbiome-based 
biomarkers  may be particularly  relevant in  stratifying patients 
with these complex diseases. However, existing studies 
are limited by small sample sizes and significant heterogeneity 
preventing robust validation. Ananthakrishnan
 
 

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

7

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 

Microbiome-Based Biomarkers