The gut microbiota serves the host by interacting directly or indirectly with host cells, the latter of
which comes about through microbially-produced bioactive molecules, thus the microbiota is capable
of regulating numerous biological pathways involved in immunity and energy homeostasis, while also
protecting the host against pathogens through colonisation resistance. In a study involving 178 elderly Irish subjects  Claesson et
al. who
reported considerable correlations between long-term dietary habits and gut community structure..

While the exact mechanisms underlying the link between low microbial diversity, diet and disease
are not fully understood, SCFAs undoubtedly play a role given that low MAC diets are directly linked
to low SCFA levels reported a signiﬁcant decrease in the proportion
of the SCFA-producing Clostridial Clusters IV/XIVa in intensive care unit patients 72 h following
hospital admission which was associated with reduced gut microbiota diversity and community
stability over time. However, a recent study reported the presence. wadsworthia was increased in
humans consuming the animal-based diet and is associated with inﬂammation owing to its
hydrogen sulﬁde-producing capabilities  E. coli is a member of Gammaproteobacteria which
also harbours many pathogenic members, including Salmonella, Yersinia, Vibrio, and Pseudomonas 
The abundances of well known glycan and protein degraders, including Bacteroides, Clostridium and. In a more recent study, the same group investigated
the eﬀect of extra virgin olive oil on mouse gut microbiota compared to butter using more in-depth
analysis  Highest levels of systolic blood pressure were recorded for mice fed butter which
correlated positively with Desulfovibrio sequences in faeces, which were signiﬁcantly higher in mice fed
butter compared to olive oil. The gut microbiota changes
observed by Olson et al. There was also an increase in spermine
which has been shown to be extremely toxic in rats  The following bacteria, which are generally
regarded as being beneﬁcial, decreased in abundance on the high protein diet, including the butyrate
producer F. prausnitzii (by 3.5 fold), Ruminococcus (by 8.04 fold) which contains butyrate producers,
and the mucin degrader Akkermansia (not detected in high protein diet group). Principal component
analysis revealed distinct microbiota on days 7 and 14, whereby the soy protein group was separate
from the meat and casein groups  In another similar study, soy protein was associated with
increased faecal SCFAs in rats compared to rats fed white meat, red meat or casein  The soy group
also had a higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which are the major propionate and
other SCFA producers  Lactobacillus, a genus known for its beneﬁcial eﬀects was increased in the
gut microbiota by ingestion of meat proteins. This was accompanied by an expansion of taxa proposed to be involved
in bile acid biotransformation. Resistant starch
is an important non-digestible carbohydrate, of which there are four types, (RS1 to RS4)  A diet
high in type 3 resistant starch for 10 weeks was found to stimulate the growth of Firmicutes bacteria
related to R. bromii and Eub. At the species level, resistant starch
type 4 increased Bif. Resistant starch type 2 signiﬁcantly increased R. bromii and Eub. This interindividual variation was also reported by Venkataraman et al. In this
case, resistant starch type 2 increased faecal butyrate in a cohort of 20 young healthy individuals but
responses varied widely such that individuals could be categorised into three groups based on butyrate
levels before and during resistant starch consumption: enhanced, high, and low.