This vast array of data has contributed
to a deeper understanding of the role of the gut microbiome in health and disease, the factors which
shape it, and the potential to harness its therapeutic potential for optimal health. Other viral infections have also been associated with
low-diversity dysbiosis, including hepatitis C 

While the exact mechanisms underlying the link between low microbial diversity, diet and disease
are not fully understood, SCFAs undoubtedly play a role given that low MAC diets are directly linked
to low SCFA levels reported a signiﬁcant decrease in the proportion
of the SCFA-producing Clostridial Clusters IV/XIVa in intensive care unit patients 72 h following
hospital admission which was associated with reduced gut microbiota diversity and community
stability over time. However, a recent study reported the presence

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

13 of 45

of C. scindens and C. diﬃcile in the same stool sample and suggested that the former does not inhibit
the latter but the study does not provide data on bile acid proﬁles or the 7-α -dehydroxylating
activity of C. scindens, the enzyme responsible for secondary bile acid production. Furthermore, faecal SCFA concentrations tend to be higher in obese
individuals  The obese gut microbiota has also been characterised by reduced diversity and
altered representation of bacterial genes and metabolic pathways  More recently, a systematic
review investigated the link between the gut microbiota and low-grade inﬂammation, a hallmark of
obesity which plays a major role in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in humans  Fourteen,
mostly observational studies were included with n = 10 to 471 participants. Dietary ﬁbre intake is recommended at 25 g/day for
women and 38 g per day for men  However, the proportions of these macronutrients in the typical
Western diet are skewed towards high-energy and low nutrient-dense foods containing large amounts
of saturated fat and sugar, and ﬁbre intake has been reported to be as low as 15 g/day in 90% of the
population in developed countries  Furthermore, each of these macronutrients contains diﬀerent
types and studies have shown that these diﬀerences along with quantity consumed can dramatically
inﬂuence gut microbiota composition and functionality. There was also an increase in spermine
which has been shown to be extremely toxic in rats  The following bacteria, which are generally
regarded as being beneﬁcial, decreased in abundance on the high protein diet, including the butyrate
producer F. prausnitzii (by 3.5 fold), Ruminococcus (by 8.04 fold) which contains butyrate producers,
and the mucin degrader Akkermansia (not detected in high protein diet group).