Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

2 of 49

is diet, an element which we can control. This is
perhaps one of the core elements of precision nutrition through the microbiome whereby it can serve
as a biomarker to predict responsiveness to dietary components and interventions. Impact of Environment and Life Stage on Gut Microbiota and Health and Opportunities for
Optimising Health through Diet, Probiotics and Prebiotics

As science continues to delineate the composition and functionality of life stage-speciﬁc gut
microbiota and deviations from what is considered “normal” or “healthy,” opportunities arise for
dietary and therapeutic interventions which can beneﬁcially modulate the microbiota and result in
translational beneﬁts to host physiology and overall health. For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003)  However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes  It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism. Despite the
apparent success of synbiotics in this small number of studies, a drawback of synbiotics is the diﬃculty
predicting selectivity and speciﬁcity and the subsequent mechanisms of action; thus, future studies
should focus on unravelling how each component in the mixture, and the mixture as a whole, exerts its
(cooperative) eﬀects 

Caesarean section has been shown to inﬂuence the development and composition of the gut
microbiota. However, in order to incite greater conﬁdence
in both the medical profession and the public in general there is a need for large cohort, possibly
multi-centre randomized controlled trials that focus on speciﬁc prebiotics, probiotics and synbiotics
which assess their impacts and modes of action on the gut microbiota, infant health and wellness and
the long-term outcomes for these parameters. While consumption of a probiotic
cheese containing L. rhamnosus HN001 and L. acidophilus NCFM by an elderly population increased the
numbers of said probiotics in faeces, there was no eﬀect on faecal immune markers  However,
the probiotic cheese was associated with a trend towards lower C. diﬃcile counts, an eﬀect which was
statistically signiﬁcant in the subpopulation that were found to harbor C. diﬃcile at the beginning of the
study. Prebiotic supplementation in the elderly has generated promising results in terms of beneﬁcial
alterations to the gut microbiota and also frailty syndrome. Decreases in the levels of Ruminococcaceae and Parabacteroides
have been pinpointed as the main microbial shifts associated with ageing in mice  Slight
reductions were observed in Oscillospira (positively associated with leanness and health  and
the sulphate-reducing Desulfovibrio following L. rhamnosus GG with soluble corn ﬁbre consumption,
whereas only Desulfovibrio decreased following intake of L. rhamnosus GG PB12 with corn ﬁbre. In a later
study with the same probiotic strain, ﬁve months of supplementation to university athletes and game
players (n = 243) had no impact on upper respiratory tract infection symptoms which the authors state
could be attributable to the low incidence of such symptoms during the study  The probiotic
was associated with plasma cytomegalovirus and Epstein Barr virus antibody titres which could be
interpreted as an improvement in immune status. compiled a number of dietary recommendations for the prevention of depression
based on current available evidence which included increased consumption of fruits, vegetables,
wholegrain cereals, legumes, nuts and seeds, high consumption of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids, limited intake of processed foods and replacement of unhealthy foods with nutritious wholesome
foods. Chronic fatigue syndrome is characterised by persistent and relapsing tiredness and 97% of
patients report neurological disturbances resulting in a variety of emotional symptoms of which
anxiety and depression are the most common  In a pilot study involving 39 chronic fatigue
syndrome patients intake of L. casei strain Shirota for two months resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in
anxiety symptoms compared with the control group (P = 0.01)  Lactobacillus and biﬁdobacteria
counts were also signiﬁcantly increased as a result of probiotic administration. Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

17 of 49

Table 1. The studies are discussed in this section and are summarized in Table 2. breve B-3 was used in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving adult volunteers with BMI ranging from 24 to 30 kg/m2  According to the WHO, BMI
values from 25.0 to 29.9 represent a pre-obesity nutritional status, while a BMI of 30 falls into class
I obesity  In the trial, participants received either placebo (n = 25) or a B-3 capsule (n = 19)
(approximately 5 × 1010 cfu/day) for 12 weeks  Consumption of the B-3 capsule signiﬁcantly
lowered fat mass by week 12. One year consumption of a probiotic- (Bif. lactis, 1.9 × 1010 cfu/day)
and prebiotic-fortified milk by Indian preschool healthy and stunted children resulted in increased
weight gain 
compared to children receiving control milk  A synbiotic consisting of Bif. Impact of prebiotics and synbiotics on overnutrition and undernutrition in human intervention studies. presented four
main groups based on the concepts of McRorie et al. Furthermore, the presence of high levels of Clostridium sphenoides,
a common gut inhabitant and Firmicutes member, in the faecal microbiota of obese individuals before
dietary invention was associated with a decrease in cholesterol following intervention while obese
individuals with abnormally low abundance of this species did not beneﬁt in terms of cholesterol
levels. reported that Americans consuming
unrestricted diets had less diverse faecal microbiota (termed AMER) compared to the microbiota of
individuals consuming calorie-restricted plant-rich diets (termed CRON) and the AMER microbiota
lacked many bacterial lineages representative of CRON. graphic
design for Figure 1 by Chor Hung Tsang, Mad Lemur Design Studio). They also measured physical activity, anthropometrics, blood parameters, gut microbiota composition
and function, as well as self-reported lifestyle behaviours. Consumer receives
personalized dietary, lifestyle and supplemental recommendations. A full list of microorganisms found in the sample and their relative
abundances is provided. A scoring system rates thousands of diﬀerent foods and food combinations based
on the consumer’s biometrics, gut microbiome analysis, lifestyle factors and health
questionnaire to yield a unique nutrition proﬁle that enables blood-sugar balance. SmartGut: In conjunction with general practitioner (who orders the test), consumer
receives a diversity score and breakdown of beneﬁcial and pathogenic
microorganisms associated with gut conditions like bIBS, and cIBD, including
ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease, as well as microorganisms associated with
metabolic conditions including obesity, diabetes and dNAFLD. Consumer receives a detailed report describing gut microbiota diversity, members
of microbial community including fungi and parasites, metabolic potential (protein,
fat and carbohydrate breakdown, vitamin production), comparison with
microbiome of others and personalised dietary recommendations. Guidelines for Evaluating the Scientiﬁc Validity of Evidence for Providing Personalised
Microbiome-Based Dietary Advice

As noted in the previous section, there are risks associated with the rapid commercialisation of
microbiome testing including inconsistencies in results between laboratories as well as over-extrapolation of

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

32 of 49

results on the side of the service provider and over-interpretation of results on the side of the consumer. The probability term is the overall judgement of the
evidence provided and is based on the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) guidance document
expressing uncertainty in scientiﬁc assessment to help describe the likelihood of an outcome
where ﬁrm conclusions are diﬃcult to draw. Funding: This research received no external funding.