it

Introduction
Asthma is a common chronic disorder during pregnancy, affecting between 8% and 13% of pregnant
women 
is often a comorbid condition with food and environmental allergies  Asthma
exacerbation rates during pregnancy are high  and more severe asthma or poor symptom control have
been associated with low birthweight  A greater risk for childhood asthma following uncontrolled
versus controlled maternal asthma during pregnancy has been reported  These variations in risk to the
offspring point to a potential in utero influence of maternal asthma. Written informed
consent was obtained from all mothers. Hospital birth records
provided data on mode of delivery, sex and infant exposures during birth. Data on maternal atopic status during pregnancy was also obtained from prenatal questionnaires as
symptoms in response to one or more food or environmental allergens, such as hay fever, atopic
dermatitis, and allergies to pollens, grasses, trees, weeds, food,
insects or pets. Parents were instructed to refrigerate
soiled diapers prior to retrieval by a CHILD research assistant during a home visit. Faecal samples were
then transported to the laboratory in a cooler, where they were divided into aliquots and stored at −80°C
prior to DNA extraction and sequencing. The sequences were then quality filtered by removing reads having more than 10 sites with
a Phred quality score less than 20. The metrics of OTU (microbial) relative
abundance and diversity (Shannon and Simpson diversity indices, Chao1 species richness index) were
generated in QIIME to profile infant gut microbiota in individual faecal samples. Statistical analysis
The statistical analysis of data was performed with the Statistical Analysis Systems (SAS) Software (version
9.4.; Restriction to Caucasian ethnicity also allowed us to test
associations within a population at highest risk for infant wheeze: male Caucasian infants 

To test the a priori research question on infant sex and adjust for putative confounding factors, analyses
were stratified by infant sex, birth mode, breastfeeding status and intrapartum antibiotic exposure (also a
strong marker for infant antibiotic use; . In Caucasian infants,
prenatal maternal asthma was significantly associated with a lower relative abundance of the genus
Lactobacillus (median 0.001% versus 0.002%, p=0.01; table 2). No differences in gut

https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00280-2017

3

ASTHMA | P.T. KOLEVA ET AL. Other sex-specific differences
were uncovered. Comparisons were performed
using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. The false discovery rate (FDR) was used to adjust p-values for multiple
testing and crude p-values <FDR p-values are indicated by “#”. The p-values <0.1 are reported and
p-values <0.05 are indicated in bold. ¶: comparison of Lactobacillus was the primary hypothesis. The p-value for the sex interaction term for differences in Megasphera
abundance related to maternal atopic asthma was 0.14 (ART test). Discussion
In a birth cohort study of 1021 full-term Canadian infants, we detected alterations to gut microbial
composition at 3–4 months following pregnancy complicated with asthma versus pregnancy without
asthma. OR: odds ratio; aOR: adjusted odds ratio; CI: confidence interval. they were male and of Caucasian ethnicity ( p=0.02). While no prior evidence exists for maternal prenatal asthma,
these findings are compatible with the reduced Lactobacillales abundance observed in the meconium of
newborns of mothers with eczema, and lower faecal colonisation with Lactobacillus species in infants of
atopic parents  In our study, male infants born to mothers with prenatal asthma were one-third
(aOR 0.26, 95% CI: 0.07–0.89) as likely to be colonised with high levels of lactobacilli, independent of
maternal overweight or atopy status, birth mode or infant diet. These associations were not present in
female offspring. Indeed, risk for atopic sensitisation at age 5 is reportedly
elevated, with lower Lactobacillus colonisation by the age of 2 months in infants born to atopic parents 
Other high-risk cohort studies have found discordant faecal microbial biomarkers for atopic disease, such as

lactobacilli

https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00280-2017

8

ASTHMA | P.T. KOLEVA ET AL. lower abundance of Bacteroidetes or Ruminococcaceae, or higher abundance of the Clostridium cluster, but
these observations were evident either at a much younger or older infant age; furthermore, sex-specific
findings were not reported in these studies 

Maternal overweight during pregnancy has been linked to a higher risk of asthma and other atopic
diseases in offspring  In our study infants, maternal asthma comorbidity with this added risk for
offspring also yielded a reduction in the abundance of faecal Megasphaera in female infants and an
elevation in the abundance of Bacteroidaceae. Author contributions: P.T. Koleva performed statistical analysis, prepared figures and tables, and wrote the first draft of
the manuscript.