Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

and react to form a response, and understanding how these
responses combine to affect human health. Three studies examined the effect of supplementing nutrients
to in vitro cultures from human stool  Just 2 were
observational, cross-sectional studies 

Intervention studies allow researchers to standardize
the dietary stimulus, providing every participant the same
amount (or relative amount) and type or quality of ingredi-
ents. The USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. supplementsprovided)
Standardizeddiet(only
Controlled
Cross-over
Randomized

supplementsprovided)
Standardizeddiet(only
Controlled
Cross-over
Randomized

supplementsprovided)
Standardizeddiet(only
Controlled
Cross-over
Randomized

Supplementeddiet
Cross-over
Controlled
Randomized

Supplementeddiet
Cross-over
Placebo-controlled
Randomized

etal.) improvementduringeitherintervention)
onlowFODMAPdietonly)andNR(no
Abdominalpainfrequency:R(≥50%decrease

microbialtaxa(LFTs)

cut-oﬀsstated)
AlsoincreasedSCFAanddecreasedpH(no

Increaseininsulinsensitivityindex(ISI)

HbA1c,insulinsensitivity,bileacids,

Intervention

Humans

bodyfatdistribution
liverfatcontent,bodycomposition,

Coeﬃcientofchangeinlactose-fermenting

Onlymicrobiotaresponse

InterventionSupplementeddiet

Humans

Colitisscore:R

CecalpH,SCFA,colitisscores

Intervention

Mice(T-bet-/-Rag2-/-versuscontrol

Fermentedmilkproduct(BFMP,

Veigaetal. Data can be transformed

Gut microbiome and precision nutrition: Part I 11

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

TABLE 3 Review of methods used to analyze precision nutrition studies1

Microbiome measures

Association or
prediction

Statistical methods

Korpela et al. Microbiota composition and function (16S and

Prediction

Linear mixed model



metagenomics)

Smits et al. Microbiota enterotype (Prevotella to Bacteroides

Association

Mann–Whitney U test or unpaired t-test Wilcoxon



(P/B) ratio, qPCR)

Zhao et al. Microbiota composition (Bifidobacteria

Association

ANOVA, ANCOVA

Energy restriction and excess

abundance by qPCR)

Cotillard et al. Microbiota composition (qPCR)

Association

Spearman correlation

Hullar et al. Microbiota composition 

Association





Chumpitazi et al. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test is used
to determine if the median of the differences between paired
responses is different from zero (e.g. within individuals). When a study moves towards the analysis phase of bringing
together microbiome, diet, and metabolic response, there
are 2 steps in the process towards development of preci-
sion nutrition recommendations: 1) identifying associations
between microbiome features and dietary responsiveness
and 2) predicting and validating individuals’ response to
dietary interventions and/or advice (Figure 4). In these cases, various correlation meth-
ods, such as Spearman, Pearson, Biweight midcorrelation
 or Co-inertia using the

18 Hughes et al. Some methods may be used when the independent/
explanatory variables are a mix of both continuous and
categorical variables. These include ANCOVA, regression,
linear mixed models
regression to
dependent observations), canonical analysis of principal
coordinates (CAP) 
and random forests  ANCOVA compares the means of
a continuous dependent variable across levels of a categorical
independent variable (i.e. experimental groups) whilst also
controlling for the effects of other continuous variables (i.e.
covariates such as BMI, cholesterol, etc.). Correction for multiple hypothesis testing. This method performs best when dimensionality is low (i.e.
fewer input variables) whereas random forests may perform
better when dimensionality is high (i.e. many input variables)


Bayesian network (BN) analysis is a graphical model
that depicts the relations between variables and their prob-
abilities or dependencies. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) is similar
to PCA/PCoA. However, in LDA, the groups of interest
are known a priori and the axes represent
the linear
combinations of the measurements that best describe the
separation between the groups. Both PLS-
DA and OPLS-DA may utilize weaker sources of variation
to separate groups but OPLS-DA also eliminates variation
that is unrelated to the separation of groups, creating a less
complex model  Although these are powerful methods,
they may force group separation at the expense of model

FIGURE 5 Decision trees. However, this test
is not as rigorous as testing in an independent cohort and the
model may not perform as well when applied to new data
sets. Mice offer a model in which differences in the gut microbiota
may be studied in a controlled experimental context, allowing
for the determination of causality and development of

mechanistic hypotheses  For example, transplantation
of isolated strains or communities of bacteria into germ-free
mice is one of the best models in use to demonstrate causal
relations between the gut microbiota and host metabolism
 This approach has been used in studies such as
Kovatcheva-Datchary et al. In vitro studies take place in an isolated system, allowing
increased control over manipulation of conditions. Kohlmeier M, De Caterina R, Ferguson LR, Gorman U, Allayee
H, Prasad C, Kang JX, Nicoletti CF, Martinez JA. Mind-altering microorganisms: the impact
of the gut microbiota on brain and behaviour. Chen T, Long W, Zhang C, Liu S, Zhao L, Hamaker BR. Specificity of polysaccharide use
in intestinal Bacteroides species determines diet-induced microbiota
alterations. Hjorth MF, Roager HM, Larsen TM, Poulsen SK, Licht TR, Bahl MI,
Zohar Y, Astrup A. Pre-treatment microbial Prevotella-to-Bacteroides
ratio, determines body fat loss success during a 6-month randomized
controlled diet
(Lond) 2017; 42
Int
580–3. Roager HM, Licht TR, Poulsen SK, Larsen TM, Bahl MI. procedures, analysis pipelines, and analytical methods. As seen in this review, considerable
progress has been made in recent years, but there is much
that remains to be done.