378

Turk J Urol 2018; 44 377-83


Among  these  treatment  approaches,  probiotic  applications  are 
among the promising alternatives. Urinary microbiota

The  structure  of  microbiome  in  humans  has  been  a  topic  of 
immense  interest  in  recent  years. The reason for this was that until recently 
urine has been thought to be sterile in healthy individuals. Other less frequently found bacterial 
strains are Alloscardovia, Burkholderia, Jonquetella, Klebsiella, 
Saccharofermentans,  Rhodanobacter  and  Veillonella. UM reported in healthy women is summarized in 
Table 1. Stapleton explained this condition by suggesting that unchange-
able host factors play a role in the colonization of these organ-
isms. So,  in  a  sense,  hosts  are  choosing,  and  containing 

Table 1. The role of probiotics in women with recurrent urinary tract infections

379

Table 2. Are the host and the 
bacteria  developing  all  together? Even  though  the  studies  were  limited  in  number,  significant 
differences  were  detected  between  male  and  female  UM. This difference, however, is thought to play a role in susceptibil-
ity to certain diseases. are dominant bacteria and form UM 
which demonstrates antimicrobial activity. In  a  healthy  vagina  dominancy  of 
Lactobacillus spp. The bacteria may be present from 
the beginning in probiotic foods and supportive treatment agents, 
or may be added during the preparation of the product. These properties 
as  well  as  their  microbiomimetic  regulatory  effects  have  been 
demonstrated. It has been shown that healthy 
microbial  populations  of  Lactobacillus  species  have  a  strong 
inhibitory effect on E. coliInfections treated using antibiotics 
reduce drug abuse, leading to drug resistance and render the nat-
ural barrier of the urinary system vulnerable to infections. Abad  and  Safdar  reviewed  25  clinical  trials  in  a  systematic 
review  they  published  in  2009  and  investigated  the  presence  of 
Lactobacillus-containing probiotics in the prevention and treatment 
of urogenital infections. It is also stated that 
additional studies are needed to clearly define the optimal dose 
and duration of application. In  a  recent 
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2 study, Stapleton et al. investigated 100 premenopausal women who had undergone cys-
titis at least once within the last 12 months . These patients were 
divided into two groups and for 10 weeks following an episode 
of cystitis placebo treatment was given to 48 patients, and other 
48  patients  received  intravaginal  probiotics  (Lactin-V)  contain-
ing  Lactobacillus  crispatus    The  results  of  this 
study showed that the incidence of recurrent UTIs in patients who 
received  intravaginal  Lactobacillus  treatment  decreased  signifi-
cantly compared to the placebo group. In 
fact, the risk factors in premenopausal women are different from 
those of the postmenopausal women. These risk factors include 
recent  sexual  intercourse,  use  of  spiral  or  condom  containing 
spermicide, history of UTI, and recent antibiotic use. Other risk 
factors can be described as factors that cause vaginal coloniza-
tion of uropathogens and decrease in the number of Lactobacilli 
which pass through ascending route into the urinary system. Researchers noted that 
the combination was well tolerated and effective. Oral, vaginal, and liquid formulations 
are being used. 382

Turk J Urol 2018; 44 377-83


The  reason  for  this  interest  is  the  desire  of  the  patients  to  be 
treated  with  natural  products  while  the  physicians  are  con-
cerned about the development of resistance against antibiotics. However,  probiotics  are  preferred  by  the  patients 
because they are safe and more tolerable than antibiotics. In clinical practice, an integrality should be established between 
scientific  evidence,  clinical  experience  and  patients’  desire. Author Contributions: Concept - T.A.; Design - T.A., T.K.; Supervision - 
T.A.; Resources - T.A.; Materials - T.A.; Data Collection and/or Processing 
- T.A., T.K.; Analysis and/or Interpretation - T.A., T.K.; Literature Search 
- T.A., T.K.; Writing Manuscript - T.A.; Critical Review - T.A., T.K. 

Conflict of Interest: Authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. Financial  Disclosure:  The  authors  declared  that  this  study  has 
received no financial support.