Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

and react to form a response, and understanding how these
responses combine to affect human health. Current Status of Knowledge

Methods for conducting precision nutrition studies
Aspects of study design, dietary intervention methods, and
response criteria are discussed below and are summarized for
recent studies in Table 1. Three studies examined the effect of supplementing nutrients
to in vitro cultures from human stool  Just 2 were
observational, cross-sectional studies 

Intervention studies allow researchers to standardize
the dietary stimulus, providing every participant the same
amount (or relative amount) and type or quality of ingredi-
ents. Identifying the appropriate con-
trol is challenging with diet interventions that are designed
with whole foods, as a true placebo diet is not possible. Research now
shows that the microbiota can also impact the eﬀect of diet on
individuals’ health and metabolism. restriction and excess; and bioactives, fermented products,
and other dietary components. ChangeinplasmaIL-6:terciles

Bodycomposition,PPGR,lipidproﬁle,

Intervention

Humans

hsCRP,IL-6,fecalSCFAs

Microbiomeonly

Intervention

Humans

RS2(Hi-Maize)vs. improvementduringeitherintervention)
onlowFODMAPdietonly)andNR(no
Abdominalpainfrequency:R(≥50%decrease

microbialtaxa(LFTs)

cut-oﬀsstated)
AlsoincreasedSCFAanddecreasedpH(no

Increaseininsulinsensitivityindex(ISI)

HbA1c,insulinsensitivity,bileacids,

Intervention

Humans

bodyfatdistribution
liverfatcontent,bodycomposition,

Coeﬃcientofchangeinlactose-fermenting

Onlymicrobiotaresponse

InterventionSupplementeddiet

Humans

Colitisscore:R

CecalpH,SCFA,colitisscores

Intervention

Mice(T-bet-/-Rag2-/-versuscontrol

Fermentedmilkproduct(BFMP,

Veigaetal. However, although
these methods can be useful for checking the stability of
dominant members and clustering communities according
to these dominant members, they do not provide direct
phylogenetic identification and it is difficult to relate banding
patterns to changes in particular species  When
coupled with 16S rRNA sequencing, these methods can
provide more specific composition information. Data can be transformed

Gut microbiome and precision nutrition: Part I 11

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

TABLE 3 Review of methods used to analyze precision nutrition studies1

Microbiome measures

Association or
prediction

Statistical methods

Korpela et al. Microbiota composition and function (16S and

Prediction

Linear mixed model



metagenomics)

Smits et al. Microbiota composition (qPCR)

Association

Spearman correlation

Hullar et al. The t-test does
not account for potential confounding factors. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test is used
to determine if the median of the differences between paired
responses is different from zero (e.g. within individuals). When a study moves towards the analysis phase of bringing
together microbiome, diet, and metabolic response, there
are 2 steps in the process towards development of preci-
sion nutrition recommendations: 1) identifying associations
between microbiome features and dietary responsiveness
and 2) predicting and validating individuals’ response to
dietary interventions and/or advice (Figure 4). Dimension reduction and clustering methods in associa-
tion studies. k-means clustering attempts to
identify groups within the data by minimizing the distances
between points within each group (defined by the mean
of points within that group), and maximizing the distances
between groups. In these cases, various correlation meth-
ods, such as Spearman, Pearson, Biweight midcorrelation
 or Co-inertia using the

18 Hughes et al. These include ANCOVA, regression,
linear mixed models
regression to
dependent observations), canonical analysis of principal
coordinates (CAP) 
and random forests  ANCOVA compares the means of
a continuous dependent variable across levels of a categorical
independent variable (i.e. experimental groups) whilst also
controlling for the effects of other continuous variables (i.e.
covariates such as BMI, cholesterol, etc.). In the first case, each individual
contributes multiple measurements on the same outcome. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) is similar
to PCA/PCoA. However, in LDA, the groups of interest
are known a priori and the axes represent
the linear
combinations of the measurements that best describe the
separation between the groups. Both PLS-
DA and OPLS-DA may utilize weaker sources of variation
to separate groups but OPLS-DA also eliminates variation
that is unrelated to the separation of groups, creating a less
complex model  Although these are powerful methods,
they may force group separation at the expense of model

FIGURE 5 Decision trees. Mice offer a model in which differences in the gut microbiota
may be studied in a controlled experimental context, allowing
for the determination of causality and development of

mechanistic hypotheses  For example, transplantation
of isolated strains or communities of bacteria into germ-free
mice is one of the best models in use to demonstrate causal
relations between the gut microbiota and host metabolism
 This approach has been used in studies such as
Kovatcheva-Datchary et al. Sonnenburg ED, Zheng H, Joglekar P, Higginbottom SK, Firbank
SJ, Bolam DN, Sonnenburg JL. Specificity of polysaccharide use
in intestinal Bacteroides species determines diet-induced microbiota
alterations. Korpela K, Flint HJ, Johnstone AM, Lappi J, Poutanen K, Dewulf
E, Delzenne N, de Vos WM, Salonen A. Gut microbiota signatures
predict host and microbiota responses to dietary interventions in obese
individuals.