+34-958-246187
† All the authors are the members of SAMID Network. Keywords: microbiome; pregnancy; fetus; placenta; newborn; infancy; critical illness; sepsis; allergy

1. Indeed, recent research complements the study of microbiome
with metabolomics and proteomic analysis in order to complete the whole metabolic picture of the
microbiota and its metabolic status. In addition, changes in speciﬁc pathological infancy situations have also been revised. Alpha-diversity changes in gut microbiota during pregnancy. In addition, they reported that
Lactobacillus communities vary depending on the ethnicity of the women conﬁrmed
that vaginal microbiota richness and diversity remained stable during the ﬁrst and second trimesters
of gestation in pregnancies ended at term, whereas in woman with preterm born, the richness and
diversity decreased early in pregnancy. Therefore, early pregnancy may be an important environment,
modulating preterm delivery. These microorganisms may reach via the hematogenous
route, the placenta, and then be transmitted to the fetus  Some of those oral bacteria, such as
Fusobacterium nucleatum, may be transmitted hematogenously during placentation by binding to
the vascular endothelium, and modifying its permeability and the translation of other common
commensals, such as Escherichia coli  In addition, Franasiak et al. critically revised scientiﬁc evidence supporting both
the “sterile womb” and “in utero colonization” hypotheses. These authors concluded that there
is more evidence supporting a sterile womb environment. One well-controlled
study compared oral, vaginal, and placenta samples with paired contamination controls. In contrast, C-section-born
infants harbored bacterial communities similar to those found on the skin surface niche, dominated by
Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium, and Propionibacterium spp. It is important to highlight that emergency C-section and vaginal delivery
labor are frequently accompanied by rupture of fetal membranes, and exposing the fetus to maternal
vaginal bacteria 

Importantly, C-section may decrease the colonization of milk-digested bacteria including the
genus Lactobacillus in newborns during the ﬁrst months of life  In addition, the mode of delivery
has a relevant impact on the microbiota composition of colostrums and milk  which also may
be inﬂuenced by antibiotics administrated during C-section. There is a great interest about “seeding approaches” as “vaginal seeding” to
reverse the eﬀects of C-section delivery mode on the microbiome in early life, but at the same time there
are critical voices concerned about safety and eﬃcacy of this practice  In addition, the intervention
could concentrate on the neonate using “seeding” methods such as encouraging breastfeeding instead
of formula feeding, or the use of infant enriched formulas. These studies have shown that the intestinal microbiota of critical patients
has low diversity, with a shortage of key commensal bacteria and overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria
such as Clostridium diﬃcile, and some species of Enteococcus, Escherichia and Shigella 
In addition, the microbiota changes throughout the stay in the intensive care units (ICU)  and the
possibility of pathogenic colonization increases with the time of stay in the unit. On one hand, sedation and endotracheal intubation
decrease mucociliary clearance and cough, reducing the elimination of microorganisms. Furthermore, the slowing down of intestinal transit, frequent drugs (sedatives, opioids, catecholamines),
and the alteration of the mechanisms of microbial elimination (decreased production of bile salts and
IgA, pharmacological alkalinization of pH, etc.) may also inﬂuence the alteration of the digestive
functions  Freedberg et al. The presence of these bacteria is lower in Crohn’s disease patients, as well as
anti-inﬂammatory fecal bacteria metabolites  Besides, it has been shown that infants with AD
improved their symptomatology when the abundance of fecal Coprococcus eutactus, a butyrate-producing
bacterium, is increased  Consequently, it has been proposed that dysbiotic gut microbiota and
subsequent dysregulation of the gut inﬂammation may promote an aberrant Th2-type immune response
to allergens altering the epithelial barrier in AD skin 

9.2. These authors have observed a characteristic
depletion of dihomo-γ-linoleate, a precursor of anti-inﬂammatory ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid and
prostaglandins that may be related 

As described previously, diﬀerent factors have been associated with infant microbiome and the
risk of asthma, such as furry pets exposure  gestational age, the mode of delivery (vaginal vs.
C-section), and antibiotic treatment (direct vs. indirect via mother) among others  However,

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

12 of 21

there is no doubt that a key issue is the type of feeding. Furthermore, a correlation between the
presence of certain taxa in sputum and the clinical course of community acquired pneumonia has been
described 

HIV infected children present reduced gastrointestinal microbial diversity  Modulation of
the intestinal microbiome through nutritional supplementation, with the aim of decreasing bacterial
permeability, has been attempted in the context of HIV infection with scarce success 
In addition, the microbiome has been suggested to impact the risk of diﬀerent infectious diseases. Author Contributions: All authors have contributed to the writing of the work. Funding: This research was funded by the PN I+D+I 2008–2011 (Spain), ISCIII- Sub-Directorate General for
Research Assessment and Promotion and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), RETICS Maternal
and Child Health and Development Network, SAMID Network, Ref. Anna Parra-Llorca
acknowledges Rio Hortega grant CM18/00165 from the Instituto de Investigación en Salud Carlos III (Ministry of
Science, Universities and Innovation; Kingdom of Spain); Talía Sainz is funded by The Instituto de Salud Carlos
III- Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation cofounded by FEDER (EU). ( Translational Research Network for Pediatric
Infectious Diseases (RITIP), Madrid, Spain.