riage patterns far exceeded what was initially
suspected (Aagaard et al. 2

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

gravid vaginal
microbiome
throughout pregnancy

gravid vaginal
microbiome
throughout pregnancy

The placenta harbors a
unique microbiome
proﬁle, most akin to
the oral microbiome
and varies by virtue of
preterm birth and a
remote history of
antenatal infection

Characterized neonatal
microbiome by mode
of delivery

Continued

3

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

Table 1. 2012b

posterior
fornix, and
mid-vagina

Romero et al. Stool

2011

Next-Gen

sequencing

Jost et al. 2014

Stool

Microarray

Murine

Ma et al. 2014b Colon, anus,

Next-Gen

V3V5

stool

sequencing

Nonhuman
primate

necrotizing colitis had
predominantly one
bacteria dominating

microbiome in VLBW
infants

neonatal microbiome
from birth to 4 mo
while examining mode
of delivery and feeding

Examined the role of
maternal IgA on
intestinal microbiome

Examined the role of
maternal diet on
juvenile microbiome

16S-Based Metagenomics

Sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene using Next-
Gen technology has recently been widely ex-
ploited to characterize the human microbiome
(Jonasson et al. For example, V1V3 amplicons
may underestimate Acinetobacter and Escheri-
chia genera, but V3V5 provides both breadth
and depth of communities dominated by these
genera. Furthermore, the number of Lactobacil-
lus species detected (and thus relative abun-
dance) will vary depending on the 16S region
sequenced, with V1V3 revealing more unique
Lactobacillus operational
taxonomic units
(OTUs) as compared with V3V5 (Huse et al. The V1V3 and V3V5 primers sets used by the
HMP consortium are outlined. Multi’omics Data Integration

To truly understand how the microbiome im-
pacts human health, metabolomic and meta-
transcriptomic approaches will be required to
characterize their precise roles as symbionts
(reviewed in Morgan and Huttenhower 2014). The fourth
CST included women with a vaginal micro-
biome deﬁcient in Lactobacillus species, and in-
terestingly, this group had increased incidence
of BV. However, re-
cent studies have shown the caution that must
be used when performing analysis such as CSTs
(Koren et al. An additional method that may be use-
ful to examine microbiome communities across
ethnicities is to use single nucleotide poly-
morphisms (SNPs) in mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), which provides more precision in
analysis (Ruiz-Pesini et al. THE VAGINAL MICROBIOME IN
PREGNANCY

With the demonstration that the vaginal micro-
biome ﬂuctuates based on the menstrual cycle,
with intercourse, and (to a much more limited
degree) with clinical symptoms of BV, we and
others sought to characterize the vaginal micro-
biome during pregnancy. However, the primary source
of lactic acid became debated when Boskey et al. Haplogroup association;
Ethnic variation

Preterm birth

??? The effect of host genetics on the maternal microbiome throughout pregnancy is relatively unknown. In
their analysis, the authors used the CSTs estab-
lished by Ravel et al. Estradiol

Progesterone

Prolactin

Metabolic demands

Vaginal mircobiota
Diversity/richness

Gut microbiota
Diversity/richness

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

en mostly consisted of the CST I or III with odds
ratios of 2.986 and 2.136, respectively, and that
the vaginal microbiome of gravid women shift
toward these two CSTs as their pregnancy
progressed (Romero et al. 2010),
which was further shown by this recent study
(Romero et al. In
agreement with previous studies, these authors
showed that alpha diversity decreases as preg-
nancy progresses and that L. crispatus and
L. iners dominate the vaginal microﬂora (Fig. Despite these challenges, the authors found
that, although alpha diversity of the vaginal
microbiome decreased with gestational age in
both African-American and Caucasian subjects,

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

African-American subjects had increased beta
diversity between gravid subjects whereas Cau-
casian gravidae did not (Walther-Anto´ nio et al. VARIANCE OF THE HUMAN MICROBIOME
IN PREGNANCY: BEYOND THE VAGINAL
COMMUNITY

In addition to changes described in the vaginal
microbiome during pregnancy, Koren et al. This
study used the V1V2 region of the 16S rRNA
gene and found that alpha diversity (within
sample variation) was decreased between the
ﬁrst and third trimesters . When directly examining the intestinal mi-
crobiome of infants born via cesarean or vaginal
delivery, culture-based microbiological tech-
niques have shown differences in the coloniza-
tion of the neonatal
intestinal microbiome,
particularly of Biﬁdobacterium-like bacteria,
Lactobacillus-like bacteria, and Bacteriodes fra-
gilis (Gro¨nlund et al. These ﬁnd-
ings suggest that the establishment of a stable

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

13

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al. Which Microbiota First Populate the Infant? In this study, the authors
found that healthy, term neonates that were
breast fed had increased diversity in their intes-
tinal microbiome when compared with hospi-
talized, preterm infants using PCR-DGGE anal-
ysis (Schwiertz et al. Our ﬁnding of Fuso-
bacteria to be a relatively abundant taxon in the
placenta supports the hypothesis of hematoge-
nous spread from the oral cavity to the placenta
(Aagaard et al. Although the vag-
inal microbiome may be implicated in these
neonatal diseases, signiﬁcant differences in
the abundance of placental bacteria have been
found when comparing preterm and term pla-
centas (Jones et al. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported in part by a
grant to Baylor College of Medicine from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the
Med into Grad Initiative.