proﬁle identiﬁed based on sequencing different
variable regions. Additionally, the vag-
inal mucosa increases in thickness and cervical
secretions increase, which causes the underlying
smooth muscle cells to hypertrophy and relax
the connective tissue. All samples were extracted in
a manner identical to that used by the HMP, and
sequenced on the same pipelines. pared with the HMP nonpregnant reference
subjects, we found that pregnancy was associat-
ed with an altered vaginal microbiome and
marked by a decrease in alpha diversity at the
subgenus level . Longi-
tudinal analysis of the vaginal microbiome in
a small cohort of women across gestation has
been performed using terminal restriction frag-
ment length polymorphism (tRFLP) in 100
gravid women (Verstraelen et al. When the
stability of the vaginal microbiome was exam-
ined during pregnancy, the authors noted that
the vaginal microbiome of gravid subjects shift-
ed between CSTs dominated by lactobacilli but
rarely shifted to CST IV, which is marked by a
diminished abundance of Lactobacillus species
(Romero et al. 2010),
which was further shown by this recent study
(Romero et al. Despite the need for further investigation
into the role of the vaginal microbiome in as-
sociation with BV and preterm birth, a recent
study by Hyman et al. has examined
the vaginal microbiome in preterm birth. In this prospective study, term 
versus preterm (,34 wk) subjects were sam-
pled at the posterior fornix by an obstetrician
and sequenced using V1V3 primers (Romero
et al. Further studies into the establishment of the
neonatal microbiome highlight this principle. Intriguingly, these
vaginally delivered infants could be classiﬁed
into two cohorts in this study: those that had
species of Bacteriodes present in their intestinal
microbiome and those that did not (Jost et al. This ﬁnding was
conﬁrmed in a study by Koenig et al. Here, the authors found that
the diversity of the intestinal microbiome in-
creased over time and with the introduction of
foods (Koenig et al. Our ﬁnding of Fuso-
bacteria to be a relatively abundant taxon in the
placenta supports the hypothesis of hematoge-
nous spread from the oral cavity to the placenta
(Aagaard et al.