Microbiome profiling was based on sequen-
cing of the cpn60 universal target, which provides higher
resolution than 16S rRNA variable regions and al-
lows the resolution of Gardnerella vaginalis subgroups,
a hallmark bacteria in the disturbed microbiota 

Methods
Study population and sampling
This retrospective cohort study analysed the vaginal
microbiota of women who experienced spontaneous pre-
term birth (sPTB) and compared the resulting microbial
profiles to those of pregnant women who delivered at
term. For the purposes of this report, self-administered
vaginal swabs were taken at 16 weeks gestation and placed
in dry tubes prior to being placed in − 80 °C for storage in
the Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute Biospecimen
Storage and Processing Laboratory. Specimens from all
cohorts were processed similarly in terms of sample col-
lection, storage, DNA extraction, library preparation and
sequencing. A no
template control was also included in each set of PCR re-
action as negative controls. The OTU reference set was generated originally by de
novo assembly of cpn60 sequence reads from 546 vaginal
microbiomes using the microbial Profiling Using Meta-
genomic Assembly pipeline (mPUMA, http://mpuma. Average maternal
age was 33 for

Characteristics

Age (mean ± SD, range)1

21–25
26–35
36–45

BMI (mean ± SD, range)1

Underweight (< 18.50)
Normal weight 
Overweight 

Obese (> 30)
MD3
Ethnicity2

White

East Asian

South/Southeast Asian

Latin America/Hispanic

Black

Other/mixed ethnicity

Community state type (CST)2

MD

I

II

III

IVA

IVC

IVD

V

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 

Page 6 of 15

BioProject PRJNA403856). Hierarchical clustering of vaginal microbiota profiles
resulted in seven community state types
I
(CST):
(Lactobacillus crispatus dominated),
(Lactobacillus
gasseri dominated), III (Lactobacillus iners dominated),
IVA (Gardnerella vaginalis subgroup B or mix of differ-
ent species), IVC (G. vaginalis subgroup A dominated),
IVD (G. vaginalis
subgroup C dominated) and V
(Lactobacillus jensenii dominated) . Bacteria prevalence

(presence/absence) was

also
assessed (only species with at least 10 total reads were
included). A total of 60 taxa had significant differences
in prevalence between term and preterm groups; 11 spe-
cies had greater prevalence in the term cohort and 49
in the preterm cohort
species were more prevalent
(Table 3). Microbiome  6:117 

Page 7 of 15

A

B C D

E

Fig. d Heatmap of relative abundances of bacterial species within each vaginal microbiota. 3 Bacteria relative abundance differences between term and preterm groups represented by ALDEx2. Bacteroides coagulans

Corynebacterium accolens

Porphyromonas uenonis

Peptoniphilus harei

Lactobacillus fermentum

Facklamia hominis

Prevotella bivia

Prevotella corporis

Actinomyces neuii subsp. Collectively, our overall findings were similar to other
two studies, which provided us the opportunity to

Freitas et al. There was no correlation between
preterm and absence/low abundance of Lactobacillus in
the microbiota; in other words, preterm outcome could
not be predicted based on CST. They found no differences in the frequency
of different CST between women who had term and pre-
term deliveries. One possible
explanation for this contradictory result might be related
to differences in participant ethnicity among these studies. study described themselves
as African American. It has been reported that the com-
position of the vaginal microbiota is strongly associated
with a woman’s ethnicity  Other studies have also
demonstrated that black ethnicity is associated with an in-
creased microbiota diversity in comparison with white
ethnicity  which could have masked differences in
bacterial diversity between term and preterm cohorts in
the Romero study. The VOGUE Research Group is Deborah Money,
Alan Bocking, Sean Hemmingsen, Janet Hill, Gregor Reid, Tim Dumonceaux,
Gregory Gloor, Matthew Links, Kieran O’Doherty, Patrick Tang, Julianne van
Schalkwyk and Mark Yudin. Funding
Financial support was provided by a joint Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) Emerging Team Grant and a Genome British Columbia (GBC) grant
awarded to DMM, AB and JEH (grant reference #108030) as well as a CIHR
grant MOP-82799 to AB. Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published
maps and institutional affiliations. 2Departments of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology and Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1L4,
Canada. Received: 19 October 2017 Accepted: 18 May 2018

4.