Microbiome profiling was based on sequen-
cing of the cpn60 universal target, which provides higher
resolution than 16S rRNA variable regions and al-
lows the resolution of Gardnerella vaginalis subgroups,
a hallmark bacteria in the disturbed microbiota 

Methods
Study population and sampling
This retrospective cohort study analysed the vaginal
microbiota of women who experienced spontaneous pre-
term birth (sPTB) and compared the resulting microbial
profiles to those of pregnant women who delivered at
term. The bacterial profiles of pregnant Canadian women
at low risk of sPTB who had term deliveries (n = 170) were
previously generated by our research group  The vagi-
nal microbial profiles of Canadian women who had pre-
term birth originated from samples of this previous study
(n = 7) and from the Ontario Birth Study (n = 39),
resulting in 46 samples. PCR products from U. parvum and U. urealyticum can
be differentiated by size 

cpn60 universal target (UT) PCR and pyrosequencing
Universal primer PCR targeting the 549–567 bp cpn60
UT region was performed using a mixture of cpn60
primers consisting of a 1:3 M ratio of primers H279/
H280:H1612/H1613, as described previously  To
allow multiplexing of samples in a single sequencing
run, primers were modified at the 5′ end with one of 24
unique decamer multiplexing identification (MID) se-
quences, as per the manufacturer’s recommendations
(Roche, Brandford, CT, USA). Amplicons were pooled in
equimolar amounts for sequencing on the Roche GS
Junior sequencing platform. MID-partitioned sequences were
mapped using Bowtie 2 (http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge. The OTU reference set was generated originally by de
novo assembly of cpn60 sequence reads from 546 vaginal
microbiomes using the microbial Profiling Using Meta-
genomic Assembly pipeline (mPUMA, http://mpuma. Among women who delivered preterm, 63% 
had premature rupture of membranes (PPROM), 10.8%
had
anemia unresponsive to therapy. Microbiome  6:117 

Page 6 of 15

BioProject PRJNA403856). Each CST is
defined by the dominance of one species of Lactobacillus (I,
II, III, V), Gardnerella vaginalis (IVC, IVD) or a mixture of
bacteria species (IVA), as previously described 

II

Overall microbiota profiles did not cluster together
based on gestational age at delivery (Figs. The CST IVC was dominated by G. vaginalis
subgroup A and Megasphaera spp., Ecological analysis and total bacterial load
Assessment of alpha diversity revealed that microbiomes
of women who delivered preterm were richer (Chao1
richness 46.3 ± 24.1) and more diverse (Shannon diver-
sity index 1.8 ± 1.1) when compared to those of women
in the term group 
(Table 1). Microbiome  6:117 

Page 7 of 15

A

B C D

E

Fig. d Heatmap of relative abundances of bacterial species within each vaginal microbiota. 3 Bacteria relative abundance differences between term and preterm groups represented by ALDEx2. Bacteroides coagulans

Corynebacterium accolens

Porphyromonas uenonis

Peptoniphilus harei

Lactobacillus fermentum

Facklamia hominis

Prevotella bivia

Prevotella corporis

Actinomyces neuii subsp. For example, more women in the term
group had Prevotella amnii and P. tannerae detected in
their vaginal samples, whereas P. timonensis, P. bivia, P.
corporis and P. bucalis were more frequently detected in
samples from women in the preterm group (Table 3). Collectively, our overall findings were similar to other
two studies, which provided us the opportunity to

Freitas et al. They found no differences in the frequency
of different CST between women who had term and pre-
term deliveries. One possible
explanation for this contradictory result might be related
to differences in participant ethnicity among these studies. study described themselves
as African American. It has been reported that the com-
position of the vaginal microbiota is strongly associated
with a woman’s ethnicity  Other studies have also
demonstrated that black ethnicity is associated with an in-
creased microbiota diversity in comparison with white
ethnicity  which could have masked differences in
bacterial diversity between term and preterm cohorts in
the Romero study. Additional files

Additional file 1: cpn60 OTU sequences. ACF was supported by a University of Saskatchewan
graduate scholarship. Authors’ contributions
DM, AB, JEH and the other members of the VOGUE Research Group conceived
the study. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. All participants provided written consent at enrolment. Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published
maps and institutional affiliations. 2Departments of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology and Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1L4,
Canada. Received: 19 October 2017 Accepted: 18 May 2018

4.