13_PARAGRAPHS

the dysbiosis of host gut microbiota and modulating of gut microbiota may be beneficial for
PCOS treatment. In this study, in order to verify our hypotheses, PCOS rat model was estab-
lished using letrozole induction. Microbiota interventions through Lactobacillus transplanta-
tion and fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) from healthy rats were used for the
treatments of PCOS rats. Administration of probiotics such as Lactobacillus is an attractive
concept in combating various diseases. L rhamnosus GR-1 attenuated lipopolysaccharide-
induced inflammation in pregnant CD-1 mice  Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM main-
tained insulin sensitivity in a metabolically heterogeneous group  Lactobacillus rhamnosus
GG and Lactobacillus casei DN-114-001 protected epithelial barrier function against Escheri-
chia coli-induced redistribution of the tight-junction proteins  Fecal microbiota trans-
plantation (FMT) was introduction of fecal suspension derived from a healthy donor into the
gastrointestinal tract of a diseased individual. It has been proposed as a novel therapeutic
approach to modulate gut microbiota dysbiosis. Patients with metabolic syndrome increased
insulin sensitivity after infusion of microbiota from lean donors  Our previous study
showed that FMT promoted the re-establishment of intestinal microbial communities and
mucosal barriers in mice with antibiotic-induced dysbiosis  Thus, the available animal and
human evidences suggested that Lactobacillus transplantation and FMT could serve as new
therapies for treating diseases. In the present study, after microbiota interventions through Lac-
tobacillus transplantation and FMT, the estrous cycles, sex hormonal levels, ovarian.

Tokyo, Japan) by two persons blinded to the origin of sections. Cystic follicles were defined
according to criteria proposed previously as those follicles devoid of oocytes, displaying a
large antral cavity, an enlarged thecal cell layer, and a thin granulosa cell compartment contain-
ing apparently healthy cells..

lanes (C2-2 and P2-3) were cut and sequenced. Band 2 and 3 were identified as Prevotella mela-
ninogenica ATCC 25845 with 93% similarity, indicating that the DGGE gel separated V3 16S
rRNA genes from different bacteria effectively. As shown in DGGE profiles, the separated and
strong bands in PCOS group were identified as Pseudomonas monteilii SB3101, Roseburia
intestinalis XB6B4, Prevotella melaninogenica ATCC25845 and Prevotella denticola F0289. The
weak bands in PCOS group were identified as Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC533 and Ruminococ-
cus torques L2-14 (Table 1)..

Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC 533 .

Prevotella melaninogenica ATCC 25845.

Prevotella melaninogenica ATCC 25845.

the gut; Lactobacillus, Prevotella and Ruminococcus genus were selected because of the results
of DGGE analysis and sequence analysis. On day 21, the copy number of Lactobacillus, Rumi-
nococcus and Clostridium were lower and Prevotella was higher in PCOS group when com-
pared with the control group. There were no significant differences in the copy number of
Bifidobacterium, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus and Bacteroides in the two groups (Table 2)..

than that in Lactobacillus transplantation group. Though Prevotella in both groups still have
significant differences with the control, it decreased significantly when compared with the
PCOS group. There were no significant differences in the copy number of Bifidobacterium,
Escherichia coli, Enterococcus, Bacteroides and Ruminococcus in the two treated groups when
compared with PCOS group. These data indicated that PCOS resulted in a significant variation
of gut microbiota composition. Both FMT and Lactobacillus transplantation were beneficial for
restorations of normal gut residents in letrozole induced PCOS rats..

Under light microscopy, the control rat ovaries exhibited follicles in various stages of develop-
ment including secondary follicles, graafian follicles, and fresh corpora lutea. The granulosa
within the follicles showed multiple layers. The PCOS rat ovaries showed small follicles in early
stage of development and atretic follicles. In addition, many large cysts with virtually no granu-
losa layer or scant granulosa were observed. The FMT and Lactobacillus transplantation rat
ovaries showed increased granulosa layers and the formation of corpora lutea (Fig 4 and
Table 3)..

Fig 4. Morphological changes of ovarian tissues. (A) Sections of ovary from the control group had normal appearance. (B) PCOS group showed cystic
degenerating follicles with thin granulosa layers. (C) PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation group showed increased granulosa layers. (D) PCOS FMT group
showed increased granulosa layers and formation of corpora lutea. The larger boxed area in A, B, C, D was shown at higher magnification in E, F, G,
H, respectively. GLC: granular cell layer, TCL: theca cell layer, O: oocyte, L: luteum, AF: atretic follicle. Magnification  scale bar, 50 μm..

Number of corpora lutea (n)
Diameter of largest follicle (μm)
Thickness of granulosa cell layer
(μm).

chronic sinusitis, periodontitis and bacterial vaginosis  Recent investigations have
revealed that males not females have greater odds of carrying Prevotella intermedia in oral cav-
ity, suggesting an association between sex hormone and carriage of Prevotella  In women
with PCOS, Prevotella intermedia serum antibody levels were higher than healthy women 
It has been hypothesized that testosterone metabolites contributed to Prevotella growth and
virulence  However, there is no evidence to support this hypothesis. Prevotella intermedia
were capable of stimulating 5α-reductase activity in human gingival fibroblasts, leading to the
synthesis of dihydrotestosterone form testosterone and androstenedione  In this study,
with the testosterone and androstenedione levels increased in PCOS group, the copy number
of Prevotella also increased, which is consistent with previous study. To further understand
effects of microbiota interventions on PCOS, PCOS rats were treated with FMT and Lactobacil-
lus transplantation. The results showed that with the copy number of Prevotella decrease the
testosterone and androstenedione levels also decreased. The relationship between Prevotella
and androgen level needs further study in letrozole-induced PCOS rat model..

ria” as they exert health-promoting properties. It is proposed that increase of Lactobacillus in
the gut lead to production of short chain fatty acids that improve gut health, increasing the bar-
rier function of the gut and reducing translocation of bacterial endotoxins across the gut wall
where they could produce inflammation and insulin resistance  Probiotic supplementation
(Lactobacillus casei Shirota (LcS)) could prevent high-fat, over-feeding induced insulin resis-
tance in human subjects  Considering the beneficial effect of Lactobacillus on insulin resis-
tance and the disorder is associated with PCOS, the present study used Lactobacillus
transplantation and FMT to treat PCOS rats. The results showed that after treating PCOS rats
with Lactobacillus transplantation and FMT, the serum androgens reduced, estrous cycles
improved and the ovarian functions normalized. These data suggested that FMT and Lactoba-
cillus transplantation were helpful for the treatments of PCOS rats.