5_PARAGRAPHS

these pups rapidly succumbed to experimental infection with
Escherichia coli or Klebsiella pneumoniae. The deleterious effects
of antibiotics could be reversed by treating mice with G-CSF or
by adoptive transfer of microbiota from normal neonatal mice.
This process was dependent on intact IL-17A signaling, high-
lighting a potential role for the IL-17A/G-CSF axis in medi-
ating the effects of the microbiota on neutrophil production in
the BM. It is important to emphasize that the antibiotic-
mediated effects in this model must reﬂect vertical transfer
from the mother to the pup, because the treatment was started
during pregnancy and discontinued prior to weaning. These
studies indicate that caution needs to be applied when con-
sidering the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics during labor or
the perinatal period and perhaps suggest potential beneﬁts of
coadministering probiotics under these circumstances..

In the experiments above, the effects of antibiotics could
reﬂect an inﬂuence on the microbiota of the mother, the
neonate, or both. To assess the impact of the maternal
microbiota alone, without any inﬂuence from microbial col-
onization of the pups after birth, Gomez de Ag€uero et al. 
transiently colonized germ-free dams during gestation with an
auxotrophic mutant strain of E. coli, termed HA107. This
model allows microbial colonization to occur only during
pregnancy so that the dam becomes germ-free again prior to
giving birth to her germ-free pups. This study revealed that
maternal Ab-mediated vertical transfer of maternal microbial
components vastly altered gene expression in the intestine of.

FIGURE 1. Microbial signals in early life shape the repertoire of immune cell development in the BM. A child’s immune system can be modulated by microbial
signals at various stages in development. Microbial metabolites, such as SCFAs, and Abs carrying microbial molecules can pass from mother to fetus during gestation
(A) or from mother to child via breast milk (B). This has been shown to impact the immune cell repertoire in the intestine and may affect susceptibil-
ity to intestinal pathogens. (B and C) From birth onward, children are exposed to microbes in the environment (i), which
(Figure legend continues).

 In mice, although early B cells that express RAGs are
absent from the small intestine at birth, they are found to
accumulate in the gut mucosa at weaning, coincident with
increasing microbial colonization in early life  This
suggests that microbes (and potentially dietary Ags) may play
an important role in shaping the primary Ab repertoire in
early life  and this may occur outside of the BM..


Although the factors mediating emergency myelopoiesis
have been characterized in some detail (see below), the reg-
ulation of steady-state hematopoiesis by the normal microbiota
remains less well understood. Nevertheless, recognition of
microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) is likely to be
important; indeed, intestinal colonization of germ-free mice
with a combination of E. coli, Staphylococcus xylosus, and
Enterococcus faecalis stimulates myelopoiesis in a MyD88 and
TRIF–dependent manner  Although it was unclear what
cell types mediated this response, one possibility is that it
reﬂects regulation of secondary mediator production by in-
testinal enterocytes stimulated by MAMPs from the com-
mensal bacteria. This would be consistent with experiments
showing that epithelial cell–derived CXCL5 can regulate the