5_PARAGRAPHS

The group- or genus-specic oligonucleotide probes targeted
the bacterial 16S rRNA, including the Bacteroides–Prevotella
group (Bac303, 50-CCAATGTGGGGGACCTT), the Clostridium
I & II group (Chis150, 50-TTATGCGGTATTAATC-
cluster
the Enterobacteriaceae group (Enter1432, 50-
TYCCTTT),
the Lactobacillus group (Lab158, 50-
GTTTTGCAACCCACT),
GGTATTAGCA(C/T)CTGTTTCCA), the Eubacterium rectale group
(Mib724, 50-GCTTCTTAGTCARGTACCG), the Atopobium group
(Ato291, 50-GGTCGGTCTCTCAACCC), the Bidobacterium group
(Bif164, 50-CATCCGGCATTACCACCC), the Enterococcus faecalis
(Enf191, 50-GAAAGCGCCTTTCACTCTTATGC), and the Clos-
tridium coccoides–Eubacterium rectale cluster group (Erec482, 50-
GCTTCTTAGTCA- GGTACCG) were used for enumeration of
dominant members of the gut microbiota. The EUB338 probe
used to determine total counts was labeled with uorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC), while the group- or genus-specic probes
were labeled at the 50-end with indocyanine (Cy3; Sangon
Biotech, Shanghai, China)..

FISH analysis, as a quantitative molecular-based technique, was
applied to assess the microbiota composition. The relative
abundance of the major bacterial groups indicated that, even
when considering a degree of interindividual variation, the HF
diet induced the gut microbiota dysbiosis . The results
of principal coordinate analysis showed that HF microbiomes
were clearly diﬀerent from those in CT and HF-RES mice
. Moreover, the principal coordinate analysis scores plot
in Fig. 2B supports the presence of overlapping clusters between
HF-RES and CT groups, which illustrated the relative similarity
of CT and RES treated mice in microbiotal proles. Lactobacillus
was reduced by 1.8-fold in HF mice and Bidobacterium was
decreased by 1.9-fold, whereas Enterococcus
faecalis was
increased by 1.8-fold in the HF group compared with CT mice
. Aer RES treatment, Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium
were signicantly increased, whereas Enterococcus faecalis was
signicantly decreased to that of control levels . In.

The correlations between body weight and the colonic bacterial
content were calculated . Body weight was positively and
signicantly correlated with Enterococcus faecalis (P < 0.05)
, and body weight was negatively correlated with
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium . In addition, a
negative correlation was found between the body weight and the
ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes (r ¼ (cid:4)0.805, P ¼ 0.002)
..

and the Bacteroides phylum. These ndings are consistent with
previous studies. For instance, Vendrame et al.39 described that
wild blueberries, a rich source of polyphenols, signicantly
increased the number of Bidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus
acidophilus, and Neyrinck et al.40 demonstrated that a poly-
phenol-rich extract of pomegranate peel increased the caecal
content weight and caecal pool of Bidobacteria spp. and
Lactobacillus spp. The antimicrobial activity of resveratrol could
not explain these results. Therefore,
there are additional
mechanisms, by which resveratrol mediates the composition of
gut microbiota, which should be further elucidated..

activity, exerting their inhibitory eﬀect on certain bacterial
groups by binding to bacterial membranes.35,36 Diﬀerences in
cell surface structures could explain why Gram-positive bacteria
are more sensitive to the bactericidal eﬀects of
these
compounds than are Gram-negative species.37 On one hand, in
our study, resveratrol has an inhibitory eﬀect on the growth of
these bacteria, which includes Enterococcus faecalis and the
Enterobacteriaceae group—an important pathogen closely
related to obesity and insulin resistance on a high-fat diet but
not on a normal chow diet.38 However, on the other hand, this
study showed that resveratrol intake positively aﬀected the
growth of the Lactobacillus group, the Bidobacterium group,