36_PARAGRAPHS

and lower Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes than FF infants [2, 
6]. Breastfeeding is strongly associated with Bifidobacte-
rium  
For example, in the TEDDY (The Environmental Deter-
minants of Diabetes in the Young) cohort, BF infants had 
higher relative abundance of B. breve, B. bifidum, and B. 
dentium than FF; while B. longum was the most dominant 
species in this study, it did not differ by feeding group  
Lactobacillus abundance has also been associated with 
breastfeeding  however, results vary considerably 
among published studies  In a recent meta-analysis of 
seven studies, infants who were not exclusively BF har-
bored higher relative abundances of Bacteroides, Eubac-
terium, and Veillonella .

spp., and Bacteroides spp.
teriaceae, Clostridium 
and increased Enterobac-
bacterium, Lactobacillus, 
Weaning decreased Bifido-.

1 3enterotype
enterotypes, but not Bifidobacterium 
with Bacteroides and Prevotella 
plasma insulin levels in children 
dietary fiber consumption and low .

Soy, pulse, and nut positively associated with Bacteroides .

can children had Bacteroides enterotype.

In Australian 2- to 3-year-olds, both habitual diet, as meas-
ured by a Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ), and recent 
dietary intake, as measured by a 24-h recall 3 days prior to 
fecal sample collection, influenced fecal microbiota com-
position  Dairy intake was negatively associated with 
species richness and diversity and Bacteroidetes abundance, 
but was positively associated with Erysipelatoclostridium 
spp. and the Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio [F/B ratio]. 
Vegetable  protein  intake  was  positively  associated  with 
abundances of the Lachnospira; soy, pulse, and nut intake 
were positively associated with Bacteroides xylanisolvens, 
and fruit intake was negatively associated with the relative 
abundance of microbes related to Ruminococcus gnavus 
 Dairy and vegetable-source proteins explained 7–10% 
of the variation in microbiota composition and fruit intake 
explained 8%. Among the dairy group, yogurt explained 9% 
of the variance in microbiota .

associated  with  metabolic  phenotypes.  Studying  Dutch 
children in the KOALA Birth Cohort Study, Zhong and col-
leagues documented higher levels of Bifidobacterium at 6 
to 9 years of age compared to adults  They also classi-
fied children into three enterotypes and observed that cor-
relations between dietary and metabolic phenotypes were 
dependent on fecal microbial enterotype. For example, a 
negative correlation between dietary fiber intake and plasma 
insulin was only reported in children with Bacteroides and 
Prevotella enterotypes, but not the Bifidobacterium entero-
type  This latter microbiome possesses lower microbial 
gene richness, alpha diversity, and functional potential for 
butyrate and succinate production, suggesting that children 
exhibiting a Bifidobacterium enterotype have a less mature 
gut microbiome  Additionally, a study of 8- to 11-year-
olds in Thailand living in two different geographical regions 
observed that frequency of vegetable intake was positively 
correlated with Lactobacillus and Prevotella, while Bifido-
bacterium spp. was negatively correlated with fish and beef 
intake .


Parallel to these findings, comparing Bangladeshi and 
American  children    Bangladeshi  children 
exhibited lower levels of Bacteroides and higher levels of 
Prevotella,  Butyrivibrio,  and Oscillospira,  indicative  of 
their consumption of a non-Western diet low in refined-
sugar enriched foods and meat and rich in rice, bread, and 
lentils  Furthermore, the American children consuming 
Western diets had higher Bacteroides abundance than chil-
dren in Bangladesh  A Bacteroides enterotype is more 
common in adults consuming a Western diet, whereas the 
Prevotella enterotype is more common in those consuming 
high amounts of fiber .

Lastly,  a  study  comparing  Egyptian  teenagers  (mean 
13.9 years) consuming a Mediterranean-style diet to Ameri-
can teenagers (mean 12.9 years) consuming a Western diet, 
found that Egyptian children clustered to the Prevotella ente-
rotype and American children clustered to the Bacteroides 
enterotype  Furthermore, the gastrointestinal environ-
ment of Egyptian children contained higher levels of SCFAs, 
microbial polysaccharide degradation-encoding genes, and 
polysaccharide-degrading genera .

and  then  to  either  the  mother  and/or  infant  postpartum 
(Table 3), and the second is to administer the pro-
biotic directly to the infant or child (Table 4). For 
the first approach, most studies gave probiotics to the moth-
ers of infants with high-risk of allergy, with the goal of 
prevention of allergic disease, such as eczema, asthma and 
allergic rhinitis  The impact of maternal pro-
biotic supplementation on the abundances of bacterial taxa 
were studied  however, the results are inconsistent, 
even when the same probiotic strain was used 
(Table 3). For example, supplementation of pregnant and 
lactating women with L. rhamnosus GG (LGG), L. acidophi-
lus La-5 and B. animalis subsp. lactis BB-12 from 36-week 
gestation until 3 months postnatal during breastfeeding did 
not affect the proportions of bacteria classes and genera of 
the infants at 3 months and 2 years  In contrast, a Finish 
study evaluated the effect of administration of L. rhamnosus 
LPR and B. longum BL999 to mothers 2 months before and 
2 months after delivery. They observed that infants whose 
mother received probiotics had lower counts of Bifidobacte-
rium and a higher percentage of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus 
than placebo at 6 months of age  In addition, several 
groups investigated the diversity of infant microbiota, report-
ing that administration of probiotics during pregnancy and 
lactation, or directly to infants after delivery have no or lim-
ited effects on alpha and beta diversity of infant microbiota 
(Table 3)..

Probiotics have been administrated directly to infants and 
children (Table 4). These studies varied in terms of 
age of the children (newborns to age 18), type of probiotic, 
dose administered, and duration of the intervention. Despite 
these differences in study design, no effects of probiotic 
administration were observed on microbiome alpha or beta 
diversity between children in probiotic and control groups, 
with the exception of one study  In that study, formula 
or L. reuteri DSM 17938-supplemented formula was fed for 
6 months to newborns born by either vaginal or C-section 
delivery  The L. reuteri-supplemented formula had a 
limited effect on the microbiota of vaginally born infants; 
however, the overall microbiota composition of C-section-
delivered infants consuming the probiotic-supplemented 
formula differed from that of placebo and was similar to 
vaginally delivered infants at 2 weeks of age .

year, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
interspace profiling, mo month, qPCR quantitative PCR, T-RFLP terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism, RT-qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, VD vaginally delivered, y 
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12, CFU colony-forming unit, CS cesarean section, d day, FISH fluorescent in situ hybridization, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-pro .

9 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. animalis subsp. lactis HN019
L. rhamnosus HN001
Powder in capsules.

bacillus, and Bacteroides at 6 mo.

↓ Colonization rate of B. longum in ST11 + BL999
↓ Colonization rate of B. infantis in LPR + BL999
Bifidobacterium in LPR + BL999 at 6 mo of age.

L. paracasei ST11 + B. longum BL999 
L. rhamnosus LPR + B. longum BL999 or
Powder in water.


lus La-5 + BB-12 
LGG + L. acidophi-
Fermented milk
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. breve M16V + B. longum BB536
Powder in water, milk or formula
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d.

B. bifidum W23 + B. lactis W52 + L. 
Powder in water, milk or formula.

↑ prevalence of species belonging to B. longum group at .

amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain and .

108 CFU/g
L. johnsonii La1
Formula.

1 × 107 CFU/g
L. fermentum CECT5716
Formula + 0.3 g/100 ml GOS.

107 CFU/g
B. longum BB536
Formula.

3 y of age
group and B. fragilis group at 
Bifidobacterium, C. coccoides 
↔ fecal counts of Lactobacillus, .

1.2 × 109 CFU/L
L. reuteri DSM 17938
Formula.

over the first y
related to B. fragilis and Blautia .

BT1 + B. longum BGT
BR3 + B. longum subsp. infantis .

B. bifidum BF3 + B. breve 
Formula.

and amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain .

qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, V vaginal delivery, wk week, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
in situ hybridization, FOS fructooligosaccharides, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-Pro interspace profiling, mo month, OTU operational taxonomic unit, qPCR quantitative PCR, RT-
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12, BF breastfed, CFU colony-forming unit, C cesarean section, Ct control, d day, EBF exclusive breastfed, FF formula-fed, FISH fluorescent .

6.5 × 109 CFU/d
L. casei Shirota.

↓ detection rate of C. perfringens .

4 × 1010 CFU/d
L. casei Shirota
4 × 108 CFU/d
LGG
Oily suspension.

5 × 109 CFU/d, 5 d/wk
B. longum BB536
Freeze-dried powder.

1.6 × 1010 CFU/d
L. paracasei A
Fermented milk.

and amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain 