10_PARAGRAPHS

There are several recent reviews on sequencing and anal-
ysis  of  the  microbiome,  although  a  full  discussion  of  these 
methods  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  review.28-31  In  brief,  com-
monly  used  methods  to  study  the  microbiome  use  either 
amplicon sequencing methods that analyze the partial genome 
or whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing. Amplicon 
sequencing methods profile segments of the bacterial genome, 
typically the hypervariable regions of the highly conserved 16s 
ribosomal RNA gene. Such profiling can reveal segments (oper-
ational taxonomic units [OTUs]) that are common to a specific 
taxon. A limitation of this method is that closely related bacte-
rial families may share 99% of the hypervariable region, thereby 
precluding  identification  of  individual  species  and  strains. 
A  second  commonly  used  microbial  sequencing  method  relies 
on shotgun metagenomic sequencing, which is high-throughput 
sequencing of the entire bacterial genome. Through profiling the 
entire genome, this method allows for resolution at the species 
and  even  strain  level  in  addition  to  the  definition  of  bacterial 
function through mapping the genome to reference databases..

Analysis of both 16s rRNA and metagenomic sequencing 
has traditionally relied on comparing the relative abundance of 
various  genera,  species,  and  strains  between  different  groups. 
A  limitation  of  this  method  is  that  a  change  in  relative  abun-
dance  could  result  from  either  the  increased  absolute  number 
of  a  species  of  interest  or  the  depletion  of  other  species  and 
consequent reliance on the overall microbial load. In contrast, 
quantitative profiling of absolute counts of absolute microbial 
abundances may be as or more relevant to defining the role of 
microbiome  in  human  disease.32  A  small  study  of  29  patients 
with CD revealed microbial counts that were 3 times lower than 
those of healthy control patients and differences in defining an 
association between Bacteroides (noted only in relative profiling) 
and Prevotella (only in quantitative microbial profiling) in CD.32.

investigators obtained fecal samples from 33 patients with CD 
who  stopped  infliximab  therapy  (as  part  of  an  interventional 
study  to  assess  the  rate  of  relapse  after  biologic  cessation). 
Fecal  samples  were  obtained  at  therapy  cessation,  2  months, 
6 months, and the end of follow-up. Cross-sectional compari-
sons  were  also  made  with  29  healthy  control  patients.  Over 
follow-up, 19 patients relapsed and 14 remained in remission. 
Compared  with  the  healthy  control  patients,  those  with  CD 
had reduced counts of Firmicutes such as Clostridium coccoides 
(P  =  0.0003),  Clostridium 
leptum,  and  Faecalibacterium 
prauznitzii (P = 0.003). Interestingly, although all patients were 
in clinical remission at study entry, a lower baseline abundance 
of F. prausnitzii (P = 0.014) and Bacteroides (P = 0.030) pre-
dicted relapse after therapy cessation in addition to biochem-
ical markers such as an elevated serum C-reactive protein. .

The  association  with  F.  prauznitzii  is  particularly  inter-
esting as prior work has shown a significant anti-inflammatory 
effect of this species. In experiments using in vitro and in vivo 
models,  Sokol  et  al34  showed  in  2008  that  stimulation  of  pe-
ripheral  blood  mononuclear  cells  by  F.  prauznitzii  resulted  in 
lower  interleukin  (IL)-12  and  interferon-γ  levels  and  higher 
levels  of  IL-10,  which  has  known  anti-inflammatory  effects. 
Interestingly, the oral administration of F. prauznitzii resulted 
in a lower severity of 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid colitis. 
Note  that  the  culture  supernatant  also  had  a  similar  effect  in 
reducing the severity of this particular colitis, suggesting that 
the  effect  of  F.  prauznitzii  may  be  mediated  in  part  through 
the  production  of  anti-inflammatory  metabolites.  A  subse-
quent study of a peptidomic analysis of F. prauznitzii culture 
supernatants  showed  7  peptides  derived  from  a  microbial  an-
ti-inflammatory  molecule  that  had  a  dose-dependent  effect 
on  reducing  the  activation  of  the  NF-κB  pathway.35  Luminal 
delivery  of  this  peptide  through  Lactococcus  lactis  alleviated 
colitis  in  dinitrobenzene  sulfonic  acid  mice  models.35  In  other 
experiments, F. prauznitzii or its supernatant also induced the 
production of IL-10 and transforming growth factor-β1.36.

Two OTUs affiliated with Faecalibacterium and Bacteroides were more abundant at .

Relapsers had lower abundance of F. prausnitzii (P = 0.014) and Bacteroides .

The  author  and  colleagues  previously  performed 
metagenomic  sequencing  from  fecal  samples  of  85  patients 
with  IBD  initiating  treatment  with  vedolizumab.25  The  study 
cohort included 43 patients with UC and 42 patients with CD. 
The primary outcome, remission at week 14, was attained by 31 
patients. A total of 35% of the cohort remained in remission 
at week 54. In the baseline stool sample, alpha diversity at the 
species  level  was  higher  among  those  with  CD  who  achieved 
remission at week 14 than in those who were not in remission 
at  that  time  point.  This  difference  was  noted  primarily  at  the 
species  level.  Compositionally,  there  was  no  separation  of  re-
sponders and nonresponders on principal component analysis, 
primarily because of similar baseline abundance of the top 15 
most  abundant  species.  Two  species,  Roseburia  inulinivorans 
and Burkholderiales, were significantly more abundant at base-
line in CD patients who achieved remission than in those who .

Response to Biologic and Nonbiologic Therapies
Several  studies  have  examined  the  utility  of  microbial 
markers in predicting relapse in patients with CD or UC.39-41 An 
initial analysis of the longitudinal changes in the microbiome 
was conducted by Kolho et al,41 who profiled 68 children with 
IBD  among  whom  32  received  anti-TNF  therapy.  During  in-
duction,  patients  who  responded  (defined  by  a  reduction  in 
fecal  calprotectin)  showed  increasing  diversity  and  similarity 
to  healthy  control  patients,  whereas  a  similar  effect  was  not 
observed  among  those  who  were  nonresponders.  Although 
the  abundance  of  Bacilli,  Proteobacteria,  and  low-abundance 
Clostridium clusters increased in nonresponders, these levels did 
not increase in responders. The authors showed that patients re-
sponding to anti-TNF therapy had higher baseline abundances 
of bacteria belonging to Bifidobacterium, Clostridium colinum, 
Vibrio,  and  Eubacterium  rectale  and  a  lower  abundance  of 
Streptococcus  mitis.  A  multivariable  model  that  incorporated 
an abundance of Clostridium sphenoides and Haemophilus spe-
cies predicted a fecal calprotectin level < 200 mcg/g at 3 months 
with an accuracy of 0.88.41.

One prior study examined the role of microbial compo-
sition in predicting response to ustekinumab therapy. Doherty 
et al27 performed 16s rRNA sequencing from fecal samples of 
patients treated in a phase 2 clinical trial (CERTIFI) comparing 
ustekinumab induction and maintenance to placebo. Stool sam-
ples were obtained at baseline and weeks 4, 6, and 22. A com-
bined random forest predictive model that incorporated clinical 
and baseline microbial data performed significantly better than 
clinical data containing models alone (AUC = 0.84 vs 0.62). In 
fact, the addition of clinical data did not add predictive value 
to  microbiome-only  predictive  models  (AUC  =  0.838).  Two 
OTUs were significantly different between those in remission at 
week 6 and those with active CD: Bacteroides (P = 0.022) and 
Faecalibacterium  (P  =  0.003).  Patients  in  remission  at  week  6 
also had a higher alpha diversity at baseline than did those with 
active disease. During maintenance therapy through week 22, 
microbiome-based  models  could  also  classify  disease  activity 
states  based  on  an  abundance  of  Faecalibacterium,  Blautia, 
Clostridium XIVa, Ruminococcaceae, and Roseburia..

Two pediatric inception cohorts with serial sampling of 
the microbiome in mucosa and stool provided insights into the 
potential  predictive  value  of  microbial  markers  in  identifying 
disease  progression.14,  23  A  total  of  913  children  were  enrolled 
at  diagnosis  of  CD,  most  of  whom  had  a  nonstricturing, 
nonpenetrating phenotype.14 At follow-up, 54 and 24 patients 
had  stricturing  and  penetrating  complications  respectively, 
and 21% received anti-TNF therapy. Interestingly, both CBir1 
positivity  and  the  presence  of  anti-saccharomyces  antibodies 
was  associated  with  a  risk  of  stricturing  or  penetrating  di-
sease  behavior.  Expression  of  genes  regulating  acute  inflam-
matory response to microbes was induced at baseline in those 
who  developed  penetrating  disease.  Specifically,  fecal  abun-
dance  of  Rothia  and  Ruminococcus  was  associated  with  the 
development of stricturing complications and Collinsella abun-
dance was greater at baseline in patients who developed pene-
trating  disease.  The  PROTECT  cohort  recruited  400  children 