29_PARAGRAPHS

The gut microbiota serves the host by interacting directly or indirectly with host cells, the latter of
which comes about through microbially-produced bioactive molecules, thus the microbiota is capable
of regulating numerous biological pathways involved in immunity and energy homeostasis, while also
protecting the host against pathogens through colonisation resistance. The dysbiotic microbiota, which
has deviated from the ‘healthy’ status in terms of diversity and functionality, has been implicated in
a range of diseases, including inﬂammatory bowel diseases (IBDs)  neuropsychiatric
disorders and cardiometabolic diseases, including obesity, type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular
disease  These diseases tend to inﬂict those living a Westernised lifestyle. Indeed, greater economic
development has been shown to correlate with signiﬁcantly lower within-host gut microbiota diversity,
a common feature of the dysbiotic microbiota .

by Prevotella and the other by Bacteroides which have been linked to long term carbohydrate-, or animal
fat and protein-rich diets, respectively  More recently, it has been suggested that Prevotella and
Bacteroides should be interpreted as ‘biomarkers’ of diet, lifestyle and disease state given that gradients
of both Bacteroides and Prevotella have been found within gut communities as opposed to distinct and
consistent community taxa .

Ageing has a signiﬁcant impact on the gut microbiota with dramatic compositional and functional
changes observed in the elderly microbiota (in general >65 years). Several physiological and lifestyle
changes associated with the ageing process may be contributing factors resulting in changes in dietary
habits and ultimately nutrition, including a decline in dentition and salivary function, a reduction
in digestion and absorption, due to gastrointestinal dysmotility, changes in appetite as a result of
prescribed drugs and psychological state, or changes in living conditions, such as residential care
or hospitalisation  Gastric hypochlorhydria which is associated with ageing and is prevalent in
individuals experiencing or who have experienced Helicobacter pylori infection can cause malabsorption
and bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine .

In general, the elderly microbiota has been characterised by a decline in microbial diversity, an
increase in the abundance of opportunistic pathogens and a decrease in species associated with short
chain fatty acid (SCFA) production, in particular butyrate  The inter-individual variation observed
in the gut microbiota of adults is even greater in the elderly cohort. Indeed, while Bacteroidetes was
found to be the dominant phylum in an elderly Irish cohort (age 65 years and older), the proportion of
Bacteroidetes within individual composition datasets ranged from 3% to 92%, while the proportion of
Firmicutes ranged from 7% to 94% reported a change in the ratio of Firmicutes:
Bacteriodetes with age, which was recorded as 0.4 in infants  10.9 in adults
 of which the latter two consumed an
unrestricted Western-type diet. In a study involving 178 elderly Irish subjects  Claesson et
al. identiﬁed distinct microbiota composition groups as a result of residence location (community
versus day-hospital versus rehabilitation versus long-stay residential care) which also overlapped with
diet (low fat/high ﬁbre versus moderate fat/high ﬁbre versus moderate fat/low ﬁbre versus high fat/low
ﬁbre, respectively). The gut microbiota of people in long-stay care was found to be signiﬁcantly less
diverse than that of healthy community dwellers, which was found to be more similar to healthy young
adults. Furthermore, increased frailty as observed in the less healthy, long-stay subjects correlated
with a loss of community-associated microbiota. Indeed, a distinct negative correlation between frailty
and gut microbiota alpha diversity has been reported  In the same study, the species Eubacterium
dolichum and Eggerthella lenta were found to be more abundant with frailty, while a Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii operational taxonomic unit (OTU) was less abundant in frailer individuals. Interestingly,.

F. prausnitzii is an important butyrate producer  More
recently, Haran et al. also reported lower abundances of butyrate-producing organisms in the
microbiota of American elderly nursing home residents (age 65 years or older) consuming a low-ﬁbre,
typical nursing home diet with increasing frailty and higher abundances of recognised dysbiotic species.
Increasing age was also associated with a decrease in the abundance of microbiome-encoded genes
and pathways associated with vitamin B, a nitrogenous base and essential amino acid production..

Interestingly, the centenarian microbiota has been shown to signiﬁcantly diﬀer from
that of young adults  being
characterised by an enrichment in facultative anaerobes, mainly pathobionts, and a rearrangement in the
Firmicutes population with a marked decrease in symbiotic species associated with anti-inﬂammatory
properties e.g., F. prausnitzii and relatives. Increased inﬂammatory markers were also identiﬁed in
centenarian blood samples, indicative of increased inﬂammatory status. Rampelli et al. also
reported a rearrangement in Firmicutes in Italian centenarians  which was not observed
in 70-year-old subjects. In this study a functional description of the coding capacity of an ageing
human cohort revealed a decrease in saccharolytic potential and an increased abundance of proteolytic
functions in the centenarian microbiome. Remarkably, a study investigating the semi-supercentarian
microbiota revealed not only a decrease in saccharolytic butyrate producers
(Faecalibacterium, Coprococcus, Roseburia) and an increase in potential opportunistic bacteria, as expected,
but also an enrichment and/or higher prevalence in health associated bacterial groups, including
Akkermansia, Biﬁdobacterium and Christensenellaceae. Whether these species were present at a younger
age or related to past lifestyle or genetics is not known .

fermentable
monosaccharides  For example, the gut bacterium Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron was recently shown
to metabolise the most structurally complex plant polysaccharide known, rhamnogalacturonan-II,
using a highly speciﬁc enzyme system  Biﬁdobacterium longum strains derived from the infant gut
were shown to be capable of metabolising human milk oligosaccharides  In-silico analysis of
CAZyme proﬁles in the guts of 448 individuals from diverse geographies and age groups revealed
89 CAZyme families which were present across 85% of the gut microbiome and revealed several
geography/age-speciﬁc trends in the CAZyme repertoires of individuals  The major end products
of microbial fermentation of the resulting monosaccharides are the SCFAs, including butyrate,
propionate, and acetate which reach a combined concentration of 50–150 mM in the colon at a ratio
of 1:1:3, respectively  They are rapidly absorbed by the intestinal epithelial cells where they
are involved in a number of cellular and regulatory processes with only 5% excreted in
faeces  Butyrate is mainly produced by Firmicutes, propionate by Bacteroidetes, and acetate by
most gut anaerobes and plays an
important role in brain function and anti-inﬂammatory
properties  Propionate
contributes to gluconeogenesis in the liver and, along with butyrate, has been shown to activate
intestinal gluconeogenesis, albeit both use diﬀerent circuits  Propionate derived from the gut
microbiota has also been shown to reduce cancer cell proliferation in the liver  The SCFAs are
also involved in regulating immune responses, a topic which has been extensively reviewed by
Corrêa et al.  For example, acetate has recently been shown to promote intestinal antibody IgA
responses to the gut microbiota via the G protein coupled receptor GPR43  Intestinal IgA is
specialised in protecting the mucosa  These SCFAs also stimulate secretion of gut hormones, such
as glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and plasma peptide YY (PYY) involved in appetite regulation
and satiety from enteroendocrine cells proposedly through the SCFA receptors GPR41 and
GPR43  thus playing a role in energy regulation in the body. Unsurprisingly, changes in
the production of these compounds as a result of disturbances to the gut microbiota can result in
pathological consequences for the host. As an example, increased acetate production from an altered
gut microbiota in a rodent model was shown to promote metabolic syndrome .

In recent years, there has been a growing appreciation for the ability of the gut microbiota to
produce neurochemicals that can inﬂuence the peripheral enteric and central nervous systems 
For example, gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) is a major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain 
and neuropsychiatric disorders, including anxiety and depression have been linked to GABA system
dysfunction  Strains of culturable lactobacilli and biﬁdobacteria from the human intestine
were shown to produce GABA, namely Lactobacillus brevis, Biﬁdobacterium dentium, adolescentis and
infantis  Furthermore, GABA was found to serve as a growth factor for a previously uncultured
gut bacterium, Flavonifractor sp. which was shown to ferment GABA  In the same study, the
authors identiﬁed several gut bacteria capable of producing GABA which included Bacteroides, Dorea,
Parabacteroides, Alistipes and Ruminococcus species. More recently, a co-culture experiment revealed that
GABA produced by Bacteroides fragilis was essential for the growth of a gut isolate termed KLE1738
which is believed to be an unreported bacterial genus  This led to the isolation of a variety
of GABA-producing bacteria and the Bacteriodes species in particular were found to produce large
quantities of GABA. Furthermore, in the same study relative abundance levels of faecal Bacteriodes
negatively correlated with brain signatures associated with depression in patients with major depressive
disorder. Bacterially-produced GABA is generated by the enzyme glutamate decarboxylase (GAD)
which catalyzes the irreversible α-decarboxylation of glutamate to GABA and is believed to protect the
microorganism against stomach acidity 
Interestingly, daily consumption of a GABA-producing Bif. dentium gut isolate was found to modulate
sensory neuron activity in a rat faecal retention model of visceral hypersensitivity revealing that
bacterially-produced GABA can modulate abdominal pain  GABA-enriched black soybean milk
fermented with a GABA-producing ﬁsh gut isolate, L. brevis, generated similar antidepressant activity
in rats as the common antidepressant drug, ﬂuoxetine, but without the side eﬀects normally associated
with the drug, such as appetite loss and reduced body weight .

Serotonin is a brain neurotransmitter and performs regulatory
functions in the gut and other organ systems  It is derived from the amino acid tryptophan
and plays an important role in the regulation of mood such that several antidepressants act on
serotonin transporters in the brain demonstrated that human- and mouse-derived
gut bacteria promote serotonin biosynthesis in colonic enterochromaﬃn cells which supply serotonin to
the lumen, mucosa and circulating platelets. Spore forming bacteria, dominated by clostridial species,
were found to elicit this eﬀect. Furthermore, conventional mice were found to have 2.8 times more
plasma serotonin levels than their germ-free counterparts  This peripherally produced molecule
does not pass the blood brain barrier under physiological conditions but is an important signalling
molecule in the gut involved in peristalsis, secretion, vasodilation, pain perception and nausea, as well
as promoting inﬂammation and being involved in neuron development and maintenance in the enteric
nervous system, while platelet serotonin derived from the gut inﬂuences bone development amongst
other functions  The mechanisms involved in gut microbiota-mediated serotonin biosynthesis
have not yet been fully elucidated but are thought to be linked to microbial metabolite-stimulation of
the enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase 1 in enterochromaﬃn cells which produces a serotonin precursor
that is subsequently metabolised to serotonin  In particular, rectal injection with the microbial
metabolites deoxycholate, p-aminobenzoate, α-tocopherol and tyramine, were shown to increase
colonic and serum concentrations of serotonin in mice .

Members of the established microbiota are controlled by ‘substrate competition,’ defined as the
superior ability of a species/strain to utilise one or a few substrates over other species and the control of
that population by the limited concentration of these substrates  Furthermore, one microorganism’s
by-product can serve as substrate for another  In this regard, nutrient resources in the gut are in huge
demand and simultaneously limited, making it challenging to become established or outcompete with
resident microbiota. Indeed, nutrient utilisation by the colonic microbiota of mice was shown to restrain
the growth of Clostridium difficile, since it was incapable of competing with the mouse microbiota for the
available carbon sources  Unfavourable environmental conditions created as a result of commensal
fermentations can also inhibit the growth of undesirable microorganisms. The utilisation of human milk
(cid:48)
oligosaccharides, particularly the dominant secretor associated oligosaccharide 2
-fucosyllactose, by
infant strains of bifidobacteria led to an increase in their proportions, an increase in lactate concentration
and a subsequent reduction in pH which was shown to decrease the proportions of Escherichia coli
and Clostridium perfringens during in vitro anaerobic fermentations  Furthermore, consumption
of butyrate by epithelial cells as an energy source has been implicated as important in maintaining a
hypoxic environment in the gut lumen  Decreased intestinal butyrate levels due to depletion of
a commensal butyrate producer in a mouse model resulted in increased epithelial oxygenation and
aerobic expansion of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium  Butyrate has also been shown to
down-regulate virulence gene expression in Salmonella .

In terms of niche competition, Lee et al. identified specific colonisation factors conserved
within the Bacteroides genus, one of the most prominent genera of the human microbiota. The specific
genetic locus referred to as commensal colonisation f actors (ccf ) was shown to be up-regulated in
Bac. fragilis during gut colonisation, especially at the colonic surface such that the strain was able to
reside deep within the crypt channels whereas ccf mutants were defective in terms of crypt association.
Such species-specific physical interactions with the host provide an example of direct competition for
niche occupation..

I and II), by degrading cell wall peptidoglycan (Class III bacteriolysins) or interfering with cellular
processes (Class III non-lytic bacteriocins)  The genetic machinery for bacteriocin synthesis is
encoded in gene clusters or operons where many of the genes are conserved. Based on this knowledge,
Walsh et al. identiﬁed 74 bacteriocin gene clusters within the genomes of the GIT subset of the
Human Microbiome Project’s reference genome database using an in-silico approach of which the most
commonly identiﬁed were bacteriolysins, then lantibiotics and sactibiotics. Thuricin CD is an example
of a sactibiotic bacteriocin produced by a human gut isolate, Bacillus thuringiensis  While it has a
narrow spectrum of inhibition, thuricin CD is capable of killing a wide range of C. diﬃcile isolates, its
antimicrobial activity being as potent as the antibiotics vancomycin and metronidazole, but without the
concomitant damage to other members of the microbiota  Bacteriocin production can also aid niche
occupation of the producing strain. Indeed, bacteriocin production in Enterococcus faecalis harboring
the bacteriocin-encoding conjugative plasmid pPD1 was shown to replace indigenous enterococci and
out-competed E. faecalis strains lacking the plasmid in a mouse model  Supplementing mice
with bacteriocin-producing strains resulted in transient advantageuous changes, such as inhibition of
Staphylococcus by enterocins and Enterococcus by garvicin and promotion of LAB by sakacin, plantaricins
and garvicin .

Other antimicrobials generated by the gut microbiota can also aid colonisation resistance.
For example, a single bacterial species, namely Clostridium scindens, was shown to confer colonisation
resistance against C. diﬃcile infection in vivo  In this instance, secondary bile acids generated by
C. scindens from host-derived bile cells were found to inhibit the pathogen..

Commensal interactions with the host promote immune system maturation and immune
homeostasis through complex microbiota-host networks although much of our understanding of these
mechanisms today have been extrapolated from animal or in vitro studies  We have already
seen how several microbial metabolites play essential roles as signalling molecules for the immune
system, such as the SCFAs and tryptophan metabolites. More speciﬁcally, a polysaccharide (PSA)
produced by Bac. fragilis was shown to promote cellular and physical maturation of the developing
immune system in mice 
and plays an important role in the development of the infant immune system. A 15 kDa protein
produced by F. prausnitzii, a commensal microbe deﬁcient in Crohn’s disease patients, was shown to
have anti-inﬂammatory properties, decreasing activation of the NF-κB pathway and also prevented
colitis in an animal model  M-cells are speciﬁc phagocytic epithelial cells which sample particulate
antigens showed that eﬃcient induction of IgA is brought about by M-cell
sampling of commensal microbes. Paneth cells (a specialized intestinal epithelial lineage) sense enteric
bacteria through activation of the MyD88-dependent toll-like receptor which results in the induction
of several antimicrobial factors that are essential for controlling bacterial translocation across the
intestinal barrier  Colonisation by segmented ﬁlamentous bacteria was shown to induce the
maturation of T-cell responses in a gnotobiotic mouse model, suggesting these microbes could play a
role in the postnatal maturation of the gut immune system  These studies provide a snapshot
of how commensals modulate host immunity. The importance of the microbiota for host immunity
can also be appreciated from the consequences of its absence in germ free animals. Indeed, germ free
animals exhibit reduced expression of IgA and antimicrobial peptides and are deﬁcient in Peyers’
patches .

bacterial species were suﬃcient to distinguish between the LGC group and the ‘high gene count’ (HGC)
group but interestingly anti-inﬂammatory species, such as F. prausnitzii were more prevalent
in HGC individuals while potentially pro-inﬂammatory species associated with IBD, Bacteroides and
Ruminococcus gnavus  were more frequently found in LGC individuals. In an accompanying
intervention study involving 49 obese and overweight subjects of whom 40% was deﬁned as LGC, a
similar phenomenon in terms of clinical parameters and inﬂammatory status was observed such that the
authors concluded that LGC individuals are at increased risk of obesity-associated co-morbidities 
Members of the LGC group were found to consume fewer fruits and vegetables and fewer ﬁshery
products than the HGC group. An energy-restricted diet with increased ﬁbre intake for six weeks
resulted in an increase in microbial gene richness in the LGC group which approached but remained
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent to that of the HGC group. Both groups showed a loss in body fat mass and an
improvement in clinical phenotypes (lipid and insulin levels and insulin resistance) and a trend towards
a decrease in inﬂammation (as measured by highly sensitive C-reactive protein) though the eﬀects were
more pronounced for the HGC group. Although this was a short-term intervention study, it suggests
that measures of gene richness and microbial diversity may help predict the eﬃcacy of interventions.
Furthermore, it seems that long term improvements to dietary habits may be required to improve
and stabilise gut microbial diversity which agrees with the observations of Klimenko et al. who
reported considerable correlations between long-term dietary habits and gut community structure..

While the exact mechanisms underlying the link between low microbial diversity, diet and disease
are not fully understood, SCFAs undoubtedly play a role given that low MAC diets are directly linked
to low SCFA levels reported a signiﬁcant decrease in the proportion
of the SCFA-producing Clostridial Clusters IV/XIVa in intensive care unit patients 72 h following
hospital admission which was associated with reduced gut microbiota diversity and community
stability over time. Simultaneously, the facultative anaerobe Enterococcus signiﬁcantly expanded.
These changes were associated with receipt of broad-spectrum antibiotics. The depletion of SCFAs
and in particular butyrate producers has been reported in cases of CDI and asymptomatic carriage of
C. diﬃcile, in suﬀerers of nosocomial diarrhoea and in MRSA-positive patients  The potential
importance of butyrate in maintaining an oxygen-depleted environment in the lumen and impeding
colonisation by facultative anaerobes has already been mentioned  however, its speciﬁc role,
if any, in colonisation resistance against C. diﬃcile infection has not yet been elucidated and thus
the viable bacteria themselves are most likely the responsible agents  Indeed, the loss of a
speciﬁc butyrate-producing species, C. scindens, a member of the Clostridium XIVa clade  was
directly associated with susceptibility to C. diﬃcile infection in a mouse model as a result of antibiotic
treatment  Administration of C. scindens alone or in combination with three other bacteria to
antibiotic-treated mice ameliorated CDI. In this case, secondary bile acids produced by C. scindens were
found to be responsible for the anti-C. diﬃcile eﬀect. However, a recent study reported the presence.

of C. scindens and C. diﬃcile in the same stool sample and suggested that the former does not inhibit
the latter but the study does not provide data on bile acid proﬁles or the 7-α -dehydroxylating
activity of C. scindens, the enzyme responsible for secondary bile acid production..

Furthermore, Sonnenburg et al. showed that in the absence of dietary polysaccharides, a
human gut microbe turned to host mucus glycans as a nutrient source. Mouse models have shown that
a defective mucus barrier enables contact between epithelial cells and bacteria resulting in spontaneous
colitis in mice  But a direct connection
between dietary ﬁbre and the status of the colonic mucosal barrier was more recently presented in a
mouse study by Desai et al.  In this study, a dietary-ﬁbre deprived gut microbiota resorted to
host-secreted mucus glycoproteins, which resulted in the erosion of the colonic mucus barrier and
enabled the gut pathogen Cit. rodentium greater access to the epithelial cells, resulting in lethal colitis.
In another study, mice fed a Western style diet presented with an altered gut microbiota composition
that resulted in increased permeability and reduced growth rate of the inner mucus layer compared
with mice fed a CHOW diet  However, administration of Bif. longum or the ﬁbre inulin prevented
mucus defects. Inulin prevented penetrability of the inner colonic mucus layer while Bif. longum
restored mucus growth..

The branched chain amino acids (BCAAs), leucine, isoleucine and valine represent three of the nine
essential amino acids. As well as being building blocks of protein synthesis, the BCAAs are involved in
nutrition metabolism, regulation of energy homeostasis, gut health, immunity and disease  Our
gut microbiome has been shown to be enriched with genes involved in the biosynthesis of essential
amino acids, including the BCAAs  While BCAAs are not precisely ‘diet-derived’ microbial
metabolites, a recent study linking microbial BCAAs to glucose intolerance and insulin resistance
renders them worthy of mention. Indeed, Pedersen et al. reported that the serum metabolome
of insulin-resistant individuals was characterised by increased levels of BCAAs which correlated
with a gut microbiome with enriched biosynthetic potential for BCAAs. Transfer of Prevotella copri to
mice, one of the main species driving the association between BCAA synthesis and insulin resistance,
increased circulating levels of BCAAs, induced insulin resistance and aggravated glucose intolerance.
The authors state that further studies are required to determine how the intestinal BCAAs enter the
bloodstream and from what intestinal location. However, elevated circulating BCAA levels and their
breakdown products have been positively associated with insulin resistance in humans. A metabolic
signature related to BCAA catabolism in obese subjects which included circulating BCAAs and
downstream products of their catabolism (acylcarnitines and glutamate) was identiﬁed in “healthy”
obese subjects free of diabetes or other serious illnesses  These obese subjects were also more
insulin resistant compared to their lean counterparts. In the same study, animals fed a high fat diet
supplemented with BCAAs had reduced food intake and weight gain compared to the high fat diet
alone but became equally insulin resistant as those on the high fat diet. The authors proposed a
pathway of dysregulated BCAA metabolism as a result of overnutrition of protein which leads to
insulin resistance, glucose intolerance and eventually type 2 diabetes. A systematic review of 23 studies
involving 20,091 participants found that circulating BCAAs are a useful biomarker for detection of
insulin resistance and diabetic risk later on  A causal role of BCAA metabolism in the aetiology
of type 2 diabetes was reported following a large-scale human genetic and metabolomic study 
Therefore, modulation of the microbiota to inﬂuence BCAA levels could represent a potential route
towards the prevention of insulin resistance and its associated aetiologies..

The Mediterranean diet is characterised by high intake of non-refined grains, legumes, and a large
diversity of fresh vegetables and fruits daily; yogurt and milk are consumed only a few times per week;
there is reduced intake of fish and seafood, eggs, white meat and high fat dairy products (a few times per
week); red meat is consumed only a few times per month; alcohol intake is also minimised; dietary lipids
are mainly derived from olive oil  Epidemiological studies and randomized clinical trials have
shown that consumption of a Mediterranean diet bestows protective effects against several diseases,
including obesity, diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, stroke, numerous cancers, allergic
diseases, as well as Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease (recently reviewed by Tosti et al. . Based
on evidence to date, Tosti et al. concluded that the health benefits of the Mediterranean diet are
due to its lipid-lowering effects, protection provided against inflammation, oxidative stress and platelet
aggregation, modulation of growth factors and hormones involved in cancer pathogenesis, inhibition
of nutrient sensing pathways by specific amino acid restriction and gut microbiota metabolites which
influence host metabolic health. Indeed, the accumulating evidence suggests that the Mediterranean
diet modulates gut microbiota composition and functionality resulting in microbiome and metabolome
which differs from that of the Western diet and reduces risk of disease. For example, consumption
of the Mediterranean diet for one year by obese men (n = 20) significantly decreased the genera
Prevotella and increased Roseburia and Oscillospira  Roseburia is a known butyrate-producer with
immune maintenance and anti-inflammatory properties and Oscillospira is positively associated
with leanness and health  Long-term consumption of the diet also increased the abundance
of Parabacteroides distasonis  a strain recently shown to block colon tumor formation in high fat
diet-fed azoxymethane-treated mice  Faecal metabolite changes linked to amino acid, peptide
and sphingolipid metabolism were reported on the Mediterranean diet and an improvement in insulin
sensitivity was noted  The same group investigated the effect of chronic consumption of the
Mediterranean diet for 2 years in obese patients with severe metabolic disease (n = 33), obese patients
without metabolic dysfunction (n = 32) and non-obese subjects (n = 41)  Obese patients with severe
metabolic disease showed a marked dysbiosis in their gut microbiota which was reversed following
consumption of the Mediterranean diet; furthermore, there was a significant reduction in plasma
triglyceride levels and a trend for glucose depletion in the same group. In this case, consumption
of the Mediterranean diet for two years increased the abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which
make up the Bacteriodetes phylum, which has previously been reported to be reduced in obese
In addition, genera with saccharolytic activity, including Faecalibacterium, Roseburia
people 
and Ruminococcus were also increased. Interestingly, such changes were not observed for non-obese
individuals or obese individuals without metabolic syndrome. De Filippis et al. reported that
adherence to the Mediterranean diet in a cohort of Italian individuals (n = 153) was associated with
increased levels of faecal SCFAs which correlated with enrichment of members of Firmicutes and
Bacteroidetes. In contrast, low adherence to the diet (particularly observed in omnivores) was associated
with increased levels of urinary TMAO which correlated with L-Ruminococcus (Ruminococcus genus
assigned to Lachnospiraceae family). Interestingly, the mucin-degrading bacterium Ruminococcus torques
has been shown to be increased in transgenic mice representative of Crohn’s disease and receiving a
high fat/high sugar Western diet  These mice had decreased mucus layer thickness and increased
intestinal permeability. Higher adherence to the Mediterranean diet in a Spanish cohort (n = 74) was
also associated with higher levels of Clostridium cluster XVIa and F. prausnitzii  Clostridium cluster
XVIa contains the Blautia coccoides group which are known butyrate producers  are involved in
secondary bile acid production  F. prausnitzii
is now recognised as one of the most abundant butyrate producers in the human gut microbiota and has
anti-inflammatory properties reported that fast food consumption.

in an adult population resulted in a microbiota with suppressed representation of Lactobacillus and
butyrate-producing bacteria while adherence to the Mediterranean diet led to lower faecal E. coli
counts, a higher Bifidobacterium: E. coli ratio and greater molar ratio of acetate (n = 120). The study also
reported increased levels and prevalence of Candida albicans due to the Mediterranean diet which the
authors suggest could be linked to the ingestion of foodstuffs that are carriers of yeast. Overall, the
studies presented here strongly indicate that increased SCFA production as a result of gut microbiota
modulation on the Mediterranean diet plays a key role in its beneficial health effects..

Another “trendy” diet type that shapes the microbiome is the gluten-free diet. De Palma et al. 
showed that a 30-day gluten-free diet decreased populations of Biﬁdobacterium and Lactobacillus while
increasing unhealthy bacteria, such as E. coli and Enterobacetriaceae that could further increase the risk
of infection by opportunistic bacteria. Others, such as Bonder et al. found reductions in R. bromii
and Roseburia faecis coupled to increased Victivallaceae and Clostridiaceae in individuals consuming
a gluten-free diet. Whilst a gluten-free diet is an eﬀective therapy for treating patients diagnosed
with celiac disease it is often associated with a number of health issues and nutritional deﬁciencies.
Interestingly, over the last 5–10 years, there has been an increasing number of healthy, non-celiac
individuals following gluten-free diets and do so under the impression that such a diet is healthier
for them when paradoxically it may be increasing their risk of the similar health issues and nutrient
deﬁciencies as those commonly seen in those with celiac disease..

Dietary fat is composed mainly of triglycerides where each triglyceride molecule contains a
glycerol backbone with three fatty acids attached  Some dietary fats reach the colon after escaping
absorption in the small intestine. Indeed, we have already seen that an animal-based diet high in
fat and protein alters the gut microbiota resulting in an increase in the abundance of bile-tolerant
microorganisms, such as Bilophila, Alistipes and Bacteroides and long-term consumption selects for
a Bacteroides enterotype directly investigated if typically consumed
dietary fatty acids alone could sustain the growth of the human gut microbiota using an in vitro
multi-vessel simulator system of the human small intestine. Switching from a balanced Western
diet type medium to one lacking carbohydrates and proteins resulted in substantial changes to the
microbiota and metabolites produced. Several speciﬁc genera increased in abundance, including
Alistipes, Bilophila and several genera within the class Gammaproteobacteria. Increased abundance
of Alistipes has been correlated with a greater frequency of pain in paediatric patients with irritable
bowel syndrome and has been
associated with type 2 diabetes  We have already seen that Bil. wadsworthia was increased in
humans consuming the animal-based diet and is associated with inﬂammation owing to its
hydrogen sulﬁde-producing capabilities  E. coli is a member of Gammaproteobacteria which
also harbours many pathogenic members, including Salmonella, Yersinia, Vibrio, and Pseudomonas 
The abundances of well known glycan and protein degraders, including Bacteroides, Clostridium and.

in both milk fat- and saﬄower oil-fed mice, Tenericutes were decreased, a phylum which has been
shown to be reduced under inﬂammatory conditions and Proteobacteria was increased, of
which Bil. wadsworthia is a member. Consumption of extra virgin olive oil (rich in MUFAs and phenolic
compounds), reﬁned olive oil (rich in MUFAs but low in phenolic compounds), or butter (rich in
SFAs and cholesterol) by mice resulted in diﬀerential eﬀects on gut microbiota composition 
The butter-induced changes resembled those reported for obese individuals while the changes induced
by extra virgin olive oil diﬀered most from butter. In a more recent study, the same group investigated
the eﬀect of extra virgin olive oil on mouse gut microbiota compared to butter using more in-depth
analysis  Highest levels of systolic blood pressure were recorded for mice fed butter which
correlated positively with Desulfovibrio sequences in faeces, which were signiﬁcantly higher in mice fed
butter compared to olive oil. Interestingly, Desulfovibrionaceae are sulfate reducers, which the authors
suggest could be sustained by butter sulfate sources, whereas the authors suggest that the lower
levels in the olive oil diet may be due to the higher presence of polyphenols. Olive oil had the lowest
plasmatic insulin levels which correlated inversely with Desulfovibrio, and the lowest plasmatic leptin
values which correlated inversely with Sutterellaceae, Marispirillum and Mucilaginibacter dageonensis
which were signiﬁcantly higher for olive oil. Mice fed the standard diet had the lowest total cholesterol
levels which correlated positively with Fusicatenibacter and Prevotella, the latter of which has been
associated with an improvement in glucose metabolism but its relationship with cholesterol is
less clear  Interestingly, butter was also associated with an increase in Alistipes indictintus and
Pontibacter lucknowensis which correlated positively with total cholesterol, ghrelin, insulin, body weight
and HDL/LDL. Lam et al. reported a rapid increase of hydrogen sulﬁde-producing bacteria
in mice consuming a diet high in saturated fat which was not observed for mice fed high fat diets
containing omega-6 or omega-3 PUFAs. In fact, these bacteria remained relatively stable in mice fed
omega-6 PUFAs and were mostly reduced in mice fed omega-3 PUFAs. Likewise, Shen et al. 
reported that mice fed a diet high in saturated fat had a greater abundance of three types of sulﬁdogenic
bacteria (Bil. wadsworthia, Desulfobulbus and Desulfovibrio) primarily in the colonic mucosa compared
to mice fed a low-fat diet after chronic feeding  In addition, high fat feeding increased
intestinal inﬂammation by week 20, which was not observed at week 6. However, by week 6, high fat
feeding had impaired the localization of the tight junction protein zonula occludens 1 at the apical area
of the ileal epithelium which was also observed at week 20. The authors concluded that chronic high
saturated fat feeding may contribute to chronic intestinal inﬂammation owing to microbial metabolic
pathways. In humans at risk of metabolic syndrome, a high saturated fat diet, a high MUFA diet
combined with high glycemic index (GI) carbohydrates, or a high MUFA diet combined with low GI
carbohydrates caused a decrease in total bacteria and the high saturated fat diet increased faecal SCFA
concentrations which the authors suggest could be due to lower absorption in the gut .

The ketogenic diet, deﬁned as a high fat and low carbohydrate diet, has been eﬀectively used as a
therapeutic treatment for a number of neurological disorders, including epilepsy, Alzheimer’s disease,
Parkinson’s disease, depression, autism, traumatic brain injury and depression, as examples 
Recently, researchers have revealed that the protective eﬀects of the ketogenic diet could be mediated
via the gut microbiota based on studies in mice  The ketogenic diet administered by
Ma et al. consisted of 75.1% fat composed of SFAs, MUFAs and PUFAs. Following 16 weeks
on the diet, mice revealed several neurovascular enhancements with potential to reduce the risk of
Alzheimer’s disease which could be associated with the observed gut microbiota changes which
included an increase in beneﬁcial bacteria, including Akkermansia muciniphila and Lactobacillus and a
reduction in pro-inﬂammatory microbes Desulfovibrio and Turicibacter. The gut microbiota changes
observed by Olson et al. in mice receiving the ketogenic diet were found to be required for the
protective eﬀects of the diet against acute electrically induced seizures and spontaneous tonic-clonic
seizures. In this case, Akkermansia and Parabacteriodes were signiﬁcantly increased and enrichment of,
and gnotobiotic colonisation with these microorganisms were capable of restoring seizure protection
in germ-free mice or mice treated with antibiotics. Additionally, in a mouse model of glioma, mice fed
the ketogenic diet had slightly increased survival compared to mice fed the control diet and showed
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in several key microorganisms  The ketogenic diet generally includes fats.

It has been estimated that up to 25 g of protein, peptides and free amino acids enter the colon on a
daily basis  Colonic microbial digestion of these materials generates a range of end products,
including SCFAs, indoles, amines, phenols, thiols, hydrogen sulﬁde, CO2 and H2, some of which are
essential for health maintenance and some of which are detrimental  Studies investigating the
direct impact of protein on gut microbiota composition and functionality have shown that protein
quantity, quality, processing history (which impacts on protein digestion, presentation and overall
function) and source must be taken into consideration. For example, a high protein diet (45% protein,
30% carbohydrate) fed to Wistar rats had detrimental eﬀects on the colonic microbiota compared
to a normal protein diet  Streptococcus, E. coli/Shigella, and
Enterococcus increased by 5.36 fold, 54.9-fold, and 31.3 fold, respectively, on the high protein diet, whose
abundances correlated positively with genes and metabolites associated with disease pathogenesis,
including the metabolite cadaverine, which is derived from decarboxylation of lysine and in high
amounts has been shown to induce oxidative stress and DNA damage  Sulfate-reducing bacteria
increased by 2.59 fold which correlated with increased sulﬁde. There was also an increase in spermine
which has been shown to be extremely toxic in rats  The following bacteria, which are generally
regarded as being beneﬁcial, decreased in abundance on the high protein diet, including the butyrate
producer F. prausnitzii (by 3.5 fold), Ruminococcus (by 8.04 fold) which contains butyrate producers,
and the mucin degrader Akkermansia (not detected in high protein diet group). A. muciniphila is
considered to be a health promoting bacterium  On the high protein diet, butyrate decreased
by 2.16 fold. This diet was also associated with a decrease in genes involved in innate immunity,
O-linked glycosylation of mucin, and oxidative phosphorylation..

Protein source or type has also been shown to impact gut microbiota composition, given that the
amino acid composition diﬀers between types. A 14-day feeding trial in rats fed either protein from
soy, pork, beef, chicken, ﬁsh and casein, (the latter served as a control) revealed changes by day 2
particularly between red meat (pork and beef) and white meat (ﬁsh and chicken). Principal component
analysis revealed distinct microbiota on days 7 and 14, whereby the soy protein group was separate
from the meat and casein groups  In another similar study, soy protein was associated with
increased faecal SCFAs in rats compared to rats fed white meat, red meat or casein  The soy group
also had a higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which are the major propionate and
other SCFA producers  Lactobacillus, a genus known for its beneﬁcial eﬀects was increased in the
gut microbiota by ingestion of meat proteins. In this study, the diets clustered into two subgroups at the
phylum level, the ‘meat class’ and the ‘non-meat class.’ In another study, soy fed hamsters were found
to have a more consistently diverse microbiota in the small and lower intestine compared to hamsters
fed milk protein isolate and the largest diﬀerences were found within the Bacteriodetes phylum 
Indeed, the milk protein isolate fed group had a greater relative abundance of Bacteroidaceae and
Porphyromonadaceae compared to the soy fed groups. Those fed partially hydrolyzed soy protein
isolate revealed a bloom of Biﬁdobacteriaceae across most intestinal sections and a higher proportion of
Clostridiales spp. in the cecum compared to the milk protein isolate fed group. Biﬁdobacteria are well
known beneﬁcial microbes and commensal members of Clostridiales are now known to be involved in
maintenance of overall gut function  The milk protein isolate fed group had a greater abundance of
Erysipelotrichacaea in ileum and faecal samples which has been associated with dyslipidemic phenotypes
in humans  Plasma lipids were signiﬁcantly reduced in the soy fed hamsters
compared to those that received milk protein isolate, owing at least in part to the gut microbiota changes
induced by soy protein  Under a high fat diet regime, soybean protein isolate reduced high fat
diet induced weight gain and adipose tissue mass accumulation and attenuated hepatic steatosis in
mice which was not observed for dairy protein  An increased cecal bile acid pool was observed.

in the soybean group with an elevated secondary: primary bile acid ratio, along with an enhancement
in the secretion of GLP-1. This was accompanied by an expansion of taxa proposed to be involved
in bile acid biotransformation. These eﬀects were abolished in germ free mice suggesting that the
metabolic beneﬁts of soy protein are due to the microbiota alterations which bring about increased bile
acid transformation and secretion of GLP-1. Likewise, tartary buckwheat protein proved capable of
preventing dyslipidemia in mice fed a high fat diet which was not observed for casein  The buck
wheat protein inhibited the growth of E. coli and promoted the growth of Lactobacillus, Enterococcus and
Biﬁdobacterium, the latter of which was closely related to plasma lipids. Excretion of total bile acids
and SCFAs were signiﬁcantly increased in faeces from mice fed buckwheat. Mungbean protein also
proved superior to casein in reducing high fat diet induced weight gain in mice  The mungbean
protein caused elevated secretion of GLP-1, an increase in the cecal and faecal bile acid pool with a
dramatically elevated secondary: primary bile acid ratio; eﬀects which were abolished in germ free
mice. In terms of the gut microbiota, mungbean consumption as part of the high fat diet resulted in
an expansion of Ruminococcaceae, a family known to have BSH activity and caused an increase
in taxa belonging to the Bacteroidetes phylum and a decrease in the abundance of Firmicutes 
Whey protein extract has been shown to increase diversity, Biﬁdobacterium and Lactobacillus populations
while decreasing Bacteroides and Clostridia  Similarly, pea protein extract has been shown to
increase diversity, Biﬁdobacterium and Lactobacillus populations  These studies clearly suggest that
plant-derived proteins are superior to animal-derived proteins for promoting a beneﬁcial microbiota
with positive eﬀects on host metabolism..

The quantity of dietary carbohydrates entering the colon each day has been estimated at
approximately 40 g  We have already seen that a carbohydrate-rich diet (ﬁbre and plant-derived
polysaccharides) results in a microbiota which is dominated by the Prevotella enterotype and
is enriched in polysaccharide degrading members with increased SCFA production 
However, dietary carbohydrates which enter the colon can be categorised as resistant starch, non-starch
polysaccharides, oligosaccharides, as well as some di- and monosaccharides  and as with the other
macronutrients, amount and type of carbohydrate has an impact on the gut microbiota. Resistant starch
is an important non-digestible carbohydrate, of which there are four types, (RS1 to RS4)  A diet
high in type 3 resistant starch for 10 weeks was found to stimulate the growth of Firmicutes bacteria
related to R. bromii and Eub. rectales in human volunteers  both of which possess amylolytic
activity  Biﬁdobacterium spp.
were found to increase dramatically in one volunteer in response to the resistant starch used in this
diet. In contrast, non-starch polysaccharides (wheat bran) presented little evidence of changes to
the faecal microbiota, which the authors state may be attributable to the smaller increase achieved
for non-starch polysaccharides compared to a 4.8 fold increase in resistant starch 
Interestingly, of the 14 volunteers, >60% of the resistant starch remained undigested in two compared to
<4% in the remaining 12 volunteers highlighting the signiﬁcance of the initial microbiota composition.
Martínez et al. revealed that resistant starch types 3 and 4 diﬀerentially aﬀected the microbiota in
human volunteers following consumption of each for three weeks in a double-blind cross-over study.
In this case, resistant starch type 4 induced changes at the phylum level resulting in a decrease in
Firmicutes and an increase in Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes. At the species level, resistant starch
type 4 increased Bif. adolescentis and Para. distasonis. In three subjects, resistant starch type 4 induced
a 10-fold increase in biﬁdobacteria. Resistant starch type 2 signiﬁcantly increased R. bromii and Eub.
rectales compared to resistant starch type 4. Importantly, the responses to the resistant starches and their
magnitudes varied between individuals but were reversible and tightly associated with resistant starch
consumption. This interindividual variation was also reported by Venkataraman et al.  In this
case, resistant starch type 2 increased faecal butyrate in a cohort of 20 young healthy individuals but
responses varied widely such that individuals could be categorised into three groups based on butyrate
levels before and during resistant starch consumption: enhanced, high, and low. In the enhanced
group, faecal butyrate increased by an average of 67% which coincided with a dramatic increase in the
relative abundance of resistant starch-degrading organisms, including Bif. adolescentis or R. bromii in
most individuals (increasing from 2% to 9%) and Eub. rectales in almost half of these individuals. In the
high group, levels of butyrate remained the same before and during resistant starch consumption.
In this group, resistant starch-degrading microorganisms increased in abundance, suggesting the
resistant starch was degraded, but there was no concomitant increase in butyrate levels which the
authors suggest may be due to these individuals experiencing a plateau eﬀect owing to the fact that
they are performing well in terms of butyrate production. In the low group, butyrate levels were low
before resistant starch consumption began and did not improve during the trial. The resistant starch
degrading bacteria in the low group did not increase from an initial abundance of ~1.5% suggesting
their microbiota did not degrade the resistant starch which the authors state may be due to the presence
of antagonistic microbes or lack of synergistic microbes. More recently, Vital et al. reported
that distinct parts of the microbiota work together to degrade resistant starch (type 2 in this study)
and successively form health-promoting end products. In this case, resistant starch degradation was
governed by Firmicutes whereby R. bromii degradation of the resistant starch provided fermentation
substrates and increased acetate concentrations to support the growth of major butyrate producers.
H2-scavenging sulphite reducers and acetogens also increased. Again, the individual responses varied
with the observed pattern reported for seven of the twelve participants, while four showed mixed
responses and one individual remained unresponsive.