7_PARAGRAPHS

Microbiota enterotype (Prevotella to Bacteroides.

1AdaBoost, adaptive boosting; ADD, average Danish diet; AIC, Akaike information criterion; ANOSIM, analysis of similarities; BIC, Bayesian information criterion; Bif, Bifidobacteria;
BN, Bayesian network; CAP, canonical analysis of principal coordinates; CASINO, community and systems-level interactive optimization; DBA, decisive bacterial abundance; DGGE,
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis; FISH, ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization; HCA, hierarchical clustering analysis; HITChip, human intestinal tract chip; iAUC, incremental AUC;
JSD, Jensen-Shannon divergence; LASSO, least absolute shrinkage and selection operator; LDA, linear discriminant analysis; LEfSe, linear discriminant analysis eﬀect size; LMM,
linear mixed models; MG-RAST, metagenomic rapid annotations using subsystems technology; MRBP, blocked multi-response permutation procedure; MRPP, multi-response
permutation procedure; NMS, nonmetric multidimensional scaling ordination; NND, new Nordic diet; OPLS-DA, orthogonal projections to latent structures discriminant analysis;
P/B ratio, Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio; PAM, partitioning around medoids; PCA, principal components analysis; PCoA, principal coordinates analysis; PDP, partial dependence plot;
PERMANOVA, permutational analysis of variance; PICRUSt, phylogenetic investigation of communities by reconstruction of unobserved states; PLSDA, partial least squares
discriminant analysis; RDA, redundancy analysis; ROC, receiver operating characteristic; T-RFLP, terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism..

Microbiota composition and function (16S, qPCR,
metagenomics, RNA-Seq) of stool as well as
lumen and mucosa samples.

Arumugam et al. first introduced the concept of
“enterotypes”, clustering individuals into 3 groups according
to their dominant genera: Bacteroides, Prevotella, and Ru-
minococcus. Although enterotypes have since been shown
to exist more on a continuous scale  the Bacteroides
and Prevotella enterotypes have been consistently replicated
across cohorts  The identification of the Ruminococcus
enterotype is more dependent on clustering and modeling
approaches  Roager
et al. 
and Chen et al.  highlight measures such as enterotype or
the Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio. Diversity and richness are
also common measures used to highlight differences between
groups .

Both animal and in vitro models have limitations when
it comes to drawing conclusions about human health and
nutrition as they lack the specific interactions present in
the human supraorganism. For further information, readers
are directed to additional reviews of animal and
in vitro models for human nutrition research.
However, these techniques used in combination with human
clinical trials will be crucial in the development of precision
nutrition research and our understanding of the interaction
between the host and the gut microbiota..

10. Sonnenburg ED, Zheng H, Joglekar P, Higginbottom SK, Firbank
SJ, Bolam DN, Sonnenburg JL. Specificity of polysaccharide use
in intestinal Bacteroides species determines diet-induced microbiota
alterations. Cell 2010;1411241–52..

11. Possemiers S, Rabot S, Espín JC, Bruneau A, Philippe C,
González-Sarrías A, Heyerick A, Tomás-Barberán FA, De
Keukeleire D, Verstraete W. Eubacterium limosum activates
isoxanthohumol from hops (Humulus lupulus L.) into the potent
phytoestrogen 8-prenylnaringenin in vitro and in rat intestine. J Nutr
2008;1381310–6.