3_PARAGRAPHS

relationships
between internal microorganisms and I. scapularis have
focused on commonly studied human pathogens. For
example, infection of blacklegged ticks by A. phagocy-
tophilum (the causative agent of granulocytic anaplas-
mosis in humans) has been shown to induce protein
expression that increases cold tolerance and, depend-
ing on weather patterns, may aid in tick survival
(Neelakanta et al. 2010). Furthermore,
infection with
B. burgdorferi has been shown to affect questing beha-
viour and movement of
this tick, possibly affecting
survival and/or pathogen transmission (Lefcort &
Durden 1996). However, little is known regarding the
range of microbes the tick comes in contact with or
maintains throughout
its entire life cycle. This tick
experiences a 2-year life cycle, feeding once per life
stage (larva, nymph, and adult) on vertebrate blood.
These bloodmeals are necessary for
the immature
stages (larva, nymph) to moult to the next stage and
for adult females to lay eggs (Needham & Teel 1991;
there are numerous opportunities
Fish 1993). Thus,
for this tick to acquire microbes either during any of
its three bloodmeals or possibly from the environ-
ment, as it spends 98% of its life cycle off-host in a
forested setting (Needham & Teel 1991; Fish 1993).
for additional symbioses
Consequently,
I. scapularis may be
involving microbes that beneﬁt
quite high..

blacklegged ticks (Moreno et al. 2006; Yuan 2010; Haw-
lena et al. 2013; Rynkiewicz et al. 2015; Van Treuren et al.
2015). Rickettsia are obligate, intracellular bacteria associ-
ated with eukaryotes,
including arthropods (Perlman
et al. 2006). Although many Rickettsia species are non-
pathogenic (Ahantarig et al. 2013), a number of them are
including Rickettsia rick-
known tick-borne pathogens,
ettsii, R. conorii, R. sibirica, R. japonica, R. australis and
R. akari (Azad & Beard 1998). The Rickettsia endosym-
biont of I. scapularis, presumed to be nonpathogenic, has
been identiﬁed in this tick in previous studies (Noda
et al. 1997; Benson et al. 2004; Moreno et al. 2006; Gille-
spie et al. 2012; Kurtti et al. 2015) and is believed to be
the only Rickettsia species found in this tick (Gillespie
et al. 2012; Kurtti et al. 2015). Recently, the name Rick-
ettsia buchneri has been proposed for this species (Kurtti
et al. 2015). The vast majority of our sequences were
assigned to the rickettsial clade isolated from Ixodes ticks
using a phylogenetic tree-guided procedure. Although
individual short sequences could not be assigned to sin-
gle tree branches with full conﬁdence, they were mostly
assigned to neighbouring branches within a clade of sis-
ter endosymbionts isolated from the same tick species.
We interpret this as an indication of sufﬁcient evolution-
ary informativeness
identiﬁcation of our
sequences at the clade level grosso modo, combined with
the observation of greater divergence patterns of this
locus in Rickettsia..

Given the overwhelming abundance of Rickettsia
across life stages and organs, we attempted to dissect
its subgeneric diversity using phylogenetic criteria and
found the vast majority of the sequences to cluster
with bona ﬁde Ixodes tick rickettsial endosymbionts. It
remains unknown whether this is indicative of a geno-
mewide pattern of conservation due to a bottleneck or
a massive selective sweep accompanying symbiosis, or
a mere localized snapshot of sequence conservation at
this locus. I. scapularis is known so far to harbour one
endosymbiotic rickettsial species (Gillespie et al. 2012;
Kurtti et al. 2015), but ﬁner taxonomic resolution using
more informative genetic markers at
the subgeneric
and strain levels may provide additional insight into
population-level variation and adaptation to intracellu-
lar
life in coexistence with pathogens. Our study
focused on an area with one of the highest pathogen
prevalence levels in blacklegged ticks. Future studies
examining the functional interplay between tick micro-
biomes and pathogens over a larger geographic region
are warranted.