Brief Reviews

  e
Th

Journal of

Immunology

The Impact of Maternal Microbes and Microbial
Colonization in Early Life on Hematopoiesis

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

function of the immune system at distal tissues, including
primary lymphoid organs, such as the bone marrow (BM) and
thymus. In this capacity,
intestinal microbes can regulate
immune function via effects on the differentiation of hema-
topoietic progenitor cells. Not only can these processes alter the
type of leukocytes produced and released from the BM, some
microbial signals may even act at the epigenetic level, thereby
inducing semipermanent changes in individual lineages. Un-
derstanding the timing and the mechanisms by which the
microbiome can inﬂuence hematopoiesis is required for ra-
tional development of novel strategies to harness the power of
the microbiome to treat and prevent disease. In this review, we
discuss how hematopoiesis in the BM is shaped by microbial
signals during neonatal life and adulthood and following in-
fection and highlight our current knowledge of the molecular
processes involved.

Impact of maternal microbiota and microbial colonization in early life
on hematopoiesis in the neonate

Current dogma suggests that microbial colonization begins at
birth via vertical microbial transmission from mother to infant.
During a natural vaginal delivery, newborn babies are ﬁrst
exposed to the commensal microbiota of their mother’s birth
canal and intestinal contents and then to microbes from the
maternal skin, mouth, and milk, as well as the environment
(1) (Fig. 1). However, recent evidence suggests that coloni-
zation may, in fact, precede birth. As more sensitive tech-
niques for microbial detection become available, there have
been increased reports of bacterial detection in the placenta,
the amniotic ﬂuid, and the meconium (reviewed in Ref. 2). It
has been suggested that a placental microbiome, seeded from
the mother’s intestine and oral cavity, may develop to initiate
fetal colonization during gestation. However, whether this
occurs in normal fetal development remains controversial.
Regardless, during the ﬁrst 3 y of a child’s life, the intestinal
microbiome becomes established through a process that is
highly dynamic and reﬂects a period of intense microbial
diversiﬁcation (3). It is becoming increasingly apparent that to
decrease susceptibility to disease, children should be colonized
with a complex and diverse microbiota as early as possible

Abbreviations used in this article: BM, bone marrow; CLP, common lymphocyte pro-
genitor; DC, dendritic cell; HSC, hematopoietic stem cell; IAP, intrapartum antibiotics
prophylactically; IBD, inﬂammatory bowel disease; ILC, innate lymphoid cell; LSK,
Sca-1+c-kit+; MAMP, microbe-associated molecular pattern; MPP, multipotential
Lin
progenitor; RA, retinoic acid; SCFA, short-chain fatty acid.

2

Copyright (cid:1) 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc. 0022-1767/18/$35.00

Kathy D. McCoy and Carolyn A. Thomson

All body surfaces are colonized by microbes, which oc-
curs through a dynamic process over the ﬁrst few years
of life. Initial colonizing microbes are transferred from
the maternal microbiota to the newborn through ver-
tical transmission. Postnatal maturation of the im-
mune system is heavily inﬂuenced by these microbes,
particularly during early life. Although microbial-
mediated education of the immune system is better
understood at mucosal sites, recent data indicate that
the systemic immune system is also shaped by the
microbiota. Bacterial products and metabolites pro-
duced through microbial metabolism can reach distal
sites, and metabolites derived from the maternal micro-
biota can cross the placenta and are present in milk.
Recent studies show that the microbiota can even in-
ﬂuence immune development in primary lymphoid or-
gans like the bone marrow. This review outlines our
current knowledge of how the microbiota can impact
hematopoiesis, with a focus on the effects of maternal
and early-life microbiota. The Journal of Immunol-
ogy, 2018, 200: 2519–2526.

F rom the moment we are born, every surface of our body

becomes colonized with a vast array of microbial
species, collectively known as the microbiota. Microbes
are passed vertically from mother to child during birth and are
subsequently obtained via horizontal transfer from the envi-
ronment. By the time we reach adulthood, we are host to
trillions of microbial cells that represent thousands of species of
bacteria, as well as fungi, archaea, and viruses. The precise
composition of our microbiota is shaped by environmental
factors that result in microbial repertoires that are as unique to
the individual as our ﬁngerprints. Our commensal microbes
are more than mere silent passengers that inhabit our body
surfaces; they play essential roles in immune development and
function, metabolism, physiology, and even brain function.
Although it is now well accepted that our microbiota inﬂuences
immune responses within mucosal tissues, it is also becoming
apparent that the microbiota can shape development and

Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases,
Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1,
Canada

ORCIDs: 0000-0002-3900-9227 (K.D.M.); 0000-0003-3906-7539 (C.A.T.).

Received for publication December 22, 2017. Accepted for publication February 12,
2018.

Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Kathy D. McCoy, University of
Calgary, Health Sciences Centre, Room 1883, 3330 Hospital Drive N.W., Calgary, AB
T2N 4N1, Canada. E-mail address: kathy.mccoy@ucalgary.ca

www.jimmunol.org/cgi/doi/10.4049/jimmunol.1701776

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

2520

BRIEF REVIEWS: MICROBIAL IMPACT ON HEMATOPOIESIS

within this time frame. Not only can changes to the micro-
biome inﬂuence susceptibility to infections and sepsis, nu-
merous studies have revealed critical links between early life
dysbiosis (deﬁned as changes in the normal composition of
the microbiota) and a broad range of metabolomic, immu-
nological, and behavioral disorders in adulthood, including
asthma, allergy, inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD), type 1
diabetes, autism, and obesity (1, 4). Many factors, including
diet, antibiotic exposure, genotype, and method of delivery
(vaginal versus caesarean), are known to shape the developing
microbiome (1), and it is of crucial importance that we un-
derstand how these factors subsequently impact the develop-
ing immune system.

Bacterial infections and sepsis are major causes of infant
mortality worldwide (5). Due to their underdeveloped im-
mune system, premature babies have a particularly high risk
for developing such infections; as such, it is often standard
practice to use empiric antibiotics in these infants until in-
fection has been ruled out (6, 7). Furthermore, pregnant
mothers with a high risk for preterm labor are often given
intrapartum antibiotics prophylactically (IAP) to reduce the
risk for infection in the mother and in the neonate (8, 9).
Indeed, IAP has been enormously beneﬁcial and has vastly
reduced the risk for early-onset sepsis in neonates (9). How-
ever, recent studies suggest that perinatal exposure to antibi-
otic treatment may have a profound and sustained impact on
the developing microbiome of newborn infants. IAP treat-
ment was shown to have more of an impact on the developing
microbiome than direct exposure to antibiotics (8). This study
reported higher proportions of Leuconostaceae (2 d after birth)
and Micrococcaceae and Propionibacteriaceae (10 d after birth)
in infants born to antibiotic-treated mothers. By day 30 after
birth, the intestinal microbiome of infants exposed to IAP in
utero had higher proportions of Comamonadaceae, Staph-
ylococcaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, and an unclassiﬁed bacilli,
along with reduced proportions of Biﬁdobacteriaceae, Strep-
tococcaceae, an unclassiﬁed Lactobacillales, and an unclassiﬁed
Actinobacteria (8). Treating infants with ampicillin and gen-
tamicin within 48 h of birth has also been demonstrated to
have long-lasting effects on the microbiome, resulting in in-
creased Proteobacteria and concurrent reduced proportions of
Actinobacteria, Biﬁdobacterium, and Lactobacillus in the in-
testinal microbiome compared with untreated controls (10).
Although intrapartum antibiotics can prevent early-onset in-
fections, which present within 72 h of birth, the sustained
dysbiosis associated with perinatal antibiotic exposure has
been linked to downstream complications and may even
render newborn infants more susceptible to necrotizing en-
terocolitis or late-onset sepsis (6, 7), which predominantly
occurs after the ﬁrst week of life.

The ﬁrst few hours of life are normally associated with a rapid
increase in neutrophils in the BM and circulation of humans and
mice (4, 11). In mice, this neutrophilia is dependent on the
presence of an intact maternal microbiota and is ablated by
treatment of the pregnant dam from 5 d before birth with a
combination of ampicillin, gentamicin, and vancomycin (4). In
antibiotic-treated pups, aberrant neutrophil development could
be detected from as early as 1 d of age and was associated with
loss of IL-17A production by innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) in
the small intestinal lamina propria of the pups, together with
signiﬁcantly reduced levels of circulating G-CSF. As a result,

these pups rapidly succumbed to experimental infection with
Escherichia coli or Klebsiella pneumoniae. The deleterious effects
of antibiotics could be reversed by treating mice with G-CSF or
by adoptive transfer of microbiota from normal neonatal mice.
This process was dependent on intact IL-17A signaling, high-
lighting a potential role for the IL-17A/G-CSF axis in medi-
ating the effects of the microbiota on neutrophil production in
the BM. It is important to emphasize that the antibiotic-
mediated effects in this model must reﬂect vertical transfer
from the mother to the pup, because the treatment was started
during pregnancy and discontinued prior to weaning. These
studies indicate that caution needs to be applied when con-
sidering the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics during labor or
the perinatal period and perhaps suggest potential beneﬁts of
coadministering probiotics under these circumstances.

Dietary metabolites can be transferred from mother to child
(12) and may have crucial roles in immune system develop-
ment and inﬂammatory immune responses in the offspring
(Fig. 1). Although an enormous body of literature describes
the immune modulatory impact of short-chain fatty acids
(SCFAs) in adults (13–16), the effects that maternally trans-
ferred SCFAs have on the offspring are yet to be fully deﬁned.
One recent study demonstrated that feeding pregnant dams
with a high-ﬁber diet or acetate alone could profoundly affect
immune responses in the offspring, resulting in decreased
eosinophil inﬁltration to the lung, reduced IgE responses, and
reduced disease severity following house dust mite–mediated
allergic airway inﬂammation (17). Importantly, these phe-
notypes prevailed, even when pups were fostered to a surro-
gate mother fed a normal diet, suggesting that maternal
acetate altered the immune system of the pups in utero.
Further, maternally derived SCFAs have been suggested to
play a role in Foxp3+ regulatory T cell generation in the
neonatal thymus (18). Although these are the only studies
directly linking maternal SCFAs to neonatal immune system
education, maternal transfer of retinoic acid (RA), a metab-
olite of dietary vitamin A, may also play an important role.
Maternal RA regulates CXCL13 production by fetal mesen-
chymal cells and the differentiation of lymphoid tissue in-
ducer cells in utero, subsequently controlling the size of
neonatal secondary lymphoid tissues (12). Maternal RA may
also regulate hematopoiesis in the fetal liver, because treating
fetal liver fragments ex vivo with RA leads to a reduction of B
lymphopoiesis (19). There are no reports directly linking the
maternal transfer of dietary metabolites to neonatal hemato-
poiesis, but the scale of immune-modulatory effects ascribed
to SCFAs, coupled with the knowledge that their impact
spans from mother to fetus, makes this an exciting and novel
area of research.

In the experiments above, the effects of antibiotics could
reﬂect an inﬂuence on the microbiota of the mother, the
neonate, or both. To assess the impact of the maternal
microbiota alone, without any inﬂuence from microbial col-
onization of the pups after birth, Gomez de Ag€uero et al. (20)
transiently colonized germ-free dams during gestation with an
auxotrophic mutant strain of E. coli, termed HA107. This
model allows microbial colonization to occur only during
pregnancy so that the dam becomes germ-free again prior to
giving birth to her germ-free pups. This study revealed that
maternal Ab-mediated vertical transfer of maternal microbial
components vastly altered gene expression in the intestine of

The Journal of Immunology

2521

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

FIGURE 1. Microbial signals in early life shape the repertoire of immune cell development in the BM. A child’s immune system can be modulated by microbial
signals at various stages in development. Microbial metabolites, such as SCFAs, and Abs carrying microbial molecules can pass from mother to fetus during gestation
(A) or from mother to child via breast milk (B). This has been shown to impact the immune cell repertoire in the intestine and may affect susceptibil-
ity to intestinal pathogens. (B and C) From birth onward, children are exposed to microbes in the environment (i), which
(Figure legend continues)

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

2522

BRIEF REVIEWS: MICROBIAL IMPACT ON HEMATOPOIESIS

the pups and was responsible for more intestinal ILC3 pop-
ulations (20). Gestational colonization was also responsible
for increased numbers of intestinal macrophages, although
Ab-mediated transfer was not involved in mediating this
phenotype. These data highlight a novel pathway whereby the
maternal microbiome inﬂuences the neonatal immune system.
Although no changes were observed in B cell development in
the neonatal BM, a general effect on BM hematopoiesis was
not assessed. One intriguing possibility that may account for
some of the changes in the neonatal immune system in re-
sponse to maternal colonization is raised by older studies il-
lustrating the presence of maternally derived hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) and other hematopoietic progenitor cells in
cord blood (21), from where they may seed the BM of the
developing fetus. Because these cell types can be regulated by
the host microbiome, dysbiosis in the mother could potentially
have indirect effects on the developing neonatal BM in utero by
altering the behavior of these maternally derived progenitors.
Postnatal maturation of the innate and adaptive immune
is driven by signals arising from the intestinal
systems
microbiota. Current work supports the presence of a critical
developmental window early in life when the immune system is
highly susceptible to microbial inﬂuence (22). In humans, this
window may encompass the ﬁrst 3 y of a child’s life and marks
a period of intense variability in the microbiome. If the
normal processes of establishing a microbiota are disrupted
during this period, it may have life-long consequences for the
host, leading to increased susceptibility to a number of dis-
orders, including autoimmune diseases, IBD, asthma, allergy,
obesity, and autism. Although multiple pathways are likely to
be involved, it is possible that alterations in hematopoiesis in
the developing BM or other tissues may result from decreased
or altered microbial signals. Recent work shows that the dif-
ferentiation fate of an HSC clone down a particular lineage is
predetermined by epigenetic modiﬁcations that are thought to
arise early during its development (23). This begs the ques-
tion: could early life exposure to microbes generate epigenetic
memory in the BM that has a life-long impact on host immune
responses, subsequently inﬂuencing the risk for immune-mediated
pathologies? Although not yet shown for cells in the neonatal
BM, microbial-mediated epigenetic regulation of the che-
mokine ligand CXCL16 has been identiﬁed in lung and colon
tissues (24). In that study, microbial colonization during
neonatal life was shown to be required to limit accumulation
of invariant NK T cells in the lung and colon, and this effect
was mediated through microbiota-mediated epigenetic regu-
lation of CXCL16 (24).

Exposure to microbes in early life is known to have an impact
on primary B cell development that occurs in hindgut B cell
structures in animals like the chicken and rabbit (reviewed in
Ref. 25). Whether early B cell development can occur in the
intestines of humans is not clear, although pre-B cells have
been found in the human fetal small intestinal lamina propria

(26). In mice, although early B cells that express RAGs are
absent from the small intestine at birth, they are found to
accumulate in the gut mucosa at weaning, coincident with
increasing microbial colonization in early life (27). This
suggests that microbes (and potentially dietary Ags) may play
an important role in shaping the primary Ab repertoire in
early life (28), and this may occur outside of the BM.

Microbes ﬁne-tune hematopoiesis during steady-state

In addition to stimulation following early life colonization,
recent studies have shown that steady-state hematopoiesis can
be regulated by the commensal microbiota; this is likely im-
portant for ﬁne-tuning immunity (Fig. 1). Indeed, there is
evidence to suggest that even subtle changes in the commensal
microbial repertoire (e.g., in response to diet or antibiotic
usage) can inﬂuence immune responses via effects on pro-
genitor cells (4, 29, 30). The absence or reduction in mi-
crobial signals in germ-free or antibiotic-treated mice is
associated with reduced numbers of neutrophils and mono-
cytes in the BM and peripheral sites (31–35). Numerous
studies show that the early stages of myelopoiesis in the BM
are impaired in germ-free mice (31, 34, 36, 37), with reduced
numbers of HSCs, multipotential progenitors (MPPs), and
(31, 37). Treatment with
common myeloid progenitors
broad-spectrum antibiotics, or even neomycin alone, can
phenocopy these abnormalities when given to adult speciﬁc
pathogen–free mice (31–33). Although one report suggested
that there were no differences in the proportions or numbers
of early progenitors in the germ-free BM (34), this might be
due to differences in the microbiota of the speciﬁc pathogen–
free mice used as a baseline in that study. As well as being
reduced in number in germ-free and antibiotic-treated mice,
granulocyte–monocyte precursors have been shown to have
an impaired capacity to differentiate into granulocytes and
macrophages ex vivo (31, 34, 36). Together, the im-
paired myelopoiesis seen in mice lacking a normal microbiota
results in increased susceptibility to bacterial pathogens, such
as Listeria monocytogenes, E. coli, and Staphylococcus aureus
(31, 34).

Although the factors mediating emergency myelopoiesis
have been characterized in some detail (see below), the reg-
ulation of steady-state hematopoiesis by the normal microbiota
remains less well understood. Nevertheless, recognition of
microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) is likely to be
important; indeed, intestinal colonization of germ-free mice
with a combination of E. coli, Staphylococcus xylosus, and
Enterococcus faecalis stimulates myelopoiesis in a MyD88 and
TRIF–dependent manner (31). Although it was unclear what
cell types mediated this response, one possibility is that it
reﬂects regulation of secondary mediator production by in-
testinal enterocytes stimulated by MAMPs from the com-
mensal bacteria. This would be consistent with experiments
showing that epithelial cell–derived CXCL5 can regulate the

leads to establishment of a diverse microbiota in the intestine. (ii) The host immune system responds to this intestinal colonization, leading to the local and/or systemic
production of growth factors, cytokines, and chemokines. Microbial components, such as SCFAs and MAMPs, including LPS and peptidoglycan (PGN), can also
enter the circulation from intestinal lumen. Collectively, these factors can access distal sites, such as the BM, where they may regulate the proliferation and differ-
entiation of LSK HSCs, LSK multipotent progenitors, and their descendants (iii), thus shaping commitment to speciﬁc immune cell lineages (iv). These effects of
hematopoiesis have functional consequences on host immune responses, reducing susceptibility to intestinal pathogens and modulating inﬂammatory responses, such as
to allergic airway challenge. Future work will unravel the impact that microbe-driven effects on BM homeostasis have on other tissues or immunopathologies.

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

The Journal of Immunology

2523

levels of circulating G-CSF and neutrophil numbers in the
BM by controlling the production of IL-17A from ILCs in
the intestine (38).

The identity of the organisms mediating the effects of the
steady-state microbiota on hematopoiesis is largely unknown,
as are many of the mechanisms that might alter these processes
during pathogenic infection or after treatment with antibiotics.
Although it has long been known that diet plays a pivotal role
in shaping the intestinal microbiota (39, 40), the subsequent
effects on immune cells are only now being elucidated. Recent
work showed that microbial dysbiosis caused by feeding mice
a high-fat diet was associated with a shift in hematopoiesis in
favor of myelopoiesis at the expense of the lymphoid lineage
(29). These changes appeared to reﬂect an increase in MPPs
and common myeloid progenitors and a concomitant re-
duction in common lymphocyte progenitors (CLPs) and
immature B cells. As a result, the host mice were less able to
regenerate leukocytes following BM ablation with 5-ﬂuoro-
uracil. Microbial dysbiosis in mice fed a high-fat diet was
characterized by an increased abundance of Verrucomicrobia,
Actinobacteria, and Proteobacteria species in the cecum and
ileum, with a relative decrease in Bacteriodetes and Firmicutes.
Importantly, the BM phenotype could be rescued by treat-
ment with the antibiotic vancomycin, suggesting the in-
volvement of Gram-positive organisms, and it could be
phenocopied by transferring microbiota from mice fed the
high-fat diet to normal mice, suggesting a causative role for
the microbiota in mediating the hematopoietic changes. The
increased abundance of Proteobacteria was interesting, be-
cause they are thought to be strong drivers of inﬂammation
and metabolic disease, yet they are Gram-negative bacteria
and are increased by vancomycin treatment. Similarly, Ver-
rucomicrobia are Gram-negative and increased during van-
comycin treatment; in contrast to Proteobacteria, members of
this phylum, such as Akkermansia muciniphila, promote a
healthy gut, possibly through colonizing the outer mucous
layer and producing SCFAs (41). In contrast, Actinobacteria
are Gram-positive and depleted by vancomycin treatment.
Exactly which bacteria may be playing a role is not clear,
because Actinobacteria are the third most dominant bacterial
phylum in humans and can be pathogens, like Mycobacterium,
or commensals, such as Biﬁdobacterium. Another study found
that feeding mice with a ﬁber-rich diet led to an outgrowth of
Bacteriodetes at the expense of Firmicutes, leading to an in-
crease in the levels of the SCFAs propionate and acetate in the
circulation (30). When challenged intranasally with house
dust mite Ag, mice on the high-ﬁber diet developed less severe
airway inﬂammation than mice fed regular chow. Allergic
airway inﬂammation could be suppressed in mice receiving a
normal diet by the administration of propionate or acetate
alone, prompting the investigators to look for changes in
immune cells. They found that exogenous administration of
the microbial metabolite propionate led to alterations in he-
matopoiesis, with a reduction in macrophage and dendritic
cell (DC) precursors in the BM. In addition, newly differ-
entiated DCs expressed lower levels of MHC class II and
costimulatory molecules and were less effective at reactivating
effector Th2 cells. Thus, deﬁned changes in the microbiota,
resulting from antibiotic use or changes in our diet, may have
drastic effects on how our immune system tackles challenges
as a result of effects on hematopoiesis.

Microbial infection drives changes to the HSC pool

The capacity for hematopoietic cells within the BM to respond
to microbial signals has been best characterized in response to
infection. The innate immune system responds to infection by
rapidly deploying newly differentiated myeloid cells from the
BM into the circulation, enabling enhanced accumulation in
sites of inﬂammation. Responding to the increased demand for
innate leukocytes, the dynamics of BM hematopoiesis changes,
resulting in an expansion of HSCs (42, 43) and a shift in
differentiation to favor increased monocyte and granulocyte
production (reviewed in Ref. 44). This phenomenon, known
as emergency myelopoiesis, is a highly regulated evolutionary
strategy that is designed to help the host provide an imme-
diate response to infection (44).

A number of factors can contribute to infection-associated
emergency myelopoiesis. G-CSF, M-CSF, and GM-CSF all
play a key role in regulating the lineage commitment of BM
progenitors in steady-state (45, 46). These growth factors are
known to increase in the circulation during infection and
inﬂammation, thereby stimulating further differentiation of
progenitors down the myeloid lineage (47–49). The pro-
duction of these growth factors and, thus, the driving of
emergency myelopoiesis and myeloid cell deployment from
the BM, are primarily driven by the activation of pattern
recognition receptors, such as TLRs and NOD-like receptors,
which are expressed by immune and stromal cells within the
host. Many studies report a defect in myelopoiesis in animals
deﬁcient in TLRs or TLR-speciﬁc adapter molecules (42, 43,
50–52). In the case of
infection with E. coli, a TLR4-
dependent increase in circulating G-CSF leads to a massive
release of mature neutrophils into the circulation, as well as an
expansion of monocytes and immature neutrophils in the BM
(50). These effects were abrogated in mice speciﬁcally lacking
the adaptor molecule MyD88 in endothelial cells (50). In-
fection with Candida albicans drives an early TLR2-
Sca-1+c-kit+ (LSK) cells, which
dependent expansion of Lin
include HSCs and noncommitted MPPs, ultimately leading
to expanded populations of myeloid cells in the BM and the
periphery (52). TLR2 is also crucial for the emergency mye-
lopoiesis that occurs during Mycobacterium tuberculosis in-
fection in mice (42).

2

Neutrophil release from the BM is dependent on G-CSF
produced by vascular endothelial cells in response to TLR
ligation. G-CSF stimulates neutrophil release from the BM via
a two-pronged approach. By triggering a downregulation of
CXCL12, a surface-bound chemokine expressed by BM
stromal cells, and by activating neutrophil proteases, G-CSF
breaks the chemokine ligand–receptor bond that usually re-
tains neutrophils within the BM niche (53, 54). Further,
G-CSF triggers the release of the neutrophil chemoattractants
CXCL1 and CXCL2 from vascular endothelial cells (55). By
binding to CXCR2 on neutrophils, these chemokines recruit
newly differentiated neutrophils to the bloodstream. A similar
process of CXCL12 regulation by the monocyte chemokine
receptor CCR2 has been proposed to regulate monocyte
egress from the BM under inﬂammatory conditions (56).
Activation of CCR2 by its cognate ligand CCL2 down-
regulates CXCR4 expression by BM monocytes, releasing
them from the BM niche. Although CCL2 was previously
assumed to come from the inﬂamed tissues, a recent article by

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

2524

BRIEF REVIEWS: MICROBIAL IMPACT ON HEMATOPOIESIS

Jung et al. (57) shows that preformed CCL2 is stored in the
vesicles of stromal cells within the BM itself, from where it is
rapidly released after TLR4 ligation.

Although enhanced production of neutrophils and mono-
cytes occurs in response to many forms of infection and/or
inﬂammation, the exact nature of the alterations in hemato-
poiesis can be ﬁnely tuned depending on the nature of the
insult. Bacterial infections tend to drive the preferential ex-
pansion and release of phagocytic cells, such as granulocytes
and monocytes that are required for elimination of such
pathogens. In contrast, viral infections or exposure to synthetic
analogs of viral MAMPs are associated with increased pro-
duction of DC precursors (58–60). Welner et al. (60) dem-
onstrated that infecting mice with HSV caused CLPs to
differentiate into plasmacytoid and conventional DCs at the
expense of B cells. Plasmacytoid DCs play an important role
in mediating antiviral host defenses, because they produce
type I IFNs (61). This effect was largely TLR9 dependent and
could be recapitulated by injecting mice with CpG (the di-
nucleotide CG, linked by a phosphate group), a synthetic
TLR9 ligand (60). CLPs express TLR9, suggesting that viral
MAMPs could directly inﬂuence CLPs in the BM. LSK cells
in the BM may also respond to MAMPs directly, because they
express TLRs (43, 62). Indeed, in vitro studies suggest that
TNF-a, IL-6, or IFN-g treatment may even return Lin
Sca-
2
c-kit+ lineage “committed” progenitors to a more primitive
1
multipotent state (43). Although it is possible that the results
in that study might reﬂect expansion of contaminating LSK
cells, inﬂammatory cytokines have also been implicated in
emergency myelopoiesis in vivo. For example, LSK cell ex-
pansion following M. tuberculosis infection could be attenu-
ated by Ab-mediated blockade of IL-6 and TNF-a (42),
whereas type I IFN production was shown to be responsible
for emergency myelopoiesis following chronic TLR7 signal-
ing (63). Although the exact mechanisms that drive emer-
gency myelopoiesis remain to be fully elucidated, it seems safe
to assume that this phenomenon can by triggered by several
arms of the innate immune system and their products. By
responding to environmental cues, the cellular components of
the BM can drive the direction of hematopoiesis according to
the nature of the immunological challenges faced by the host,
thus shaping subsequent immune responses in an appropriate
manner.

2

Impact of microbial signals on HSC function and leukocyte longevity

The microbial factors that regulate myeloid cell production
and differentiation in the BM may also control their subse-
quent expansion and longevity after their export to the pe-
riphery. Recent work by Hergott et al. (32) demonstrated that
treating mice with neomycin results in accelerated turnover of
circulating monocytes and neutrophils and that these cell
populations are less able to survive ex vivo. Although neo-
mycin did not reduce the overall bacterial burden in the in-
testine,
it did induce signiﬁcant microbial dysbiosis. The
ability of microbiota to enhance myeloid cell lifespan in vivo
was dependent on NOD1, but not NOD2, TLR2, or TLR4,
suggesting a role for speciﬁc bacterial peptidoglycans in me-
diating these effects. The age-prolonging effect of NOD1 li-
gation could be reversed by blocking IL-17A, highlighting a
potential role for this cytokine in mediating the effects of the
microbiota on myeloid cell development and behavior.

Until very recently, dogma surrounding microbe-driven
changes in hematopoiesis suggested that LSK cells in the
BM expanded and differentiated down a particular lineage in
response to environmental cues. However, recent work cou-
pling functional studies with transcriptional and epigenetic
modiﬁcation assays suggests that HSCs are biased in their
differentiation potential (23, 64) and that speciﬁc HSC clones
may be impaired in their ability to differentiate down a par-
ticular lineage pathway by cell-autonomous epigenetic con-
straints (23). In a landmark study, Yu et al. (23) generated the
transgenic HUe mouse strain, which allowed fate mapping of
endogenous HSCs in vivo, as well as isolation of distinct HSC
clones and transplantation into new hosts. The majority of
hematopoietic cells in the body were found to be maintained
by only a few HSC clones at any given time; following
transplantation into a new host, HSC clones consistently
behaved in a cell-autonomous manner, expanding and dif-
ferentiating down the same lineage pathway, regardless of the
recipient. Furthermore,
individual clones showed distinct
characteristics with respect to proliferation, cell activation,
and, importantly, lineage differentiation in the steady-state
and following LPS challenge. These effects were attributed
to differences in chromatin accessibility, DNA methylation at
speciﬁc sites, and corresponding alterations in the gene-
expression proﬁles of individual clones. Although paradigm
shifting, this work does not imply that BM hematopoiesis is
unaffected by environmental cues;
instead, speciﬁc HSC
clones may be epigenetically poised to expand and differen-
tiate down a particular lineage given the appropriate stimuli.

Conclusions
Recent decades have seen a profound increase in the prevalence
of immunopathologies, such as asthma, allergies, IBD, type 1
diabetes, and multiple sclerosis. Such rapid increases in these
immune-mediated diseases have been attributed to changes in
the environment and a reduction in the biodiversity of the
human microbiome, which may be particularly important
early in life. An explosion of research in recent years has begun
to reveal how different components of the intestinal microbiota
can modulate immune function in the gut and elsewhere, and
we are coming increasingly closer to understanding the mo-
lecular mechanisms involved. As we discuss in this article, one
way in which our microbial constituents can shape the immune
response is by regulating hematopoiesis via a complex interplay
among MAMPS, microbial metabolites, and secondary me-
diators, such as growth factors, cytokines, and chemokines.
These processes allow the microbiota to drive proliferation of
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells in the BM, as well as
inﬂuence lineage commitment of individual progenitor cells.
Importantly, it is becoming clear that alterations in diet or
antibiotic treatment can alter BM hematopoiesis in adults,
resulting in profound effects on immune function.

In addition to these effects in adults, it is becoming in-
creasingly clear that early life is a particularly critical period
during which disruption of normal microbial colonization can
have life-long effects on immune function. There is also
emerging evidence that exposure of the mother to microbial
signals during gestation or in the postnatal period can alter
immune responses in infants. Whether this is a downstream
consequence of altered BM hematopoiesis in the offspring
remains unclear but certainly warrants further study. Elucidating

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

The Journal of Immunology

2525

the processes that allow the microbiota to shape immune
function early in life could provide a missing link in our
understanding of how immunopathologies develop and has
important implications for the use of antibiotics and dietary
manipulation in children and pregnant women.

Disclosures
The authors have no ﬁnancial conﬂicts of interest.

References
1. Wopereis, H., R. Oozeer, K. Knipping, C. Belzer, and J. Knol. 2014. The ﬁrst
thousand days - intestinal microbiology of early life: establishing a symbiosis.
Pediatr. Allergy Immunol. 25: 428–438.

2. Perez-Mun˜oz, M. E., M. C. Arrieta, A. E. Ramer-Tait, and J. Walter. 2017. A
critical assessment of the “sterile womb” and “in utero colonization” hypotheses:
implications for research on the pioneer infant microbiome. Microbiome 5: 48.
3. Matamoros, S., C. Gras-Leguen, F. Le Vacon, G. Potel, and M. F. de La Cochetiere.
2013. Development of intestinal microbiota in infants and its impact on health.
Trends Microbiol. 21: 167–173.

4. Deshmukh, H. S., Y. Liu, O. R. Menkiti, J. Mei, N. Dai, C. E. O’Leary,
P. M. Oliver, J. K. Kolls, J. N. Weiser, and G. S. Worthen. 2014. The microbiota
regulates neutrophil homeostasis and host resistance to Escherichia coli K1 sepsis in
neonatal mice. Nat. Med. 20: 524–530.

5. Person, M. K., D. H. Esposito, R. C. Holman, J. M. Mehal, and B. J. Stoll. 2014.
Risk factors for infectious disease death among infants in the United States. Pediatr.
Infect. Dis. J. 33: e280–e285.

6. Greenwood, C., A. L. Morrow, A. J. Lagomarcino, M. Altaye, D. H. Taft, Z. Yu,
D. S. Newburg, D. V. Ward, and K. R. Schibler. 2014. Early empiric antibiotic use
in preterm infants is associated with lower bacterial diversity and higher relative
abundance of Enterobacter. J. Pediatr. 165: 23–29.

7. Kuppala, V. S., J. Meinzen-Derr, A. L. Morrow, and K. R. Schibler. 2011. Pro-
longed initial empirical antibiotic treatment is associated with adverse outcomes in
premature infants. J. Pediatr. 159: 720–725.

8. Arboleya, S., B. Sa´nchez, C. Milani, S. Duranti, G. Solı´s, N. Ferna´ndez, C. G. de
los Reyes-Gavila´n, M. Ventura, A. Margolles, and M. Gueimonde. 2015. Intestinal
microbiota development in preterm neonates and effect of perinatal antibiotics. J.
Pediatr. 166: 538–544.

9. Moore, M. R., S. J. Schrag, and A. Schuchat. 2003. Effects of intrapartum anti-
microbial prophylaxis for prevention of group-B-streptococcal disease on the inci-
dence and ecology of early-onset neonatal sepsis. Lancet Infect. Dis. 3: 201–213.
10. Fouhy, F., C. M. Guinane, S. Hussey, R. Wall, C. A. Ryan, E. M. Dempsey,
B. Murphy, R. P. Ross, G. F. Fitzgerald, C. Stanton, and P. D. Cotter. 2012. High-
throughput sequencing reveals the incomplete, short-term recovery of infant gut
microbiota following parenteral antibiotic treatment with ampicillin and gentami-
cin. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 56: 5811–5820.

11. Manroe, B. L., A. G. Weinberg, C. R. Rosenfeld, and R. Browne. 1979. The
neonatal blood count in health and disease. I. Reference values for neutrophilic cells.
J. Pediatr. 95: 89–98.

12. van de Pavert, S. A., M. Ferreira, R. G. Domingues, H. Ribeiro, R. Molenaar,
L. Moreira-Santos, F. F. Almeida, S. Ibiza, I. Barbosa, G. Goverse, et al. 2014.
Maternal retinoids control type 3 innate lymphoid cells and set the offspring im-
munity. Nature 508: 123–127.

13. Le Poul, E., C. Loison, S. Struyf, J. Y. Springael, V. Lannoy, M. E. Decobecq,
S. Brezillon, V. Dupriez, G. Vassart, J. Van Damme, et al. 2003. Functional
characterization of human receptors for short chain fatty acids and their role in
polymorphonuclear cell activation. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 25481–25489.

14. Maslowski, K. M., A. T. Vieira, A. Ng, J. Kranich, F. Sierro, D. Yu, H. C. Schilter,
M. S. Rolph, F. Mackay, D. Artis, et al. 2009. Regulation of inﬂammatory re-
sponses by gut microbiota and chemoattractant receptor GPR43. Nature 461:
1282–1286.

15. Nilsson, N. E., K. Kotarsky, C. Owman, and B. Olde. 2003. Identiﬁcation of a free
fatty acid receptor, FFA2R, expressed on leukocytes and activated by short-chain
fatty acids. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 303: 1047–1052.

16. Smith, P. M., M. R. Howitt, N. Panikov, M. Michaud, C. A. Gallini, M. Bohlooly-
Y, J. N. Glickman, and W. S. Garrett. 2013. The microbial metabolites, short-chain
fatty acids, regulate colonic Treg cell homeostasis. Science 341: 569–573.

17. Thorburn, A. N., C. I. McKenzie, S. Shen, D. Stanley, L. Macia, L. J. Mason,
L. K. Roberts, C. H. Wong, R. Shim, R. Robert, et al. 2015. Evidence that asthma
is a developmental origin disease inﬂuenced by maternal diet and bacterial metab-
olites. Nat. Commun. 6: 7320.

18. Nakajima, A., N. Kaga, Y. Nakanishi, H. Ohno, J. Miyamoto, I. Kimura, S. Hori,
T. Sasaki, K. Hiramatsu, K. Okumura, et al. 2017. Maternal high ﬁber diet during
pregnancy and lactation inﬂuences regulatory T cell differentiation in offspring in
mice. J. Immunol. 199: 3516–3524.

19. Chen, X., B. L. Esplin, K. P. Garrett, R. S. Welner, C. F. Webb, and
P. W. Kincade. 2008. Retinoids accelerate B lineage lymphoid differentiation. J.
Immunol. 180: 138–145.

20. Gomez de Ag€uero, M., S. C. Ganal-Vonarburg, T. Fuhrer, S. Rupp, Y. Uchimura,
H. Li, A. Steinert, M. Heikenwalder, S. Hapfelmeier, U. Sauer, et al. 2016. The
maternal microbiota drives early postnatal innate immune development. Science
351: 1296–1302.

21. Broxmeyer, H. E. G., G. Hangoc, S. Cooper, R. C. Ribeiro, V. Graves, M. Yoder,
J. Wagner, S. Vadhan-Raj, L. Benninger, P. Rubinstein, et al. 1992. Growth
characteristics and expansion of human umbilical cord blood and estimation of its
potential for transplantation in adults. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89: 4109–4113.
22. Renz, H., B. D. Adkins, S. Bartfeld, R. S. Blumberg, D. L. Farber, J. Garssen,
P. Ghazal, D. J. Hackam, B. J. Marsland, K. D. McCoy, et al. 2017. The neo-
natal window of opportunity-early priming for life. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2017.11.019.

23. Yu, V. W., R. Z. Yusuf, T. Oki, J. Wu, B. Saez, X. Wang, C. Cook, N. Baryawno,
M. J. Ziller, E. Lee, et al 2016. Epigenetic memory underlies cell-autonomous
heterogeneous behavior of hematopoietic stem cells. [Published erratum appears
in 2017 Cell 168: 944–945.] Cell 167: 1310–1322.e17.

24. Olszak, T., D. An, S. Zeissig, M. P. Vera, J. Richter, A. Franke, J. N. Glickman,
R. Siebert, R. M. Baron, D. L. Kasper, and R. S. Blumberg. 2012. Microbial ex-
posure during early life has persistent effects on natural killer T cell function. Science
336: 489–493.

25. Wesemann, D. R. 2015. Microbes and B cell development. Adv. Immunol. 125:

155–178.

26. Golby, S., M. Hackett, L. Boursier, D. Dunn-Walters, S. Thiagamoorthy, and
J. Spencer. 2002. B cell development and proliferation of mature B cells in human
fetal intestine. J. Leukoc. Biol. 72: 279–284.

27. Wesemann, D. R., A. J. Portuguese, R. M. Meyers, M. P. Gallagher, K. Cluff-Jones,
J. M. Magee, R. A. Panchakshari, S. J. Rodig, T. B. Kepler, and F. W. Alt. 2013.
Microbial colonization inﬂuences early B-lineage development in the gut lamina
propria. Nature 501: 112–115.

28. Granato, A., Y. Chen, and D. R. Wesemann. 2015. Primary immunoglobulin
repertoire development: time and space matter. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 33: 126–131.
29. Luo, Y., G. L. Chen, N. Hannemann, N. Ipseiz, G. Kro¨nke, T. Ba¨uerle, L. Munos,
S. Wirtz, G. Schett, and A. Bozec. 2015. Microbiota from obese mice regulate
hematopoietic stem cell differentiation by altering the bone niche. Cell Metab. 22:
886–894.

30. Trompette, A., E. S. Gollwitzer, K. Yadava, A. K. Sichelstiel, N. Sprenger,
C. Ngom-Bru, C. Blanchard, T.
Junt, L. P. Nicod, N. L. Harris, and
B. J. Marsland. 2014. Gut microbiota metabolism of dietary ﬁber inﬂuences allergic
airway disease and hematopoiesis. Nat. Med. 20: 159–166.

31. Balmer, M. L., C. M. Sch€urch, Y. Saito, M. B. Geuking, H. Li, M. Cuenca,
L. V. Kovtonyuk, K. D. McCoy, S. Hapfelmeier, A. F. Ochsenbein, et al. 2014.
Microbiota-derived compounds drive steady-state granulopoiesis via MyD88/
TICAM signaling. J. Immunol. 193: 5273–5283.

32. Hergott, C. B., A. M. Roche, E. Tamashiro, T. B. Clarke, A. G. Bailey, A. Laughlin,
F. D. Bushman, and J. N. Weiser. 2016. Peptidoglycan from the gut microbiota
governs the lifespan of circulating phagocytes at homeostasis. Blood 127: 2460–
2471.

33. Josefsdottir, K. S., M. T. Baldridge, C. S. Kadmon, and K. Y. King. 2017. Anti-
biotics impair murine hematopoiesis by depleting the intestinal microbiota. Blood
129: 729–739.

34. Khosravi, A., A. Ya´n˜ez, J. G. Price, A. Chow, M. Merad, H. S. Goodridge, and
S. K. Mazmanian. 2014. Gut microbiota promote hematopoiesis to control bacterial
infection. Cell Host Microbe 15: 374–381.

35. Tada, T., S. Yamamura, Y. Kuwano, and T. Abo. 1996. Level of myelopoiesis in the
bone marrow is inﬂuenced by intestinal ﬂora. Cell. Immunol. 173: 155–161.
36. Goris, H., F. de Boer, and D. van der Waaij. 1985. Myelopoiesis in experimentally
contaminated speciﬁc-pathogen-free and germfree mice during oral administration
of polymyxin. Infect. Immun. 50: 437–441.

37. Iwamura, C., N. Bouladoux, Y. Belkaid, A. Sher, and D. Jankovic. 2017. Sensing of
the microbiota by NOD1 in mesenchymal stromal cells regulates murine hemato-
poiesis. Blood 129: 171–176.

38. Mei, J., Y. Liu, N. Dai, C. Hoffmann, K. M. Hudock, P. Zhang, S. H. Guttentag,
J. K. Kolls, P. M. Oliver, F. D. Bushman, and G. S. Worthen. 2012. Cxcr2 and
Cxcl5 regulate the IL-17/G-CSF axis and neutrophil homeostasis in mice. J. Clin.
Invest. 122: 974–986.

39. Howard, M. D., D. T. Gordon, K. A. Garleb, and M. S. Kerley. 1995. Dietary
fructooligosaccharide, xylooligosaccharide and gum arabic have variable effects on
cecal and colonic microbiota and epithelial cell proliferation in mice and rats. J.
Nutr. 125: 2604–2609.

40. Mountzouris, K. C., A. L. McCartney, and G. R. Gibson. 2002. Intestinal mi-
croﬂora of human infants and current trends for its nutritional modulation. Br. J.
Nutr. 87: 405–420.

41. Belzer, C., and W. M. de Vos. 2012. Microbes inside–from diversity to function:

the case of Akkermansia. ISME J. 6: 1449–1458.

42. Choi, H. H., K. K. Kim, K. D. Kim, H. J. Kim, E. K. Jo, and C. H. Song. 2011.
Effects of mycobacterial infection on proliferation of hematopoietic precursor cells.
Microbes Infect. 13: 1252–1260.

43. Zhang, P., S. Nelson, G. J. Bagby, R. Siggins, II, J. E. Shellito, and D. A. Welsh.
2008. The lineage2c-Kit+Sca-1+ cell response to Escherichia coli bacteremia in
Balb/c mice. Stem Cells 26: 1778–1786.

44. Takizawa, H., S. Boettcher, and M. G. Manz. 2012. Demand-adapted regulation of

early hematopoiesis in infection and inﬂammation. Blood 119: 2991–3002.

45. Kondo, M., D. C. Scherer, T. Miyamoto, A. G. King, K. Akashi, K. Sugamura, and
I. L. Weissman. 2000. Cell-fate conversion of lymphoid-committed progenitors by
instructive actions of cytokines. Nature 407: 383–386.

46. Richards, M. K., F. Liu, H. Iwasaki, K. Akashi, and D. C. Link. 2003. Pivotal role
of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in the development of progenitors in the
common myeloid pathway. Blood 102: 3562–3568.

47. Higgins, D. M., J. Sanchez-Campillo, A. G. Rosas-Taraco, J. R. Higgins, E. J. Lee,
I. M. Orme, and M. Gonzalez-Juarrero. 2008. Relative levels of M-CSF and

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

2526

BRIEF REVIEWS: MICROBIAL IMPACT ON HEMATOPOIESIS

GM-CSF inﬂuence the speciﬁc generation of macrophage populations during in-
fection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. J. Immunol. 180: 4892–4900.

48. Ingersoll, M. A., K. A. Kline, H. V. Nielsen, and S. J. Hultgren. 2008. G-CSF
induction early in uropathogenic Escherichia coli infection of the urinary tract
modulates host immunity. Cell. Microbiol. 10: 2568–2578.

49. Shi, Y., C. H. Liu, A. I. Roberts, J. Das, G. Xu, G. Ren, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang,
Z. R. Yuan, H. S. Tan, et al. 2006. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF) and T-cell responses: what we do and don’t know. Cell Res. 16:
126–133.

50. Boettcher, S., R. C. Gerosa, R. Radpour,

J. Bauer, F. Ampenberger,
M. Heikenwalder, M. Kopf, and M. G. Manz. 2014. Endothelial cells translate
pathogen signals into G-CSF-driven emergency granulopoiesis. Blood 124: 1393–
1403.

51. Delano, M. J., P. O. Scumpia, J. S. Weinstein, D. Coco, S. Nagaraj, K. M. Kelly-
Scumpia, K. A. O’Malley, J. L. Wynn, S. Antonenko, S. Z. Al-Quran, et al. 2007.
MyD88-dependent expansion of an immature GR-1(+)CD11b(+) population in-
duces T cell suppression and Th2 polarization in sepsis. J. Exp. Med. 204: 1463–
1474.

52. Ya´n˜ez, A., J. Megı´as, J. E. O’Connor, D. Gozalbo, and M. L. Gil. 2011. Candida
induces selective development of macrophages and monocyte derived

albicans
dendritic cells by a TLR2 dependent signalling. PLoS One 6: e24761.

53. Delano, M. J., K. M. Kelly-Scumpia, T. C. Thayer, R. D. Winﬁeld, P. O. Scumpia,
A. G. Cuenca, P. B. Harrington, K. A. O’Malley, E. Warner, S. Gabrilovich, et al.
2011. Neutrophil mobilization from the bone marrow during polymicrobial sepsis
is dependent on CXCL12 signaling. J. Immunol. 187: 911–918.

54. Petit,

I., M. Szyper-Kravitz, A. Nagler, M. Lahav, A. Peled, L. Habler,
T. Ponomaryov, R. S. Taichman, F. Arenzana-Seisdedos, N. Fujii, et al. 2002. G-
CSF induces stem cell mobilization by decreasing bone marrow SDF-1 and up-
regulating CXCR4. [Published erratum appears in 2002 Nat. Immunol. 3: 787.]
Nat. Immunol. 3: 687–694.

55. Eash, K. J., A. M. Greenbaum, P. K. Gopalan, and D. C. Link. 2010. CXCR2 and
CXCR4 antagonistically regulate neutrophil trafﬁcking from murine bone marrow.
J. Clin. Invest. 120: 2423–2431.

56. Serbina, N. V., and E. G. Pamer. 2006. Monocyte emigration from bone marrow
during bacterial infection requires signals mediated by chemokine receptor CCR2.
Nat. Immunol. 7: 311–317.

57. Jung, H., D. S. Mithal, J. E. Park, and R. J. Miller. 2015. Localized CCR2 acti-
vation in the bone marrow niche mobilizes monocytes by desensitizing CXCR4.
PLoS One 10: e0128387.

58. Singh, P., Y. Yao, A. Weliver, H. E. Broxmeyer, S. C. Hong, and C. H. Chang.
2008. Vaccinia virus infection modulates the hematopoietic cell compartments in
the bone marrow. Stem Cells 26: 1009–1016.

59. Sioud, M., and Y. Fløisand. 2007. TLR agonists induce the differentiation of hu-
man bone marrow CD34+ progenitors into CD11c+ CD80/86+ DC capable of
inducing a Th1-type response. Eur. J. Immunol. 37: 2834–2846.

60. Welner, R. S., R. Pelayo, Y. Nagai, K. P. Garrett, T. R. Wuest, D. J. Carr,
L. A. Borghesi, M. A. Farrar, and P. W. Kincade. 2008. Lymphoid precursors are
directed to produce dendritic cells as a result of TLR9 ligation during herpes in-
fection. Blood 112: 3753–3761.

61. Swiecki, M., and M. Colonna. 2015. The multifaceted biology of plasmacytoid

dendritic cells. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15: 471–485.

62. Nagai, Y., K. P. Garrett, S. Ohta, U. Bahrun, T. Kouro, S. Akira, K. Takatsu, and
P. W. Kincade. 2006. Toll-like receptors on hematopoietic progenitor cells stim-
ulate innate immune system replenishment. Immunity 24: 801–812.

63. Buechler, M. B., T. H. Teal, K. B. Elkon, and J. A. Hamerman. 2013. Cutting
edge: type I IFN drives emergency myelopoiesis and peripheral myeloid expansion
during chronic TLR7 signaling. J. Immunol. 190: 886–891.

64. Morita, Y., H. Ema, and H. Nakauchi. 2010. Heterogeneity and hierarchy within
the most primitive hematopoietic stem cell compartment. J. Exp. Med. 207: 1173–
1182.

