Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

1. Introduction

2 of 22

The human gastrointestinal (GI) tract contains an abundant and diverse microbial community
that gathers more than 100 trillion microorganisms [1]. The density of bacterial cells in the colon has
been estimated at 1011 to 1012 per milliliter which makes the colon one of the most densely populated
microbial habitats known on earth [2]. The gut microbiome encodes over 3 million genes producing
thousands of metabolites, whereas the human genome consists of approximately 23,000 genes [3].
For years, scientists have been interested in gut microbiota, but one of the major difﬁculties in the
relevant research has been the ability to culture these microorganisms [4]. During the last years, new
technologies have allowed researchers to phylogenetically identify and/or quantify the components
of the gut microbiota by analyzing nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) directly extracted from stools.
The majority of these techniques are based on the extraction of DNA and the ampliﬁcation of the 16S
ribosomal RNA gene (rRNA) [5,6]. 16S rRNA sequencing has become the most useful technique to
highlight diversity and abundance of the microbiome. The 16S rRNA gene sequences can be exploited
with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and metagenomics sequencing to characterize the microbial
strains [7].

Considering the characteristics of gut microbiota such as the large diversity, the stability and
resilience, and the symbiotic interaction with the host, we can deﬁne the host and the microorganisms
inhabiting it as a “superorganism” [8,9] which performs immune and metabolic functions [1].
Gut bacteria are key regulators of digestion along the gastrointestinal tract; commensal bacteria
play an important role in the extraction, synthesis, and absorption of many nutrients and metabolites,
including bile acids, lipids, amino acids, vitamins, and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). Gut microbiota
have a crucial immune function against pathogenic bacteria colonization inhibiting their growth,
consuming available nutrients and/or producing bacteriocins. Gut microbiota also prevent bacteria
invasion by maintaining the intestinal epithelium integrity [10]. Microorganisms prevent pathogenic
colonization by many competition processes: nutrient metabolism, pH modiﬁcation, antimicrobial
peptide secretions, and effects on cell signaling pathways. Moreover, recent studies have identiﬁed a
critical role for commensal bacteria and their products in regulating the development, homeostasis,
and function of innate and adaptive immune cells [11]. It is paradoxical to note that the gut microbiota
functions are highly preserved between individuals, whereas each individual’s gut microbiota are
characterized by a speciﬁc combination of bacterial species due to inter-individual and intra-individual
variations throughout human life.

This review aims to deﬁne what would be the optimal gut microbiota composition in order
to maintain these optimal microbiota immune and metabolic functions. After deﬁning microbiota
variations within and between individuals, we highlight the involvement of gut microbiota dysbiosis
in various intestinal and extra-intestinal disorder development and we describe the strong relationship
between gut microbiota diversity and health. We will see how these gut microbiota variations may have
huge implications for intestinal and extra-intestinal disorders and, consequently, may inﬂuence health.

2. Gut Microbiota Variations

Gut microbiota are composed of several species of microorganisms, including bacteria, yeast,
and viruses. Taxonomically, bacteria are classiﬁed according to phyla, classes, orders, families,
genera, and species. Only a few phyla are represented, accounting for more than 160 species [12].
The dominant gut microbial phyla are Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria,
Fusobacteria, and Verrucomicrobia, with the two phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes [13] representing
90% of gut microbiota. The Firmicutes phylum is composed of more than 200 different genera such
as Lactobacillus, Bacillus, Clostridium, Enterococcus, and Ruminicoccus. Clostridium genera represent
95% of the Firmicutes phyla. Bacteroidetes consists of predominant genera such as Bacteroides and
Prevotella. The Actinobacteria phylum is proportionally less abundant and mainly represented by
the Biﬁdobacterium genus [13]. Examples of taxonomic gut microbiota composition are illustrated in
Figure 1.

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

3 of 22

Figure 1. Examples of taxonomic gut microbiota composition. In the box are cited examples of bacteria
belonging to Phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, representing 90% of gut microbiota.

2.1. Variations in the Same Individual

Human gut microbiota vary taxonomically and functionally in each part of the GI tract and
undergo variations in the same individual due to infant transitions, age, and environmental factors
such as antibiotic use. Microbiota variations within individuals are summarized in Table 1.

Microorganisms 2018, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 23  Figure 1. Examples of taxonomic gut microbiota composition. In the box are cited examples of bacteria belonging to Phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, representing 90% of gut microbiota. 2.1. Variations in the Same Individual Human gut microbiota vary taxonomically and functionally in each part of the GI tract and undergo variations in the same individual due to infant transitions, age, and environmental factors such as antibiotic use. Microbiota variations within individuals are summarized in Table 1. Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

4 of 22

2.1.1. Intestine Anatomical Regions

Gut microbiota vary according to the intestine anatomical regions, which vary in terms of
physiology, pH and O2 tension, digesta ﬂow rates (rapid in the mouth to the caecum, slower
afterward), substrate availability, and host secretions [14]. The small intestine provides a more
challenging environment for microbial colonizers given the fairly short transit times (3–5 h) and
the high bile concentrations. The large intestine, which is characterized by slow ﬂow rates and
neutral to mildly acidic pH, harbors by far the largest microbial community (dominated by obligate
anaerobic bacteria) [14]. We can observe a microbiota quantitative increasing gradient and a microbiota
qualitative decreasing gradient with a progressive aerobic bacteria decrease for the beneﬁt of strictly
anaerobic bacteria (Table 1).

2.1.2. Infant Transitions

Birth Gestational Age

Birth gestational age is a major determinant of gut microbiota colonization. The microbiota
composition of preterm infants (<37 weeks of gestation) is different from term counterparts (Table 1).
In preterm infants, after birth, the microbiota colonization is challenged by organ immaturity and
environmental factors such as antibiotic use, hospital stay [15], and enteral feeding [16]. For these
reasons, the postnatal maturation of gut and systemic immunity may be highly affected by preterm
birth [16].

In a new-born pig model, an analysis of the gut microbiota composition of preterm and term pigs
showed that Ruminococcus spp., some Enterobacterium spp., Lachnospiraceae, Peptostreptococcaceae, and
Clostridiaceae were dominant genera in both preterm and term pigs. However, a higher Enterococcus spp.
abundance in preterm than term pigs was found [16].

Preterm infants show low diversity with an increased colonization of potentially pathogenic
bacteria from the Enterobacteriaceae family of the Proteobacteria phylum [15] and reduced levels of
strict anaerobes such as Biﬁdobacterium [17], Bacteroides, and Atopobium [15].

Human milk composition depends on genetic factors and the mother’s secretor and Lewis blood
groups deﬁning four phenotypes characterized by different levels of oligosaccharide amounts [18].
Higher levels of Proteobacteria and lower levels of Firmicutes are noted in premature infants of
non-secretor mothers [19]. A recent study by Praticò et al. [20] characterizing human breast milk
composition demonstrated that human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) related to different mother
phenotypes modulate gut microbiota composition in infants. Speciﬁcally, HMOs associated with
secretor mothers may have a protective prebiotic effect by decreasing pathogens associated with
sepsis and necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) [19]. This indicates that HMOs may inﬂuence the intestinal
microbiota and prevent gut dysfunction and NEC in preterm infants [21].

Lactoferrin (LF) is another well-known component of human milk favoring gut infant colonization
with beneﬁcial bacteria and consequently representing a crucial role played in preterm infants’
microbiota [22]. Indeed, correlations between LF and beneﬁcial microbiota in breast milk and infant’s
feces have been demonstrated [22]. High levels of fecal LF, particularly in preterm infants, may
represent an important factor in the initiation, development, and/or composition of the neonatal gut
microbiota contributing to the immunologic maturation and well-being of the newborn, especially in
preterm infants [22].

Therefore, a mother’s own milk helps to shape developing core gut microbiota that can improve
growth and neurodevelopment and decrease the risk of NEC and late-onset sepsis [19,21]. It is for all
these reasons that human milk should be the primary enteral diet of premature infants.

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

Type of Delivery

5 of 22

At birth, the intestine is sterile and devoid of bacteria. After birth, a rich and dynamic ecosystem
develops from mother’s skin, vaginal and fecal microbiota, and environment microbiota contacts.
Microbiota colonization varies according to the type of delivery [23–25] (Table 1).

With regard to vaginal delivery, newborns acquire a microbiota composition resembling their
mother’s vaginal microbiota. Indeed, an analysis of the meconium of newborn infants [24] revealed a
strong correlation between the microbiota of the newborn digestive tract and the microbial communities
of the mother’s vagina: Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Sneathia. Biasucci et al. [25] showed that the
microbiota of vaginally delivered infants are also characterized by predominant groups such as
Biﬁdobacterium longum and Biﬁdobacterium catenulatum. Other facultative anaerobic species such as
Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus, Bacteroides fragilis, and Streptococcus colonize the infant gut [26–28].

On the contrary, infants born by cesarean section (C-section) acquire bacteria derived from
hospital environment and mother’s skin: Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium, Propionibacterium spp. [24,
29]. Escherichia, Shigella, and Bacteroides species are underrepresented in infants born by cesarean
delivery [29]. The intestinal microbiota of neonates delivered by cesarean delivery are less diverse in
terms of bacteria species than the microbiota of vaginally delivered infants [25].

Differences between the microbiota of C-section and vaginally born infants have been also detected
in analyses performed at 7 years of age [23]. Cesarean birth has been associated with an increased risk
of chronic immune disorders such as asthma, systemic connective tissue disorders, juvenile arthritis,
inﬂammatory bowel disease [30], and obesity [31].

Methods of Milk Feeding

Studies have demonstrated that formula-fed infants are more often colonized with Escherichia coli,
Bacteroides, and Clostridium difﬁcile compared with breastfed infants [29,32]. Regarding Actinobacteria
abundance, Biﬁdobacterium spp. have been associated with breastfeeding and formula milk [33,34].
However, breastfed infants generally harbor a more complex and diverse Biﬁdobacterium microbiota
than formula-fed infants [34]. Breastfed infants are provided with microbiota having more than a
two-fold increase in the number of Biﬁdobacterium cells compared to formula-fed infants [33]. Breastfed
infants have more beneﬁcial gut microbiota, with a higher richness and diversity of Biﬁdobacterium spp.
and a lower number of Clostridium difﬁcile and Escherichia coli than formula-fed infants [32] (Table 1).
Biﬁdobacterium spp. are responsible for the fermentation of galactooligosaccharide (GOS), one
of the main components of breast milk, to produce SCFAs [35]. Indeed, Biﬁdobacterium spp. have an
enzyme named lacto-N-biosidase, which facilitates the assimilation of GOS [36]. If Biﬁdobacterium
quantity increases, the quantity of HMOs in feces decreases causing elevated acetate and lactate
concentrations and decreasing pH [37]; an HMO consumption by Biﬁdobacteria in the infant’s
gut may suggest a prebiotic effect of HMOs on gut infant microbiota by selectively stimulating
Biﬁdobacterium spp. [37]. Another prebiotic effect of β-palmitate, a natural human milk fatty acid
and a component of some infant formulas, on gut infant microbiota was demonstrated by positively
inﬂuencing Biﬁdobacterium spp. (and Lactobacillus spp.) abundance [38].

Furthermore, the maintenance of a healthy and balanced mother’s gut microbiota during
pregnancy is also considered as an important factor in positively inﬂuencing the milk microbiota
composition [39]. Additionally, oral probiotic supplementation in mothers with vaginal delivery may
increase breast milk Biﬁdobacterium spp. and Lactobacilli spp. abundance [39].

These studies have shown that native core microbiota are shaped during early life: the proﬁle
of intestinal microbiota in the full-term, vaginally delivered, and breastfed infant with healthy and
balanced mother’s milk microbiota is considered healthy. Researches should seek to demonstrate the
role of this native core microbiota composition on gut health and subsequent diseases.

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

Weaning Period

6 of 22

The introduction of solid foods and the termination of milk-feeding/weaning coincide with
major gut microbiota changes. The abundance of genera Biﬁdobacterium, Clostridium coccoides, and
Bacteroides are predominant after weaning [40]. The microbiota of breastfed children and the microbiota
of children previously fed with formula milk become closer to each other (Table 1).

Dietary habits, infant weaning, and feeding practices become determinants and play a crucial role
in gut microbiota variations. The introduction of high-ﬁber and carbohydrate foods (traditional foods)
causes an increase in Firmicutes and Prevotella, whereas the introduction of high-ﬁber and animal
protein foods causes an increase in Bacteroidetes [41]. Furthermore, Fallani et al. [40] demonstrated
that northern European countries are associated with a higher proportion of Biﬁdobacteria in the
infant gut microbiota, whereas higher levels of Bacteroides and Lactobacilli characterize southern
European countries.

2.1.3. Age

At one year old, a child’s microbiota composition has a characteristic abundance of Akkermansia

muciniphila, Bacteroides, Veillonella, Clostridium coccoides spp., and Clostridium botulinum spp. [42].

Microbiota diversity increases with age until it becomes a stable adult microbiota composition
dominated by three bacterial phyla (Table 1): Firmicutes (Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae),
Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidaceae, Prevotellaceae, and Rikenellaceae), and Actinobacteria (Biﬁdobacteriaceae
and Coriobacteriaceae) that are the result of maturation due to the inﬂuence of genetics, environment,
diet, lifestyle, and gut physiology [42]. At approximately three years of age, a child’s gut microbiota
composition and diversity are most like those of adults [43].

With regard to older people over the age of 70, gut microbiota composition can be affected by
digestion and nutrient absorption changes and immune activity weakness. Dietary habit changes
(more monotonous) may also weaken gut microbiota diversity. A decrease in anaerobic bacteria such
as Biﬁdobacterium spp. and an increase in Clostridium and Proteobacteria have been observed [44].
Given the role of Biﬁdobacterium spp. in the stimulation of the immune system and metabolic processes,
a Biﬁdobacteria decrease may partially explain low systemic inﬂammatory status and malnutrition in
older adults [45].

2.1.4. Antibiotics

Gut microbiota composition can be more or less affected by antibiotic use. A follow-up
study explored the effect of antibiotics with different modes of action on human gut microbiota
composition [46] and demonstrated that antibiotic treatments modify the gut microbiota composition
with an abundance/appearance of certain species and a decrease/disappearance of other species
(Table 1). Broad-spectrum antibiotics lead to an imbalance between Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes.
The bacterial diversity decreases and so does the abundance of these bacteria during the treatments.
The alteration of microbiome composition depends on the antibiotic class, dose, period of exposure,
pharmacological action, and target bacteria [47] (Table 1). Speciﬁc properties of antibiotics such as
antimicrobial effects or mode of action are powerful forces for the selection of intestinal microbiota
and are partially responsible for the shifts in bacterial composition during antibiotic therapy [46].

Each class of antibiotics has different properties and excretion systems, resulting in different

patterns of alteration in the microbiome composition [47].

A cultivation-independent survey of gut microbiota composition of three persons before, during,
and after two exposures to the same antibiotic (ciproﬂoxacin) [48] has been conducted. This study
revealed a considerable resilience to antibiotic administration but also suggested that, in some cases,
the system retains a memory of past disturbance and that, in all cases, repeated disturbance leads to a
persistent regime shift [48]. The impact of antibiotic disturbance on the resilience of microbiota during
future antibiotic treatments can thus also vary considerably across individuals [49].

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

7 of 22

Actinobacteria

Bacteroidetes

Firmicutes

Proteobacteria

Fusobacteria

Verrucomicrobia

Euryarchaeota

Table 1. Microbiota variations within individuals.

Gut Microbiota Abundance

Lactobacillus

Enterobacteriaceae *

Small intestine

Anatomical
part of gut tract

Colon

Bacteroidaceae *
Prevotellaceae *
Rikenellaceae *

Preterm birth
(<37 weeks of
gestation)

Biﬁdobacterium spp.↓
Atopobium spp.↓

Bacteroides *↓
(non-secretor
mothers)

Enterobacteriaceae *↑
Enterococcus spp.↑

Gestational age

Full-term birth

Biﬁdobacterium spp.↑

Bacteroidetes *↑

Enterobacteriaceae *

Type of
delivery

Vaginal
delivery

C-section

Biﬁdobacterium spp.↑
Biﬁdobacterium
longum↑
Biﬁdobacterium
catenulatum↑

Corynebacterium↑
Propionibacterium↑

Breast milk

Biﬁdobacterium↑↑

Prevotella↑
Bacteroides
fragilis↑

Lactobacillus↑
Staphylococcus↑
Streptococcus ↑

Bacteroides *↓

Staphylococcus↑

Methods of
(milk) feedings

Artiﬁcial milk

Biﬁdobacterium↑

Bacteroides↑

Introduction of
solid food

Biﬁdobacterium↑

Bacteroidetes *↑
Bacteroides↑

Escherichia↑

Sneathia↑

Escherichia↓
Shigella↓

Enterococcus↑

Escherichia↑

Lachnospiraceae *
Ruminococcaceae *

Firmicutes *↓
(non-secretor
mothers)
Lactobacillus↑
Ruminococcus spp.
Lachnospiraceae *
Peptostreptococcaceae *
Clostridiaceae *

Ruminococcus spp.
Lachnospiraceae *
Peptostreptococcaceae *
Clostridiaceae *

Lactobacillus↑
Staphylococcus ↑

Clostridium↑
Clostridium difﬁcile↑
Lactobacillus↑

Firmicutes *↑
Lactobacilli↑
Clostridium coccoides↑

Bacteria
Diversity

Ref.

[14]

↓

↑

↑

↓

↑

↓

↑

[15,16,19]

[16,20]

[22–26]

[21–23,27]

[27,30–32,38]

[27,30–32]

[36,37]

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

8 of 22

Actinobacteria

Bacteroidetes

Firmicutes

Proteobacteria

Fusobacteria

Verrucomicrobia

Euryarchaeota

Bacteria
Diversity

Ref.

Table 1. Cont.

Gut Microbiota Abundance

Akkermansia
muciniphila

Proteobacteria *

Fusobacteria *

Akkermansia
muciniphila

Methanobrevibacter
smithii

Childhood
(ﬁrst year of
life)

Human age

Biﬁdobacterium

Bacteroides

2–3 years old to
adult

Biﬁdobacteriaceae *
Coriobacteriaceae *

Over 70

Biﬁdobacteriaceae↓

Macrolide

Actinobacteria *↓

Clarithromycin

Actinobacteria *↓

Bacteroidaceae *
Prevotellaceae *
Rikenellaceae *

Bacteroides↑

Bacteroides↑

Vancomycin

Antibiotic
treatments

Ciproﬂoxacin

Biﬁdobacterium↓

Alistipes↓
Bacteroides↑

Clindamycin

Biﬁdobacteriaceae↓
Lactobacillus↓

Veillonella
C. coccoides
C. botulinum

Lachnospiraceae
Ruminococcaceae

Firmicutes *↓

Firmicutes *↓

Lactobacillus↓
Clostridium↓

Faecalibacterium↓
Oscillospira↓
Ruminococcus↓
Dialister↓

Clostridium *↓

Proteobacteria *↑

Proteobacteria *↑

Proteobacteria *↑

* Unknown genera.

[38,39]

[38]

[40]

[43]

↑

↑

↓

↓

↓

↓

↓

↓

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

9 of 22

2.2. Gut Microbiota Variations between Individuals

We highlighted that the gut microbiota composition varies in the same individual and we will
see that it also changes between individuals. These inter-individual variations are principally due to
enterotypes, body mass index (BMI) level, and external factors such as lifestyle, exercise frequency,
ethnicity, and dietary and cultural habits. The microbiota abundance variations between individuals
are illustrated in Table 2.

2.2.1. Enterotypes

Gut microbiota of each individual are speciﬁcally characterized by clusters of bacteria named
enterotypes [13]. Three enterotypes are characterized by three dominant bacteria clusters (Table 2):
Bacteroides (enterotype I), Prevotella (enterotype II), or Ruminococcus (enterotype III). Each enterotype
harbors different bacteria genera (Table 1). These three enterotypes are not only enumerations of
bacteria; they are also speciﬁcally regrouped by functions. Indeed, an enterotype is a functional
harmonious association of several bacteria species rather than a systematic addition of bacteria species.
Every enterotype is not a clear-cut identity such as blood groups; however, enterotypes characterize
individuals, remain stable from adulthood, and can be restored if they are modiﬁed. Each enterotype
with its distinctive clusters of bacteria and respective functional characteristics deﬁnes a distinctive
way of generating energy from fermentable substrates available in the colon. Indeed, bacteria clusters
of enterotype I derive energy primarily from carbohydrates using principally glycolysis and pentose
phosphate pathways, whereas bacteria clusters of enterotypes II and III are able to degrade mucin
glycoproteins of the gut mucosal layer. Enterotypes seem to be principally deﬁned according to dietary
habits. Understanding the origins and functions of enterotypes may improve the knowledge of the
relationships between gut microbiota and human health.

2.2.2. Body Mass Index (BMI) Classes

Several studies [50,51] have examined the impact of childhood BMI on gut microbiota composition
and demonstrated that children with overweight or normal BMI are provided with a higher microbial
diversity than underweight children. Gut microbiota diversity descends stepwise based on BMI
class [50,52].

Bervoets et al. [53] demonstrated that the microbiota of obese children are provided with
an elevated Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio compared to the microbiota of lean children [53].
low relative proportions of Biﬁdobacterium vulgatus and high concentrations of
Furthermore,
Lactobacillus spp. are observed in the obese microbiota [53]. Riva et al. [54] conﬁrmed that obesity
is associated with elevated levels of Firmicutes such as Ruminococcaceae and depleted levels of
Bacteroidetes such as Bacteroidaceae and Bacteroides. SCFAs are higher in obese children suggesting
elevated substrate utilization. These ﬁndings suggest that the dysbiosis of gut microbiota may
contribute to the pathophysiology of obesity and the increased ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes is
associated with the increased production of SCFAs and energy harvest from colonic fermentation [54].
The underweight BMI level also revealed profound gut microbiota variations. Borgo et al. [55]
performed a comprehensive data analysis comparing gut microbiota and anthropometric traits of 15
anorexia nervosa (AN) women and healthy controls. Results showed that AN intestinal microbiota
showed a signiﬁcant increase in Enterobacteriaceae and Methanobrevibacter smithii compared with healthy
controls [55]. On the contrary, the genera Roseburia, Ruminococcus, and Clostridium were depleted in
line with the observed reduction in AN of the total SCFAs [55].

BMI levels represent a valid predictive value for gut microbiota dysbiosis. Studies have
demonstrated that gut microbiota variations are correlated with increased or depleted production
of SCFAs that may respectively contribute to the pathophysiology of obesity or AN. Interventions
such as prebiotics and probiotics may be possible solutions to manage both pediatric obesity [50] and
AN patients.

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

10 of 22

2.2.3. Ethnicity, Dietary Habits, and Cultural Habits

While the microbiome of a healthy individual is relatively stable, gut microbial dynamics can
certainly be inﬂuenced by lifestyle and dietary cultural choices [56]. A study of European children
(fed with the Western diet) and Burkina Faso children (assuming a diet rich in millet/sorghum +
local vegetables containing very few lipids and animal proteins) [57] revealed that African children’s
microbiota have a remarkable abundance of Prevotella and Xylanibacter. Furthermore, Shigella and
Escherichia are widely under-represented. Another study [58] compared Hadza hunter-gatherers and
Italian gut microbiota. At the phylum level, Hadza gut microbiota are largely enriched in Proteobacteria
and Spirochaetes, which are extremely rare in the Italian gut microbiota, whereas Actinobacteria,
an important subdominant component of the Italian gut microbiota, are almost absent. At the
genus level, Hadza gut microbiota are comparatively enriched in Prevotella, Eubacterium, Oscillibacter,
Butyricicoccus, Sporobacter, Succinivibrio, and Treponema and correspondingly depleted in Biﬁdobacterium,
Bacteroides, Blautia, Dorea, unclassiﬁed Lachnospiraceae, Roseburia, Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcus, and
unclassiﬁed Erysipelotrichaceae. These two studies showed that African gut microbiota have clearly
an enterotype Prevotella (enterotype II); the African diet rich in millet/sorghum + local vegetables
containing very few lipids and animal proteins allows a mucine degradation in synergy with
Desulfovibrionaceae. European gut microbiota (Western diet) have principally an enterotype Bacteroides
(enterotype I): the European diet rich in lipids and animal proteins allows energy production from
carbohydrates and proteins through fermentation [13]. David et al. [59] compared plant-based diet
microbiome (high ﬁbers and low fats and proteins) with animal-based diet microbiome (low ﬁbers
and high fats and proteins) and respective changes in microbiome on either diet and demonstrated
that a shift toward an animal-based diet increases the abundance of bile-tolerant microorganisms
(Alistipes, Bilophila, and Bacteroides) and decreases the levels of Firmicutes that metabolize dietary plant
polysaccharides (Roseburia, Eubacterium rectale, and Ruminococcus bromii). Moreover, microbial activity
trades off between carbohydrate and protein fermentation when the type of diet respectively changes.
This change occurred only one day after the diet reached the distal gut microbiota. David et al. [59]
showed that diet alters human microbiota rapidly and reproducibly.

2.2.4. Exercise Frequency

Bai et al. [50] suggested associations of exercise frequency with gut microbiota composition
of young children and adolescents. Daily exercise increases gut microbial diversity (Table 2) with
a Firmicutes enrichment microbiota: Clostridiales, Roseburia, Lachnospiraceae, and Erysipelotrichaceae
by producing more SCFAs which may increase the expression of tight junction proteins in colon
epithelia to heighten the resistance of the intestinal barrier, reduce mucosal permeability, and inhibit
inﬂammatory cytokines [50,60].

Clarke et al. [61] explored exercise and protein consumption for their impact on the gut microbiota
of professional athletes from an international rugby union squad. A higher alpha diversity of gut
microorganisms representing more than 20 distinct phyla has been demonstrated in athletes compared
with high and low BMI controls [61]. Indeed, this study showed that exercise increases gut microbial
diversity (Table 2) and protein consumption positively correlates with microbial diversity. These results
provide evidence for a beneﬁcial impact of exercise on gut microbiota diversity, but also indicate that the
relationship exercise–microbiota diversity is probably related to accompanying dietary extremes [61].

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

11 of 22

Table 2. Microbiota variations between individuals.

Gut Microbiota Abundance

Actinobacteria

Bacteroidetes

Firmicutes

Proteobacteria

Verrucomicrobia

Euryarchaeota

Spirochaetes

Bacteria
Diversity

Ref.

Slackia

Bacteroides (1)
Parabacteroides

Methanobrevibacter
smithii

I

II

Enterotype

Eggerthella

Prevotella (1)

III

Gordonibacter

Sphingobacterium

Overweight to
obese level

Biﬁdobacterium↑
B. vulgatus↓

Bacteroidetes *↓

Geobacter

Desulfovibrionaceae *
Rhodospirillum
Helicobacter
Escherichia
Shigella

Proteobacteria *↑

Enterobacteriaceae *↑

Akkermansia
muciniphila

Akkermansia
muciniphila

Bacteroides↓

Succinivibrionaceae *↑

Akkermansiaceae↓

Methanobrevibacter
smithii↑

BMI level (among
children and
adolescents)

Exercise frequency

Underweight level

High performance
sport

Children and
adolescents daily
exercise

Type of diet,
communities,
climate, and
geographical sites

High-ﬁber diet
(African diet)

Biﬁdobacterium↓

Prevotella↑
Bacteroides↓

Succinivibrio↑

Treponema↑

↑

High-fat and
animal protein diet
(Western diet)

Actinobacteria *↑

Bacteroides↑
Alistipes↑
Barnesiella↑

Roseburia↓
Eubacterium rectale↓
Ruminococcus bromii↓
* Unknown genera. (1) Main genera.

Bilophila↑

Clostridiales *
Alkaliphilus
Lactobacillus
Catenibacterium

Veillonella
Ruminococcaceae *
Holdemania
Peptostreptococcaceae *
Staphylococcus
Leuconostoc

Ruminococcus (1)
Staphylococcus
Marvinbryantia
Symbiobacterium
Ruminococcaceae *
Dialister

Lactobacillus↑
Firmicutes *↑

Roseburia spp.↓
Ruminococcus↓
Clostridium spp.↓

Ruminococcaceae *↑
Lactobacillus↓
Lactobacillaceae *↓

Clostridiales↑
Roseburia↑
Lachnospiraceae↑
Erysipelotrichaceae↑

Eubacterium↑
Oscillibacter↑
Butyricicoccus↑
Sporobacter↑
Blautia↓
Dorea↓
Lachnospiraceae *↓
Roseburia↓
Faecalibacterium↓
Ruminococcus↓
Erysipelotrichaceae *↓

[46,47,49,50]

[46,51]

[13]

[57]

[46]

[53,55]

↓

↓

↑

↑

↓

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

12 of 22

3. Gut Microbiota Variations in Health and Disease

Gut microbiota composition is highly variable. The variation itself is considered as physiological in
the context of healthy gut microbiota, according to age, ethnicity, lifestyle, and dietary habits. However,
these physiological gut microbiota variations have huge implications in intestinal and extra-intestinal
disorders. Indeed, dysbiosis is often deﬁned as an alteration of gut microbiota composition and a
cause or a consequence of disorders. It is often difﬁcult to ascertain whether the change is beneﬁcial
or detrimental. As for the human conditions, changes represent a challenge for a better adaptation
in a new context and may potentiate resilience. However, a chronic external stimulation may be
stressful and disruptive for an unstructured ecosystem. We will discuss the correlations between
several diseases and alterations of gut microbiota composition.

3.1. Intestinal Disorders

3.1.1. Irritable Bowel Syndrome

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is one of the most common gastrointestinal (GI) disorders and the

bacterial role has been largely investigated [62].

The study [63] of fecal and colonic mucosal biopsy samples from IBS patients and healthy
controls demonstrated a signiﬁcant reduction in the concentration of aerobic bacteria such as the
Lactobacillus species in fecal samples from IBS patients compared to healthy controls. Another study [64]
demonstrated that the microbial communities of IBS patients are enriched in Proteobacteria and
Firmicutes but reduced in Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes compared to controls. In particular, 16S
rDNA sequences belonging to the family Lachnospiraceae within the phylum Firmicutes are in greater
abundance in the IBS clone library [64].

Other studies [62,65] conﬁrmed and revealed some phyla and genera variations in IBS patients
compared to healthy controls: an increase in the Firmicutes-to Bacteroidetes-ratio, a decrease in some
Firmicutes families (Lactobacilli, Faecalibacterium) and the Actinobacteria population (Biﬁdobacteria,
Collinsella), and an increase in some Firmicutes families (Veillonella, Streptococci, and Ruminococcus spp.)
and in Proteobacteria (Enterobacteriaceae spp.). Therefore, these ﬁndings demonstrated a loss of
microbial richness that may be involved in amino acid synthesis, in the integrity of cellular junctions,
and in inﬂammatory response, suggesting a weakness of the epithelial barrier functions partially
explaining IBS symptoms.

3.1.2. Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease (IBD)

Inﬂammatory bowel diseases (IBD) gather idiopathic, chronic, and relapsing inﬂammatory

conditions of the gastrointestinal tract including ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CRD).

The ﬁndings of Frank et al. [66] indicated a diminution of Lachnospiraceae and Bacteroidetes
microbial populations and an increase in Proteobacteria families in IBD patients compared to control
gut microbiota.

Gut microbiota variations appear to be different between UC and CRD. Indeed, a decreased
abundance of the butyrate-producing bacteria Roseburia hominis and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii has
been observed in UC patients relative to controls [67], whereas the opposite has been observed in CRD
patients, who are provided with increased Faecalibacterium prausnitzii levels in addition to a reduced
overall diversity [68].

In the case of CRD patients, another study [69] demonstrated a decrease in Dialister invisus,
an uncharacterized species of Clostridium spp., in Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and in Biﬁdobacterium
adolescentis and an increase in Ruminococcus gnavus.

Sokol et al. [70] conﬁrmed the reduction of F. prausnitzii in CRD patients and also demonstrated
that an oral administration of live Faecalibacterium prausnitzii reduced the severity of colitis and tended
to correct the dysbiosis. These results suggest that counterbalancing dysbiosis using Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii as a probiotic is a promising strategy in CRD treatment [70].

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

13 of 22

These results do not demonstrate a causal relationship between microbial dysbiosis and IBD
pathophysiology, but they rather suggest that gut microbial unbalances are likely to contribute to
disease severity.

3.1.3. Celiac Disease

Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic intestinal inﬂammatory disorder due to an aberrant immune

response to dietary gluten proteins in genetically predisposed individuals.

Gut microbiota variations may play a signiﬁcant role in the pathogenesis of CD; indeed, dysbiosis
is linked with an inﬂammatory milieu in celiac patients [71]. Celiac disease is caused by the interplay
between gluten, genetic factors, and environmental factors such as gut microbiota [72].

Studies [73–76] have demonstrated that Biﬁdobacterium spp., Biﬁdobacterium longum, Clostridium
histolyticum, C. lituseburense, and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii group proportions are less abundant in
untreated CD patients than in healthy controls. Indeed, patients with CD show a reduction in beneﬁcial
species (Lactobacillus and Biﬁdobacterium) and an increase in those potentially pathogenic (Bacteroides
and E. coli) as compared to healthy subjects [74]. The mucosal layer of CD patients fails to stabilize the
gut microbiota and fails to prevent the host from the invasion of harmful antigens and pathogens [71].
This dysbiosis is reduced, but may still remain, after a gluten-free diet [71,73].

3.1.4. Colorectal Cancer (CRC)

Colorectal cancer is the third most common cause of cancer mortality in the world [77].
Structural fecal bacterial segregations between CRC patients and healthy volunteers have been
demonstrated [78]. The gut microbiota of the CRC patients were enriched in Bacteroides fragilis,
Enterococcus, Escherichia/Shigella, Klebsiella, Streptococcus, and Peptostreptococcus and were impoverished
in Roseburia and other butyrate-producing bacteria of the family Lachnospiraceae [78]. The gut microbiota
of the healthy volunteers were enriched in Bacteroides vulgatus and Bacteroides uniformis. Therefore,
gut microbiota variations, such as a reduction of butyrate producers and an increase in opportunistic
pathogens, constitute a major structural imbalance of gut microbiota in CRC patients.

Shen et al. [79] demonstrated a higher abundance of Proteobacteria and a lower abundance of
Bacteroidetes in CRC cases compared to controls. At the genus level, CRC cases showed an increased
abundance of Dorea spp. and Faecalibacterium spp. and lower proportions of Bacteroides spp. and
Coprococcus spp. than controls.

Genomic analysis identiﬁed an association of Fusobacterium spp. with colorectal cancer [80];
the microbiota of CRC patients were enriched in Fusobacterium spp., whereas the Bacteroidetes and
Firmicutes phyla were depleted. Furthermore, Fusobacterium spp. may contribute to tumorigenesis by
an inﬂammatory-mediated mechanism [80], but the precise role of Fusobacteria in colorectal carcinoma
pathogenesis requires further investigation.

All these ﬁndings reveal alterations in CRC microbiota that may contribute to the etiology of
colorectal cancer. The extension of these ﬁndings may lead to strategies able to manipulate microbiota
to prevent colorectal cancer as well as to identify individuals at high risk [79].

3.2. Extra-Intestinal Disorders

We highlighted that the pivotal relationship between gut microbiota and the host is involved in
many intestinal disorders. Recent advances in research have demonstrated that this mutualistic gut
microbiota–host relationship appears to play a critical role for many extra-intestinal diseases such
as metabolic diseases and neurological disorders with “gut–brain axis” interactions [81], but also
for complex multifactorial diseases such as age-related macular degeneration with “gut–retina axis”
interactions [82].

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

14 of 22

3.2.1. Metabolic Disorders

Obesity

Animal studies constitute the majority of causative evidence linking changes in microbial
composition to obesity while, in humans, data are more variable. In addition, although the majority of
mouse gut species are unique, the mouse and human microbiota are similar at the division level, with
Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes dominating [83].

The analysis [83] of gut microbiota of genetically obese ob/ob mice and lean mice all fed the same
polysaccharide-rich diet revealed a lower relative abundance (50%) of Bacteroidetes in obese ob/ob
mice, whereas the Firmicutes are correspondingly higher. Indeed, higher numbers of Ruminococcaceae
and Rikenellaceae have been observed in leptin-resistant obese (leptin-promoting satiety) and diabetic
mice (db/db) compared with their lean littermates [84].
In addition, the higher abundance of
Ruminococcaceae and Rikenellaceae in mice fed a high-fat diet is not only dependent on the ingested
diet but is also closely linked with obesity and type 2 diabetes [85]. Furthermore, the association
between Desulfovibrionaceae abundance and obesity and type 2 diabetes has been demonstrated [86,87].
Other studies [50,88] conﬁrmed the role of Proteobacteria in obesity by producing pro-inﬂammatory
molecules such as lipopolysaccharides and helping to harvest energy and increase host fat storage [88].
On the contrary, researchers [86,89] have recently demonstrated that Akkermansia muciniphila,
a mucin-degrading bacteria living in the mucus layer [90], decreases in both genetically and
diet-induced obese mice.

All these studies highlight the ﬁnding that obesity is associated with changes in the composition
of gut microbiota including lower species diversity and shifts in the abundance of genes involved
in metabolism. These gut microbiota variations affect the microbiome which has an increased
capacity to harvest energy from the diet and these changes are transmissible [91]. Gut microbiota
can be considered as a contributing factor to the pathophysiology of obesity and may have potential
therapeutic implications.

Type 2 Diabetes (T2D)

Several studies [92,93] demonstrated that gut microbiota composition is altered in patients
suffering from T2D, but it is not clear whether these changes are a cause or simply a consequence of
the disorder.

Larsen et al. [92] showed that the proportions of phyla Firmicutes and Clostridia are signiﬁcantly
reduced in the T2D sufferers compared to the healthy group. Furthermore, the ratios of Bacteroidetes
to Firmicutes, the ratios of Bacteroides-Prevotella, and Betaproteobacteria are highly increased in T2D
sufferers compared to healthy patients and positively correlated with plasma glucose.

A metagenome-wide association study of gut microbiota of T2D Chinese sufferers [94]
demonstrated that patients with type 2 diabetes were characterized by a decrease in butyrate-producing
bacteria such as Roseburia spp. and an increase in various opportunistic pathogens (Clostridium spp.,
Bacteroides caccae) as well as an enrichment of other microbial functions conferring sulfate reduction
(Desulfovibrionaceae spp.).

Gut microbiota interact with various host sensing and signaling pathways, leading to a modulation
of the endocrine system, immune responses, nervous system activity, and hence, the predisposition
to metabolic diseases. Gut microbiota dysbiosis drives and implies new therapeutic strategies for
diabetes and related metabolic diseases [95].

3.2.2. Central Nervous System (CNS)-Related Disorders

The brain and the gut are connected via the gut–brain axis with bidirectional interactions
between the central nervous system, the enteric nervous system, and the gastrointestinal tract.
These bidirectional interactions enable the brain to inﬂuence gastrointestinal functions as well as
immune functions.

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

15 of 22

Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Diseases

Today, over 46 million people live with dementia worldwide [96]. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and

Parkinson’s disease (PD) are considered the most common forms of dementia in the elderly.

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic, rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated
with impaired cognition and cerebral accumulation of amyloid-beta peptides. Cattaneo et al. [97]
demonstrated that an increase in Escherichia/Shigella abundance and a reduction of E. rectale abundance
are possibly associated with a peripheral inﬂammatory state in patients with cognitive impairment
and brain amyloidosis. Vogt et al. [98] compared gut microbiota composition from patients with and
without a diagnosis of AD and revealed a lower microbial diversity compositionally distinct from
control-age and sex-matched individuals, with a decrease in Firmicutes and Biﬁdobacterium abundance
and an increase in Bacteroidetes abundance in the microbiome of AD participants.

The gut microbiota variations are also involved in the pathogenesis of PD. Hopfner et al. [99]
suggested, in agreement with most other studies [100–102], an increase in Lactobacillaceae abundance
in Parkinson patients compared to healthy controls. Moreover, none of the differences in alpha
diversity has been observed between PD cases and controls, whereas beta diversity has been
revealed for three bacterial families (Lactobacillaceae, Barnesiellaceae, and Enterococcaceae) [99]. PD is
associated with changes in gut microbiota and this gut microbiota dysbiosis may be the mechanism of
neuroinﬂammation that leads to PD pathology [99].

Hepatic Encephalopathy

Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is a complication of cirrhosis and is deﬁned as a spectrum
of neuropsychiatric abnormalities in patients with liver dysfunctions. Bajaj et al. [103] linked
the gut microbiota composition with cognition and inﬂammation in HE. Fecal microbiota of
cirrhotics were signiﬁcantly higher in Enterobacteriaceae, Alcaligenaceae, and Fusobacteriaceae and
lower in Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae compared with controls [103]; moreover, altered higher
levels of Veillonellaceae were found in HE patients compared with cirrhotics without HE. In the
cirrhosis group, Alcaligenaceae and Porphyromonadaceae were positively correlated with cognitive
impairment. Fusobacteriaceae, Veillonellaceae, and Enterobacteriaceae were positively and Ruminococcaceae
was negatively related to inﬂammation. Thus, cirrhosis, especially when complicated with HE,
is associated with signiﬁcant gut microbiota alterations compared with healthy individuals. Speciﬁc
bacterial families (Alcaligenaceae, Porphyromonadaceae, and Enterobacteriaceae) are strongly associated
with cognition and inﬂammation in HE [103].

Autism Spectrum Disorders

Compared with the gut microbiota of children without ASD, the gut microbiota of children
with ASD is less diverse and exhibits lower levels of Biﬁdobacterium and Firmicutes and higher levels
of Lactobacillus, Clostridium, Bacteroidetes, Desulfovibrio, Caloramator, and Sarcina [104–107]. A study
by Wang et al. [108] showed a decrease in Biﬁdobacterium spp. and mucolytic bacteria Akkermansia
muciniphila in the gut microbiota of autism subjects compared to control subjects.

Williams et al. [109] found an increase in the Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio and a signiﬁcant
increase in Sutterella compared to their abundance in controls. These ﬁndings demonstrated that
gut microbiota dysbiosis has close relationships with gastrointestinal and behavioral manifestations
of autism.

Stress

The bidirectional interactions of gut–brain mean that the brain can also alter gut microbiota
composition [110]. A model of social disruption among adult mice [111] demonstrated that exposure
to stress results in substantial changes in gut microbiota composition: a decrease in Bacteroides spp.
abundance and an increase in Clostridium spp. abundance have been observed in stress-induced mice

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

16 of 22

relative to controls. The mechanisms by which stress inﬂuences gut microbiota composition are unclear
but include microbial habitat alterations following stress-induced changes in intestinal mobility and
mucin secretion [110,112].

Other studies [62] revealed that chronic psychological stress is reﬂected in the microbiota
composition. Indeed, depression due to chronic stressful life events is associated with an increase in
Enterobacteriaceae, whereas psychological stress is associated with a reduction in Lactobacilli spp. and
an increase in Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas spp.

Gut microbiota variations are closely associated with the onset of these neurological disorders,

and the gut bacterial communities may be a target for therapeutic interventions.

4. Conclusions

Each healthy human is provided with unique gut microbiota. Core native microbiota are shaped
in early life (4–36 months) by gut maturation developing from enterotype, birth gestational age, type
of delivery, methods of milk feeding, weaning period, lifestyle, and dietary and cultural habits. After a
child reaches 2–3 years old, a relative stability in gut microbiota composition has been demonstrated.
Richness and diversity of gut microbiota shaped in early life characterize a healthy gut microbiota
composition. However, this optimal healthy gut microbiota composition is different for each individual.
Throughout life, the richer and more diverse the microbiota, the better they will withstand
external threats. Indeed, gut microbiota represent a changing ecosystem that is severely tested by
many factors such as unbalanced diet, stress, antibiotic use, or diseases. A healthy host–microorganism
balance must be respected in order to optimally perform metabolic and immune functions and prevent
disease development. Indeed, disturbances to the delicate host–microbe relationship may disrupt the
development of the immune system, which may in turn result in diseases [113]. Although the role of
gut microbiota is still poorly understood, the close association between gut microbiota dysbiosis and
intestinal and extra-intestinal disorders has been demonstrated. This is the reason why dysbiosis can
be considered as a biomarker of such disorders and that the study of gut microbiota balances shall be
one of the priorities for future therapies to prevent and treat diseases.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, E.R. and M.C.M.; Data Research, M.C.; Data Curation, M.C.;
Writing—Original Draft Preparation, P.R.; Writing—Review & Editing, E.R. and M.C.M.; Visualization, G.A.D.M.;
Supervision, F.F. and A.G.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.
2.

3.

5.

Thursby, E.; Juge, N. Introduction to the human gut microbiota. Biochem. J. 2017, 474, 1823–1836. [CrossRef]
Ley, R.E.; Turnbaugh, P.J.; Klein, S.; Gordon, J.I. Microbial ecology: Human gut microbes associated with
obesity. Nature 2006, 444, 1022–1023. [CrossRef]
Valdes, A.M.; Walter, J.; Segal, E.; Spector, T.D. Role of the gut microbiota in nutrition and health. BMJ 2018,
361, 36–44. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

4. Moore, W.E.; Holdeman, L.V. Human fecal ﬂora: The normal ﬂora of 20 Japanese-Hawaiians. Appl. Microbiol.

1974, 27, 961–979. [PubMed]
Poretsky, R.; Rodriguez-R, L.M.; Luo, C.; Tsementzi, D.; Konstantinidis, K.T. Strengths and limitations of 16S
rRNA gene amplicon sequencing in revealing temporal microbial community dynamics. PLoS ONE 2014,
9, e93827. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

6. Mizrahi-Man, O.; Davenport, E.R.; Gilad, Y. Taxonomic classiﬁcation of bacterial 16S rRNA genes using
short sequencing reads: Evaluation of effective study designs. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e53608. [CrossRef]
7. Human Microbiome Jumpstart Reference Strains Consortium; Nelson, K.E.; Weinstock, G.M.; Highlander, S.K.;
Worley, K.C.; Creasy, H.H.; Wortman, J.R.; Rusch, D.B.; Mitreva, M.; Sodergren, E.; et al. A catalog of reference
genomes from the human microbiome. Science 2010, 328, 994–999. [CrossRef]

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

17 of 22

8.

Gill, S.R.; Pop, M.; Deboy, R.T.; Eckburg, P.B.; Turnbaugh, P.J.; Samuel, B.S.; Gordon, J.I.; Relman, D.A.;
Fraser-Liggett, C.M.; Nelson, K.E. Metagenomic analysis of the human distal gut microbiome. Science 2006,
312, 1355–1359. [CrossRef]
Luckey, T.D. Introduction to intestinal microecology. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1972, 25, 1292–1294. [CrossRef]
9.
10. Khosravi, A.; Mazmanian, S.K. Disruption of the gut microbiome as a risk factor for microbial infections.

11. Brestoff, J.R.; Artis, D. Commensal bacteria at the interface of host metabolism and the immune system.

Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2013, 16, 221–227. [CrossRef]

Nat. Immunol. 2013, 14, 676–684. [CrossRef]

12. Laterza, L.; Rizzatti, G.; Gaetani, E.; Chiusolo, P.; Gasbarrini, A. The gut microbiota and immune system
relationship in human graft-versus-host disease. Mediterr. J. Hematol. Infect. Dis. 2016, 8, e2016025. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

13. Arumugam, M.; Raes, J.; Pelletier, E.; Le Paslier, D.; Yamada, T.; Mende, D.R.; Fernandes, G.R.; Tap, J.;
Bruls, T.; Batto, J.M.; et al. Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome. Nature 2011, 473, 174–180. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Flint, H.J.; Scott, K.P.; Louis, P.; Duncan, S.H. The role of the gut microbiota in nutrition and health. Nat. Rev.
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2012, 9, 577–589. [CrossRef]

14.

15. Arboleya, S.; Binetti, A.; Salazar, N.; Fernández, N.; Solís, G.; Hernández-Barranco, A.; Margolles, A.;
de Los Reyes-Gavilán, C.G.; Gueimonde, M. Establishment and development of intestinal microbiota in
preterm neonates. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 2012, 79, 763–772. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

16. Ren, S.; Hui, Y.; Obelitz-Ryom, K.; Brandt, A.B.; Kot, W.; Nielsen, D.S.; Thymann, T.; Sangild, P.T.;
Nguyen, D.N. Neonatal gut and immune maturation is determined more by postnatal age than by
post-conceptional age in moderately preterm pigs. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 2018, 315,
G855–G867. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

17. Butel, M.J.; Suau, A.; Campeotto, F.; Magne, F.; Aires, J.; Ferraris, L.; Kalach, N.; Leroux, B.; Dupont, C. Conditions
of bifidobacterial colonization in preterm infants: A prospective analysis. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2007, 44,
577–582. [CrossRef]

18. Gabrielli, O.; Zampini, L.; Galeazzi, T.; Padella, L.; Santoro, L.; Peila, C.; Giuliani, F.; Bertino, E.; Fabris, C.;
Coppa, G.V. Preterm milk oligosaccharides during the ﬁrst month of lactation. Pediatrics 2011, 128,
e1520–e1531. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

19. Underwood, M.A.; Gaerlan, S.; De Leoz, M.L.; Dimapasoc, L.; Kalanetra, K.M.; Lemay, D.G.; German, J.B.;
Mills, D.A.; Lebrilla, C.B. Human milk oligosaccharides in premature infants: Absorption, excretion, and
inﬂuence on the intestinal microbiota. Pediatr. Res. 2015, 78, 670–677. [CrossRef]

20. Praticò, G.; Capuani, G.; Tomassini, A.; Baldassarre, M.E.; Delﬁni, M.; Miccheli, A. Exploring human breast

milk composition by NMR-based metabolomics. Nat. Prod. Res. 2014, 28, 95–101. [CrossRef]

21. Bering, S.B. Human milk oligosaccharides to prevent gut dysfunction and necrotizing enterocolitis in preterm

neonates. Nutrients 2018, 10, 1461. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

22. Mastromarino, P.; Capobianco, D.; Campagna, G.; Laforgia, N.; Drimaco, P.; Dileone, A.; Baldassarre, M.E.
Correlation between lactoferrin and beneﬁcial microbiota in breast milk and infant’s feces. Biometals 2014, 27,
1077–1086. [CrossRef]
Salminen, S.; Gibson, G.R.; McCartney, A.L.; Isolauri, E. Inﬂuence of mode of delivery on gut microbiota
composition in seven year old children. Gut 2004, 53, 1388–1389. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

23.

24. Dominguez-Bello, M.G.; Costello, E.K.; Contreras, M.; Magris, M.; Hidalgo, G.; Fierer, N.; Knight, R. Delivery
mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the initial microbiota across multiple body habitats in newborns.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 11971–11975. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

25. Biasucci, G.; Benenati, B.; Morelli, L.; Bessi, E.; Boehm, G. Cesarean delivery may affect the early biodiversity

of intestinal bacteria. J. Nutr. 2008, 138, 1796S–1800S. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

26. Mueller, N.T.; Bakacs, E.; Combellick, J.; Grigoryan, Z.; Dominguez-Bello, M.G. The infant microbiome

development: Mom matters. Trends Mol. Med. 2015, 21, 109–117. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

27. Pantoja-Feliciano, I.G.; Clemente, J.C.; Costello, E.K.; Perez, M.E.; Blaser, M.J.; Knight, R.; Dominguez-Bello, M.G.
Biphasic assembly of the murine intestinal microbiota during early development. ISME J. 2013, 7, 1112–1115.
[CrossRef]

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

18 of 22

28. Grönlund, M.M.; Lehtonen, O.P.; Eerola, E.; Kero, P. Fecal microflora in healthy infants born by different methods
of delivery: Permanent changes in intestinal flora after cesarean delivery. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 1999, 28,
19–25. [CrossRef]

29. Azad, M.B.; Konya, T.; Maughan, H.; Guttman, D.S.; Field, C.J.; Chari, R.S.; Sears, M.R.; Becker, A.B.;
Scott, J.A.; Kozyrskyj, A.L. Gut microbiota of healthy Canadian infants: Proﬁles by mode of delivery and
infant diet at 4 months. CMAJ 2013, 185, 385–394. [CrossRef]
Sevelsted, A.; Stokholm, J.; Bønnelykke, K.; Bisgaard, H. Cesarean section and chronic immune disorders.
Pediatrics 2015, 135, e92–e98. [CrossRef]

30.

31. Chen, G.; Chiang, W.L.; Shu, B.C.; Guo, Y.L.; Chiou, S.T.; Chiang, T.L. Associations of caesarean delivery
and the occurrence of neurodevelopmental disorders, asthma or obesity in childhood based on Taiwan birth
cohort study. BMJ Open 2017, 7, e017086. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

32. Penders, J.; Thijs, C.; Vink, C.; Stelma, F.F.; Snijders, B.; Kummeling, I.; van den Brandt, P.A.; Stobberingh, E.E.
Factors inﬂuencing the composition of the intestinal microbiota in early infancy. Pediatrics 2006, 118, 511–521.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

33. Bezirtzoglou, E.; Tsiotsias, A.; Welling, G.W. Microbiota proﬁle in feces of breast- and formula-fed newborns
by using ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Anaerobe 2011, 17, 478–482. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Roger, L.C.; Costabile, A.; Holland, D.T.; Hoyles, L.; McCartney, A.L. Examination of faecal Biﬁdobacterium
populations in breast- and formula-fed infants during the ﬁrst 18 months of life. Microbiology 2010, 156,
3329–3341. [CrossRef]

35. Marcobal, A.; Barboza, M.; Froehlich, J.W.; Block, D.E.; German, J.B.; Lebrilla, C.B.; Mills, D.A. Consumption
of human milk oligosaccharides by gut-related microbes. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2010, 58, 5334–5340. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Sakurama, H.; Kiyohara, M.; Wada, J.; Honda, Y.; Yamaguchi, M.; Fukiya, S.; Yokota, A.; Ashida, H.;
Kumagai, H.; Kitaoka, M.; et al. Lacto-N-biosidase encoded by a novel gene of Biﬁdobacterium longum
subspecies longum shows unique substrate speciﬁcity and requires a designated chaperone for its active
expression. J. Biol. Chem. 2013, 288, 25194–25206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

36.

37. Matsuki, T.; Yahagi, K.; Mori, H.; Matsumoto, H.; Hara, T.; Tajima, S.; Ogawa, E.; Kodama, H.; Yamamoto, K.;
Yamada, T.; et al. A key genetic factor for fucosyllactose utilization affects infant gut microbiota development.
Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11939. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

38. Yaron, S.; Shachar, D.; Abramas, L.; Riskin, A.; Bader, D.; Litmanovitz, I.; Bar-Yoseph, F.; Cohen, T.; Levi, L.;
Lifshitz, Y.; et al. Effect of high β-palmitate content in infant formula on the intestinal microbiota of term
infants. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2013, 56, 376–381. [CrossRef]

39. Mastromarino, P.; Capobianco, D.; Miccheli, A.; Praticò, G.; Campagna, G.; Laforgia, N.; Capursi, T.;
Baldassarre, M.E. Administration of a multistrain probiotic product (VSL#3) to women in the perinatal
period differentially affects breast milk beneﬁcial microbiota in relation to mode of delivery. Pharmacol. Res.
2015, 95, 63–70. [CrossRef]
Fallani, M.; Amarri, S.; Uusijarvi, A.; Adam, R.; Khanna, S.; Aguilera, M.; Gil, A.; Vieites, J.M.; Norin, E.;
Young, D.; et al. Determinants of the human infant intestinal microbiota after the introduction of ﬁrst
complementary foods in infant samples from ﬁve European centres. Microbiology 2011, 157, 1385–1392.
[CrossRef]

40.

41. Tanaka, M.; Nakayama, J. Development of the gut microbiota in infancy and its impact on health in later life.

Allergol. Int. 2017, 66, 515–522. [CrossRef]

42. Tidjani Alou, M.; Lagier, J.C.; Raoult, D. Diet inﬂuence on the gut microbiota and dysbiosis related to

nutritional disorders. Hum. Microbiome J. 2016, 1, 3–11. [CrossRef]

43. Yatsunenko, T.; Rey, F.E.; Manary, M.J.; Trehan, I.; Dominguez-Bello, M.G.; Contreras, M.; Magris, M.;
Hidalgo, G.; Baldassano, R.N.; Anokhin, A.P.; et al. Human gut microbiome viewed across age and
geography. Nature 2012, 486, 222–227. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

44. Toshitaka, O.; Kumiko, K.; Hirosuke, S.; Nanami, H.; Sachiko, T.; Jin-Zhong, X.; Fumiaki, A.; Ro, O.
Age-related changes in gut microbiota composition from newborn to centenarian: A cross-sectional study.
BMC Microbiol. 2016, 16, 90.

45. Guigoz, Y.; Doré, J.; Schiffrin, E.J. The inﬂammatory status of old age can be nurtured from the intestinal

environment. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 2008, 11, 13–20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

19 of 22

46. Pérez-Cobas, A.E.; Artacho, A.; Knecht, H.; Ferrús, M.L.; Friedrichs, A.; Ott, S.J.; Moya, A.; Latorre, A.;
Gosalbes, M.J. Differential effects of antibiotic therapy on the structure and function of human gut microbiota.
PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e80201. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Iizumi, T.; Battaglia, T.; Ruiz, V.; Perez, G.I. Gut microbiome and antibiotics. Arch. Med. Res. 2017, 48,
727–734. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

47.

48. Dethlefsen, L.; Relman, D.A. Incomplete recovery and individualized responses of the human distal gut
microbiota to repeated antibiotic perturbation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011, 108, 4554–4561. [CrossRef]
49. Lozupone, C.A.; Stombaugh, J.I.; Gordon, J.I.; Jansson, J.K.; Knight, R. Diversity, stability and resilience of

the human gut microbiota. Nature 2012, 489, 220–230. [CrossRef]

50. Bai, J.; Hu, Y.; Bruner, D.W. Composition of gut microbiota and its association with body mass index and
lifestyle factors in a cohort of 7–18 years old children from the American Gut Project. Pediatr. Obes. 2018.
[CrossRef]

51. Karlsson, C.L.; Onnerfält, J.; Xu, J.; Molin, G.; Ahrné, S.; Thorngren-Jerneck, K. The microbiota of the gut
in preschool children with normal and excessive body weight. Obesity 2012, 20, 2257–2261. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

52. Yun, Y.; Kim, H.N.; Kim, S.E.; Heo, S.G.; Chang, Y.; Ryu, S.; Shin, H.; Kim, H.L. Comparative analysis of
gut microbiota associated with body mass index in a large Korean cohort. BMC Microbiol. 2017, 17, 151.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

53. Bervoets, L.; Van Hoorenbeeck, K.; Kortleven, I.; Van Noten, C.; Hens, N.; Vael, C.; Goossens, H.;
Desager, K.N.; Vankerckhoven, V. Differences in gut microbiota composition between obese and lean
children: A cross-sectional study. Gut Pathog. 2013, 5, 10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

54. Riva, A.; Borgo, F.; Lassandro, C.; Verduci, E.; Morace, G.; Borghi, E.; Berry, D. Pediatric obesity is associated
with an altered gut microbiota and discordant shifts in Firmicutes populations. Environ. Microbiol. 2017, 19,
95–105. [CrossRef]

55. Borgo, F.; Riva, A.; Benetti, A.; Casiraghi, M.C.; Bertelli, S.; Garbossa, S.; Anselmetti, S.; Scarone, S.;
Pontiroli, A.E.; Morace, G.; et al. Microbiota in anorexia nervosa: The triangle between bacterial species,
metabolites and psychological tests. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0179739. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

56. Wu, G.D.; Chen, J.; Hoffmann, C.; Bittinger, K.; Chen, Y.Y.; Keilbaugh, S.A.; Bewtra, M.; Knights, D.;
Walters, W.A.; Knight, R.; et al. Linking long-term dietary patterns with gut microbial enterotypes. Science
2011, 334, 105–108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

57. De Filippo, C.; Cavalieri, D.; Di Paola, M.; Ramazzotti, M.; Poullet, J.B.; Massart, S.; Collini, S.; Pieraccini, G.;
Lionetti, P. Impact of diet in shaping gut microbiota revealed by a comparative study in children from Europe
and rural Africa. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 14691–14696. [CrossRef]
Schnorr, S.L.; Candela, M.; Rampelli, S.; Centanni, M.; Consolandi, C.; Basaglia, G.; Turroni, S.; Biagi, E.;
Peano, C.; Severgnini, M.; et al. Gut microbiome of the Hadza hunter-gatherers. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3654.
[CrossRef]

58.

59. David, L.A.; Maurice, C.F.; Carmody, R.N.; Gootenberg, D.B.; Button, J.E.; Wolfe, B.E.; Ling, A.V.; Devlin, A.S.;
Varma, Y.; Fischbach, M.A.; et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature
2014, 505, 559–563. [CrossRef]

60. Monda, V.; Villano, I.; Messina, A.; Valenzano, A.; Esposito, T.; Moscatelli, F.; Viggiano, A.; Cibelli, G.;
Chiefﬁ, S.; Monda, M.; et al. Exercise modiﬁes the gut microbiota with positive health effects. Oxid. Med.
Cell. Longev. 2017, 3831972. [CrossRef]

61. Clarke, S.F.; Murphy, E.F.; O’Sullivan, O.; Lucey, A.J.; Humphreys, M.; Hogan, A.; Hayes, P.; O’Reilly, M.;
Jeffery, I.B.; Wood-Martin, R.; et al. Exercise and associated dietary extremes impact on gut microbial
diversity. Gut 2014, 63, 1913–1920. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

62. Bhattarai, Y.; Muniz Pedrogo, D.A.; Kashyap, P.C. Irritable bowel syndrome: A gut microbiota-related

disorder? Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 2017, 312, 52–62. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

63. Carroll, I.M.; Chang, Y.H.; Park, J.; Sartor, R.B.; Ringel, Y. Luminal and mucosal-associated intestinal
microbiota in patients with diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome. Gut Pathog. 2010, 2, 19.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

20 of 22

64. Krogius-Kurikka, L.; Lyra, A.; Malinen, E.; Aarnikunnas, J.; Tuimala, J.; Paulin, L.; Mäkivuokko, H.;
Kajander, K.; Palva, A. Microbial community analysis reveals high level phylogenetic alterations in the
overall gastrointestinal microbiota of diarrhoea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome sufferers. BMC
Gastroenterol. 2009, 9, 95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Salonen, A.; de Vos, W.M.; Palva, A. Gastrointestinal microbiota in irritable bowel syndrome: Present state
and perspectives. Microbiology 2010, 156, 3205–3215. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Frank, D.N.; St Amand, A.L.; Feldman, R.A.; Boedeker, E.C.; Harpaz, N.; Pace, N.R. Molecular-phylogenetic
characterization of microbial community imbalances in human inﬂammatory bowel diseases. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 2007, 104, 13780–13785. [CrossRef]

65.

66.

67. Machiels, K.; Joossens, M.; Sabino, J.; De Preter, V.; Arijs, I.; Eeckhaut, V.; Ballet, V.; Claes, K.; Van Immerseel, F.;
Verbeke, K.; et al. A decrease of the butyrate-producing species Roseburia hominis and Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii deﬁnes dysbiosis in patients with ulcerative colitis. Gut 2014, 63, 1275–1283. [CrossRef]

69.

68. Hansen, R.; Russell, R.K.; Reiff, C.; Louis, P.; McIntosh, F.; Berry, S.H.; Mukhopadhya, I.; Bisset, W.M.;
Barclay, A.R.; Bishop, J.; et al. Microbiota of de-novo pediatric IBD: Increased Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and
reduced bacterial diversity in Crohn’s but not in ulcerative colitis. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2012, 107, 1913–1922.
[CrossRef]
Joossens, M.; Huys, G.; Cnockaert, M.; De Preter, V.; Verbeke, K.; Rutgeerts, P.; Vandamme, P.; Vermeire, S.
Dysbiosis of the faecal microbiota in patients with Crohn’s disease and their unaffected relatives. Gut 2011,
60, 631–637. [CrossRef]
Sokol, H.; Pigneur, B.; Watterlot, L.; Lakhdari, O.; Bermúdez-Humarán, L.G.; Gratadoux, J.J.; Blugeon, S.;
Bridonneau, C.; Furet, J.P.; Corthier, G.; et al. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-inﬂammatory commensal
bacterium identiﬁed by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2008,
105, 16731–16736. [CrossRef]

70.

71. Marasco, G.; Di Biase, A.R.; Schiumerini, R.; Eusebi, L.H.; Iughetti, L.; Ravaioli, F.; Scaioli, E.; Colecchia, A.;

Festi, D. Gut microbiota and celiac disease. Dig. Dis. Sci. 2016, 61, 1461–1472. [CrossRef]

72. Chander, A.M.; Yadav, H.; Jain, S.; Bhadada, S.K.; Dhawan, D.K. Cross-talk between gluten, intestinal microbiota
and intestinal mucosa in celiac disease: Recent advances and basis of autoimmunity. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9,
2597. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

73. De Palma, G.; Nadal, I.; Medina, M.; Donat, E.; Ribes-Koninckx, C.; Calabuig, M.; Sanz, Y. Intestinal dysbiosis
and reduced immunoglobulin-coated bacteria associated with coeliac disease in children. BMC Microbiol.
2010, 10, 63. [CrossRef]

74. Nadal, I.; Donat, E.; Ribes-Koninckx, C.; Calabuig, M.; Sanz, Y. Imbalance in the composition of the duodenal
microbiota of children with coeliac disease. J. Med. Microbiol. 2007, 56, 1669–1674. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Collado, M.C.; Donat, E.; Ribes-Koninckx, C.; Calabuig, M.; Sanz, Y. Imbalances in faecal and duodenal
Biﬁdobacterium species composition inactive and non-active coeliac disease. BMC Microbiol. 2008, 8, 232.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

76. Collado, M.C.; Donat, E.; Ribes-Koninckx, C.; Calabuig, M.; Sanz, Y. Speciﬁc duodenal and faecal bacterial

77.

groups associated with paediatric coeliac disease. J. Clin. Pathol. 2009, 62, 264–269. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Jemal, A.; Bray, F.; Center, M.M.; Ferlay, J.; Ward, E.; Forman, D. Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J. Clin.
2011, 61, 69–90. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

78. Wang, T.; Cai, G.; Qiu, Y.; Fei, N.; Zhang, M.; Pang, X.; Jia, W.; Cai, S.; Zhao, L. Structural segregation of gut
microbiota between colorectal cancer patients and healthy volunteers. ISME J. 2012, 6, 320–329. [CrossRef]
Shen, X.J.; Rawls, J.F.; Randall, T.; Burcal, L.; Mpande, C.N.; Jenkins, N.; Jovov, B.; Abdo, Z.; Sandler, R.S.;
Keku, T.O. Molecular characterization of mucosal adherent bacteria and associations with colorectal
adenomas. Gut Microbes 2010, 1, 138–147. [CrossRef]

79.

80. Kostic, A.D.; Gevers, D.; Pedamallu, C.S.; Michaud, M.; Duke, F.; Earl, A.M.; Ojesina, A.I.; Jung, J.; Bass, A.J.;
Tabernero, J.; et al. Genomic analysis identiﬁes association of Fusobacterium with colorectal carcinoma.
Genome Res. 2012, 22, 292–298. [CrossRef]

81. Mayer, E.A.; Tillisch, K.; Gupta, A. Gut/brain axis and the microbiota. J. Clin. Investig. 2015, 125, 926–938.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

82. Rinninella, E.; Mele, M.C.; Merendino, N.; Cintoni, M.; Anselmi, G.; Caporossi, A.; Gasbarrini, A.;
Minnella, A.M. The role of diet, micronutrients and the gut microbiota in age-related macular degeneration:
New perspectives from the gut-retina axis. Nutrients 2018, 10, 1677. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

21 of 22

83. Ley, R.E.; Bäckhed, F.; Turnbaugh, P.; Lozupone, C.A.; Knight, R.D.; Gordon, J.I. Obesity alters gut microbial

ecology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2005, 102, 11070–11075. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

84. Geurts, L.; Lazarevic, V.; Derrien, M.; Everard, A.; Van Roye, M.; Knauf, C.; Valet, P.; Girard, M.;
Muccioli, G.G.; François, P. Altered gut microbiota and endocannabinoid system tone in obese and diabetic
leptin-resistant mice: Impact on apelin regulation in adipose tissue. Front. Microbiol. 2011, 2, 149. [CrossRef]
85. Kim, K.A.; Gu, W.; Lee, I.A.; Joh, E.H.; Kim, D.H. High fat diet-induced gut microbiota exacerbates
inﬂammation and obesity in mice via the TLR4 signaling pathway. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e47713. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

86. Cani, P.D. Gut microbiota and obesity: Lessons from the microbiome. Brief. Funct. Genom. 2013, 12, 381–387.

[CrossRef]

87. Zhang, C.; Zhang, M.; Wang, S.; Han, R.; Cao, Y.; Hua, W.; Mao, Y.; Zhang, X.; Pang, X.; Wei, C.; et al.
Interactions between gut microbiota, host genetics and diet relevant to development of metabolic syndromes
in mice. SME J. 2010, 4, 232–241. [CrossRef]

88. Rizzatti, G.; Lopetuso, L.R.; Gibiino, G.; Binda, C.; Gasbarrini, A. Proteobacteria: A common factor in human

diseases. Biomed. Res. Int. 2017, 9351507. [CrossRef]

89. Everard, A.; Belzer, C.; Geurts, L.; Ouwerkerk, J.P.; Druart, C.; Bindels, L.B.; Guiot, Y.; Derrien, M.;
Muccioli, G.G.; Delzenne, N.M.; et al. Cross-talk between Akkermansia muciniphila and intestinal epithelium
controls diet-induced obesity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2013, 110, 9066–9071. [CrossRef]

90. Derrien, M.; Vaughan, E.E.; Plugge, C.M.; de Vos, W.M. Akkermansia muciniphila gen. nov., sp. nov., a human

intestinal mucin-degrading bacterium. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 2004, 54, 1469–1476. [CrossRef]

91. Turnbaugh, P.J.; Ley, R.E.; Mahowald, M.A.; Magrini, V.; Mardis, E.R.; Gordon, J.I. An obesity-associated gut

microbiome with increased capacity for energy harvest. Nature 2006, 444, 1027–1031. [CrossRef]

92. Larsen, N.; Vogensen, F.K.; van den Berg, F.W.; Nielsen, D.S.; Andreasen, A.S.; Pedersen, B.K.; Al-Soud, W.A.;
Sørensen, S.J.; Hansen, L.H.; Jakobsen, M. Gut microbiota in human adults with type 2 diabetes differs from
non-diabetic adults. PLoS ONE 2010, 5, e9085. [CrossRef]

93. Walsh, C.J.; Guinane, C.M.; O’Toole, P.W.; Cotter, P.D. Beneﬁcial modulation of the gut microbiota. FEBS Lett.

2014, 588, 4120–4130. [CrossRef]

94. Qin, J.; Li, Y.; Cai, Z.; Li, S.; Zhu, J.; Zhang, F.; Liang, S.; Zhang, W.; Guan, Y.; Shen, D.; et al. A metagenome-wide

association study of gut microbiota in type 2 diabetes. Nature 2012, 490, 55–60. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

95. Li, X.; Watanabe, K.; Kimura, I. Gut microbiota dysbiosis drives and implies novel therapeutic strategies for

diabetes mellitus and related metabolic diseases. Front. Immunol. 2017, 8, 1882. [CrossRef]

96. Prince, M.; Wimo, A.; Guerchet, M.; Ali, G.C.; Wu, Y.T.; Prina, M. World Alzheimer Report 2015: The Global
Impact of Dementia: An Analysis of Prevalence, Incidence, Cost and Trends. Available online: https://www.
alz.co.uk/research/WorldAlzheimerReport2015.pdf (accessed on 1 November 2018).

97. Cattaneo, A.; Cattane, N.; Galluzzi, S.; Provasi, S.; Lopizzo, N.; Festari, C.; Ferrari, C.; Guerra, U.P.; Paghera, B.;
Muscio, C.; et al. Association of brain amyloidosis with pro-inﬂammatory gut bacterial taxa and peripheral
inﬂammation markers in cognitively impaired elderly. Neurobiol. Aging 2017, 49, 60–68. [CrossRef]

98. Vogt, N.M.; Kerby, R.L.; Dill-McFarland, K.A.; Harding, S.J.; Merluzzi, A.P.; Johnson, S.C.; Carlsson, C.M.;
Asthana, S.; Zetterberg, H.; Blennow, K.; et al. Gut microbiome alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep.
2017, 7, 13537. [CrossRef]

99. Hopfner, F.; Künstner, A.; Müller, S.H.; Künzel, S.; Zeuner, K.E.; Margraf, N.G.; Deuschl, G.; Baines, J.F.;
Kuhlenbäumer, G. Gut microbiota in Parkinson disease in a northern German cohort. Brain Res. 2017, 1667,
41–45. [CrossRef]

100. Hill-Burns, E.M.; Debelius, J.W.; Morton, J.T.; Wissemann, W.T.; Lewis, M.R.; Wallen, Z.D.; Peddada, S.D.;
Factor, S.A.; Molho, E.; Zabetian, C.P.; et al. Parkinson’s disease and Parkinson’s disease medications have
distinct signatures of the gut microbiome. Mov. Disord. 2017, 32, 739–749. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

101. Keshavarzian, A.; Green, S.J.; Engen, P.A.; Voigt, R.M.; Naqib, A.; Forsyth, C.B.; Mutlu, E.; Shannon, K.M.
Colonic bacterial composition in Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 2015, 30, 1351–1360. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Scheperjans, F.; Aho, V.; Pereira, P.A.; Koskinen, K.; Paulin, L.; Pekkonen, E.; Haapaniemi, E.; Kaakkola, S.;
Eerola-Rautio, J.; Pohja, M.; et al. Gut microbiota are related to Parkinson’s disease and clinical phenotype.
Mov. Disord. 2015, 30, 350–358. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

22 of 22

103. Bajaj, J.S.; Ridlon, J.M.; Hylemon, P.B.; Thacker, L.R.; Heuman, D.M.; Smith, S.; Sikaroodi, M.; Gillevet, P.M.
Linkage of gut microbiome with cognition in hepatic encephalopathy. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.
2012, 302, 168–175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

104. Finegold, S.M.; Molitoris, D.; Song, Y.; Liu, C.; Vaisanen, M.L.; Bolte, E.; McTeague, M.; Sandler, R.; Wexler, H.;
Marlowe, E.M.; et al. Gastrointestinal microﬂora studies in late-onset autism. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2002, 35,
S6–S16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

105. Finegold, S.M. Desulfovibrio species are potentially important in regressive autism. Med. Hypotheses 2011,

106. Finegold, S.M.; Downes, J.; Summanen, P.H. Microbiology of regressive autism. Anaerobe 2012, 18, 260–262.

107. Li, Q.; Han, Y.; Dy, A.B.C.; Hagerman, R.J. The gut microbiota and autism spectrum disorders. Front. Cell.

77, 270–274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

Neurosci. 2017, 11, 120. [CrossRef]

108. Wang, L.; Christophersen, C.T.; Sorich, M.J.; Gerber, J.P.; Angley, M.T.; Conlon, M.A. Low relative abundances
of the mucolytic bacterium Akkermansia muciniphila and Biﬁdobacterium spp. in feces of children with autism.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2011, 77, 6718–6721. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

109. Williams, B.L.; Hornig, M.; Parekh, T.; Lipkin, W.I. Application of novel PCR-based methods for detection,
quantitation, and phylogenetic characterization of Sutterella species in intestinal biopsy samples from children
with autism and gastrointestinal disturbances. MBio 2012, 3, e00261-11. [CrossRef]

110. Collins, S.M.; Surette, M.; Bercik, P. The interplay between the intestinal microbiota and the brain. Nat. Rev.

Microbiol. 2012, 10, 735–742. [CrossRef]

111. Bailey, M.T.; Dowd, S.E.; Galley, J.D.; Hufnagle, A.R.; Allen, R.G.; Lyte, M. Exposure to a social stressor alters the
structure of the intestinal microbiota: Implications for stressor-induced immunomodulation. Brain Behav. Immun.
2011, 25, 397–407. [CrossRef]

112. Lee, Y.K.; Menezes, J.S.; Umesaki, Y.; Mazmanian, S.K. Proinﬂammatory T-cell responses to gut microbiota
promote experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011, 108, 4615–4622.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

113. Patterson, E.; Cryan, J.F.; Fitzgerald, G.F.; Ross, R.P.; Dinan, T.G.; Stanton, C. Gut microbiota, the
pharmabiotics they produce and host health. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 2014, 73, 477–489. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

