 

Mei Wang

Sharon M. Donovan

Introduction

Over the past decade, the essential role that the gut micro-
biota plays in the developmental programming of the neo-
nate, including growth trajectories, metabolism, and immune 
and cognitive development, has been demonstrated [1–3]. 
Thus, fostering the development of the microbiome in the 
first 1000 days of life is critical to supporting lifelong health. 
Due to the rapid changes in the gut microbiome in the early 
postnatal period, most pediatric microbiome research has 
focused  on  differences  between  breast-  and  formula-fed 
infants in the first year of life [4]. Few studies have evaluated 
the microbiota of toddlers and children, and the prevailing 
thought is that children attain an adult-like microbiota by 
3 years of age [5, 6]. However, recent studies suggest that 
maturation of the gut microbiota is influenced by diet, and 
differences from an adult-type microbiota persist into later 
childhood [6, 7]. Therefore, the goal herein was to review 
the current evidence for the role of dietary intake and pre- 
and probiotic interventions on the gut microbiota from birth 
through adolescence.

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

Early Life (0–2 years)

Breast‑ and Formula‑Feeding

Among pediatric populations, gut microbiota composi-
tion of breastfed (BF) and formula-fed (FF) infants is most 
extensively studied and has been reviewed elsewhere [3, 
4]. While heterogeneity exists among demographics, infant 
age, formula type, and sampling and analytical techniques 
applied in the published literature, most studies show that 
both diversity and richness of the microbiome are lower in 
BF than FF infants [4, 7–10]. Breastfeeding, particularly 
of longer duration, is associated with a more stable bacte-
rial composition [4, 8] as well as a lower microbiota age 
[8, 11]. BF infants tend to have higher Actinobacteria [4] 
and lower Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes than FF infants [2, 
6]. Breastfeeding is strongly associated with Bifidobacte-
rium [4, 7–9, 11] and Bifidobacteriaceae abundance [10]. 
For example, in the TEDDY (The Environmental Deter-
minants of Diabetes in the Young) cohort, BF infants had 
higher relative abundance of B. breve, B. bifidum, and B. 
dentium than FF; while B. longum was the most dominant 
species in this study, it did not differ by feeding group [7]. 
Lactobacillus abundance has also been associated with 
breastfeeding [9, 11]; however, results vary considerably 
among published studies [4]. In a recent meta-analysis of 
seven studies, infants who were not exclusively BF har-
bored higher relative abundances of Bacteroides, Eubac-
terium, and Veillonella [8].

Feeding mode interacts with other perinatal factors to 
influence the infant gut microbiota. Ho and colleagues 
reported  that  non-exclusively  BF  infants  have  a  lower 
abundance of Proteobacteria, but only among those deliv-
ered via cesarean section (C-section) [8]. However, breast-
feeding  appears  to  moderate  the  detrimental  effects  of 
C-section delivery and intrapartum antibiotics on the early 
microbiota, producing a microbiota profile more similar to 
that of vaginally delivered infants or those not receiving 
antibiotics [4]. Geography and ethnicity are also important 
to take into account. Across five European countries, the 
effect of country was more pronounced than delivery or 
feeding method, with dominant bifidobacteria in north-
ern countries and greater early diversification in southern 
European countries [12]. Within the USA, Bifidobacterium 
abundance differed between white and Hispanic BF and FF 
infants, but not black infants [9].

Compared to BF infants, the functional capacity of the 
microbiome of FF infants is more similar to that of adults, 
consisting  of  genes  related  to  bile  acid  synthesis  and 
methanogenesis, but considerable variation exists among 
recent studies [4]. For example, the BF infant microbi-
ome has an increased abundance of genes associated with 

1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences 

carbohydrate and lipid metabolism and fatty acid biosyn-
thesis than FF [7], although another study reported similar 
data related to fatty acid biosynthesis genes, but opposite 
results for carbohydrate and lipid metabolism [8]. Com-
pared to FF infants, the BF infant’s microbiome has more 
genes associated with vitamin and cofactor metabolism 
[8], free radical detoxification [8], and glutathione metabo-
lism [13]. Discrepancies among the studies could be due to 
differences in infant age or the inclusion of mixed-feeding 
infants (MF) in different feeding groups. Thus, more work 
is needed to understand the functional ontogeny of the 
infant gut microbiota.

Human milk (HM) contains nutrients, bioactive compo-
nents, and bacteria that drive the aforementioned differences 
in the gut microbiota of BF and FF infants. In particular, the 
human milk oligosaccharides (HMO) are complex glycans 
that are resistant to digestion and exert a number of func-
tions in the distal gastrointestinal tract of the infant [14]. 
Over 200 unique HMOs have been identified, and maternal 
genetics affects the HMO present in milk [4, 14]. HMOs 
shape the infant gut microbiota by acting as a prebiotic sub-
strate for select beneficial bacteria, such as certain species 
of Bifidobacterium, as well as, acting as a decoy receptor 
for pathogenic microorganisms [14]. The addition of HMOs 
and other prebiotics to infant formula over the last decade 
has likely resulted in some convergence in the microbiota 
of BF and FF infants [4] and will be discussed later in this 
review. Along with the HMOs, BF infants receive a con-
tinuous source of bacteria from HM [15]. The HM micro-
biome is dominated by Staphylococcus and Streptococcus, 
but also contains Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Clostrid-
ium, and Veillonella, all resident genera found in the early 
infant microbiome [4, 15–17]. Hundreds of bacterial species 
are present in HM [15–17], and composition is associated 
with a variety of maternal factors such as body mass index, 
delivery mode, geography, and breast pump usage [15]. The 
microbial compositions of HM and infant feces are strongly 
associated [16]; thus, the unique microbial composition of 
each mother’s milk may account for some variation in the 
gut microbiome of BF infants [4, 15]. While HMO and the 
HM microbiome are most widely studied in relation to the 
infant microbiota, other HM components, such as IgA, anti-
microbials, glycoproteins [18], cytokines [19], phages [20], 
and fungi [21], likely contribute to development of the early 
microbiome.

Introduction of Complementary Feeding 
and Cessation of Breastfeeding

Ruminococcaceae, Blautia, Bacteroides, and Akkermansia 
[22–25] and decreases in Bifidobacterium, Veillonellaceae, 
Lactobacillaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, and Enterococcaceae 
[24]. However, early feeding mode continues to remain evi-
dent throughout these dietary transitions, influencing infant 
gut microbiota composition even up to 2 years of age [8, 26]. 
Whether an infant is BF during solid food introduction influ-
ences microbial patterns [10, 12, 24, 25, 27] (Table 1). Con-
tinued breastfeeding provides substrates necessary to sustain 
microbes such as Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Collinsella, 
Megasphera, and Veillonella [26, 27] (Table 1). Introduction 
of foods high in protein and fiber increases microbial diver-
sity, but the particular foods most correlated with microbial 
diversity differ depending on whether the infant is still being 
breastfed [24]. For example, a greater number of predicted 
functional changes were identified in FF and MF infants dur-
ing introduction of solids compared to BF infants, suggest-
ing that breastfeeding may increase the plasticity of the infant 
microbiome [25].

As energy-yielding substrates change over the first year 
of life, so does the metabolic capacity of the infant micro-
biome, with increases in genes associated with starch, cen-
tral carbon, and pyruvate metabolism [27]. During weaning 
from HM or formula, milk-associated bacteria decrease and 
microbes capable of degrading complex polysaccharides, such 
as Bacteroidaceae, Lachnospiraceae, and Ruminococcaceae, 
increase [24]. Breastfeeding duration influences when these 
transitions occur; at 12 months, richness and diversity were 
highest among infants weaned before 6 months and lowest 
among those still being BF [10]. Similarly, the microbiota 
of BF infants residing in Italy and Burkina Faso have been 
shown to cluster fairly close together, despite vast differences 
in the diets [high fiber vs. high fat/protein] and the environ-
ments [urban vs. rural] of the two countries [29]. However, 
once children were fully weaned, the microbiota of children in 
Burkina Faso was dominated by Bacteroidetes, while that of 
Italian children was enriched with Firmicutes [29].

Previously, cessation of breastfeeding, rather than comple-
mentary food introduction, was proposed to be the driving 
force behind the shift toward an adult-like microbiome [27]. 
However, both contribute to this transition to different degrees 
among infants [24]. Still, studies investigating changes in the 
microbiome upon weaning and introduction to solid foods are 
limited [29]. Additional large, longitudinal cohort studies are 
needed to explore the compositional and functional changes 
of the microbiota that accompany dietary shifts in early life.

Microbiota composition increases in both diversity and rich-
ness during the transition from a milk-based to an adult-
like  diet  [4,  9].  Introduction  to  complementary  foods  is 
accompanied  by  marked  increases  in  Lachnospiraceae, 

Although studies on gut microbiota composition in children 
after 2 years of age are more limited, available evidence sug-
gest that the microbiota of young children differs from that 

Beyond the 2 Years of Age

1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences

Burkina Faso children
and Treponema (Spirochaetes) were higher in 
rides (Prevotella, Xylanibacter (Bacteroidetes), 
3 genera involved in utilization plant polysaccha-

Faso children
was ~ sixfold higher in Italian than Burkina 
Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio (F/B ratio) 

[29]

in children than adults
Bacteroidetes were higher 
(Ruminococcaceae), and 
Clostridium cluster IV 
Actinobacteria, Bacilli, 
microbiota than adults
Children had less diverse 

spp., and Bacteroides spp.
teriaceae, Clostridium 
and increased Enterobac-
bacterium, Lactobacillus, 
Weaning decreased Bifido-

[28]

[26]

3-d dietary questionnaire
on children’s diet and a 
vided in-depth interview 
Burkina Faso parents pro-

lifestyle survey
detailed medical, diet, and 
Italian parents completed a 

rules and regulations
local state and federal 
requirements defined by 
adhering to nutritional 
Children attended daycares 

V5–V6 16S rRNA by 454-pyrose-

quencing

Cross-sectional

N = 29
1–6 y
Italy and Burkina Faso

rRNA and qPCR

Microarray targeting V1–V6 16S 

Cross-sectional

N = 28
1–4 y and adults
USA (North Carolina)

Targeted qPCR analysis

FFQ at 9-, 18-, and 36-mo 

Observational 

visits

cohort (SKOT)

n = 330
0–3 y
Denmark

taiotaomicron
increased B. the-
degradation; 
sugar and starch 
for complex 
enriched in genes 
12-mo microbiota 

degradation
genes for HMO 
biota enriched in 
4-mo micro-
Newborn and 
Anaerostipes
Clostridium, and 
Roseburia, 
roides, Bilophila, 
increased Bacte-

BF cessation 

and Veillonella
Megasphaera, 
Collinsella, 
Lactobacillus, 
Bifidobacterium, 
predominate in 

[27]

BF infants 

Metagenomic shotgun sequencing by 

Feeding practices question-

Cross-sectional

Illumina HiSeq 2000

naires assessing

BF cessation
BF, FF, MF

 = 98

yN

Sweden

and number of participants
Country of study, age range, 

 

Table 1  Characteristics of studies investigating dietary effects on microbiome composition in infants and children

Citations

Outcomes

Method of diet assessmentMethod of microbiota assessment

Study design

1 3enterotype
enterotypes, but not Bifidobacterium 
with Bacteroides and Prevotella 
plasma insulin levels in children 
dietary fiber consumption and low 

Negative correlation between high 

than adults
teria (Bifidobacterium) in children 
Higher Bacteroidetes and Actinobac-

sequencing
by Illumina 
sequencing 
shotgun 
Metagenomic 

Parent-report FFQ

Cross-sectional

[33]

Bangkok children had higher Actinobacteria, 

V1–V2 16S rRNA by Illumina MiSeq

7-day dietary records

Comparative 

Thailand—Rural (Buriam) 

cross-sectional

and urban (Bangkok)

[32]

V6–V8 16S rRNA by 454 pyrosequencing

Cross-sectional

[34]
caceae and higher butyrate and propionate
streptococcaceae and unclassified Ruminococ-
Buriram children had more Clostridiales, Pepto-

Bacteroidales and Selenomadales

Lachnospiraceae)
Bifidobacteriaceae, Ruminococcaceae, and 
BB-type cluster (defined by Bacteroidaceae, 
Ormoc samples were included in the termed 
(defined by Prevotellaceae) and 78.9% of the 
87.5% of Baybay children fell into P-type cluster 

rium and lower Dorea and Eubacterium
higher Cyanobacteria and Phascolarctobacte-
legumes, nuts and seeds) was associated with 

Dietary Pattern 2 (intake of grains, dairy and 

Roseburia
lower Bifidobacterium, Prevotella, Blautia, and 
roidetes, Bacteroides, and Ruminococcus and 
snacks and sweets) was linked to higher Bacte-
and sweetened beverages, kid’s meals and 
refined carbohydrates, vegetables, fruit, juice 
Dietary Pattern 1 (intake of fish, protein foods, 

microbial taxa and composition

Fruit intake negatively associated with Ruminococcus 

Soy, pulse, and nut positively associated with Bacteroides 

gnavus

xylanisolvens

nospira

habits of Filipino children
and adapted to dietary 
National Dietary Survey 
modified from Singapore 
viewed using FFQ 
Parents/guardians inter-

dietary patterns
(YAQ) FFQ was used for 

Youth and Adolescent 
3-day food diaries

N = 281
6–9 y
Netherlands

N = 45
9–10 y

N = 43
7–9 y

City)
bay) and urban (Ormoc 
Philippines—Rural (Bay-

N = 22
4–8 y
USA (Illinois)

N = 37
2–3 y
Australia

and number of participants
Country of study, age range, 

Table 1  (continued)

[31]

Two dietary patterns were associated with 

V3–V4 16S rRNA by Illumina MiSeq

Nutrient intake assessed by 

Cross-sectional

Digestive Diseases and Sciences 

Vegetable protein intake positively associated with Lach-

toclostridium spp. and the F/B ratio
cies richness and diversity and positively with Erysipela-
V6–V8 16S rRNA by Illumina MiSeqDairy intake negatively associated with Bacteroidetes, spe-

[30]

24-h recall
(FFQ)
Adolescent Eating Survey 

Australian Child and 

Cross-sectional

Citations

Outcomes

Method of diet assessmentMethod of microbiota assessment

Study design

1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

F/B Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio, BF breastfed, FF formula-fed, FFQ Food Frequency Questionnaire, MF mixed-fed, SCFA short-chain fatty acids, USA United States of America

[38]

Egyptian consumed Mediterranean-type diet, and Ameri-

V4 16S rRNA by Illumina 

Not reported

Cross-sectional

MiSeq

[37]

Bangladeshi children had lower 

Not reported

Cross-sectional

quencing
by 454 pyrose-
V1–V3 16S rRNA 

ride-degrading genera
saccharide degradation-encoding genes, and polysaccha-
Egyptian children had higher fecal SCFAs, microbial poly-

can children had Bacteroides enterotype

Egyptian children had Prevotella enterotype, and Ameri-

can children consumed a Western diet

rice, bread, and lentils
enriched foods and meat and high in 
Western diet low in refined-sugar-
Bangladeshi children consumed non-

Butyrivibrio, and Oscillospira
Bacteroides and higher Prevotella, 

curry foods
positively associated with fruits and 
sugar-enriched foods; Collinsella 
positively correlated with refined-

Bifidobacterium, and Collinsella 

changes
is a major delineator of microbiome 
Southern Chinese or Malay children) 
diet), rather than ethnicity (i.e., 
Geographical-related factors (i.e., 

with fish and beef
bacterium spp. negatively associated 
Lactobacillus and Prevotella; Bifido-
Vegetables positively correlated with 

[36]

[35]

Board validated FFQ

qPCR

Singapore Health Promotion 

Cross-sectional

China and Malay-

Citations

Outcomes

Method of diet assessmentMethod of microbiota assessment

Study design

qPCR

Self-administered FFQ

Cross-sectional

and number of participants
Country of study, age range, 

Table 1  (continued)

N = 14
10.1–15.7 y
USA (Ohio)
N = 28
13.3–14.5 y
(Giza)

Egypt 

N = 4
12–14 y
USA
N = 10
8–13 y
Bangladesh

N = 210
7–12 y
sia

N = 60
8–11 y
Thailand

1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences 

of adults [28]. As children consume a more complex diet, 
associations between dietary patterns and the gut microbiota 
emerge, and their microbiota composition becomes more 
similar to adults [28]. How diet affects the gut microbiota 
can be interrogated at several levels, starting with specific 
nutrients, such as fiber [31], to categories of foods, or food 
groups [30, 31], to more complex assessments of dietary 
intake, such as dietary patterns [30]. A summary of the 
impact of diet on gut microbiota composition is shown in 
Table 1 and is discussed below.

Toddlers (2–3 Years of Age)

In Australian 2- to 3-year-olds, both habitual diet, as meas-
ured by a Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ), and recent 
dietary intake, as measured by a 24-h recall 3 days prior to 
fecal sample collection, influenced fecal microbiota com-
position [30]. Dairy intake was negatively associated with 
species richness and diversity and Bacteroidetes abundance, 
but was positively associated with Erysipelatoclostridium 
spp. and the Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio [F/B ratio]. 
Vegetable  protein  intake  was  positively  associated  with 
abundances of the Lachnospira; soy, pulse, and nut intake 
were positively associated with Bacteroides xylanisolvens, 
and fruit intake was negatively associated with the relative 
abundance of microbes related to Ruminococcus gnavus 
[30]. Dairy and vegetable-source proteins explained 7–10% 
of the variation in microbiota composition and fruit intake 
explained 8%. Among the dairy group, yogurt explained 9% 
of the variance in microbiota [30].

Young Childhood to Adolescence (4–14 Years of Age)

Moving beyond the first 1000 days of life, Berding and cow-
orkers [31] investigated the temporal stability of the fecal 
microbiota and whether dietary patterns were associated 
with microbial taxa and composition in American 4–8-year-
olds at 3 time points over a 6-month period. Dietary intakes 
were assessed over the previous year using the Young Ado-
lescent Questionnaire, and two dietary patterns were identi-
fied by principal components analysis (PCA) and factor anal-
ysis [31]. Temporal stability of microbiota over the 6-month 
period was associated with baseline dietary patterns. Dietary 
pattern 1, defined by intake of fish, protein foods, refined 
carbohydrates, vegetables, fruit, juice and sweetened bev-
erages, kid’s meals and snacks and sweets, was linked to 
higher relative abundance of Bacteroidetes,  Bacteroides, 
and Ruminococcus and lower Bifidobacterium, Prevotella, 
Blautia, and Roseburia relative abundance. Dietary pat-
tern 2, defined by intake of grains, dairy and legumes, nuts 
and seeds, was associated with higher Cyanobacteria and 
Phascolarctobacterium abundance and lower Dorea and 
Eubacterium abundance [31]. Additionally, the intake of 

snacks and sweets and refined carbohydrates were nega-
tively correlated with both Shannon and the Chao1 Indices, 
respectively, demonstrating reduced microbial diversity with 
greater intake of sugars and refined grains.

Residing in rural vs. urban environments can also affect 
food availability and choices, which has been investigated 
in a series of studies. A study of Filipino children (7 to 
9 years) living in rural (Baybay) and urban (Ormoc) com-
munities showed distinct differences in dietary habits and 
fecal microbiota composition [32]. Nearly all (94%) of urban 
children consumed fast food four times per week on average 
compared to 42% of rural children who consumed fast food 
less than once per week. Urban-dwelling children also con-
sumed a diet higher in meat, fat, and confectionaries, such 
as sweetened pastries and biscuits, and lower in complex 
carbohydrates compared to rural children. Using family-level 
bacterial composition to execute PCA and clustering analy-
sis in conjunction with a dataset from five other Asian coun-
tries, it was observed that 87.5% of rural children fell into 
the termed P-type cluster [defined by Prevotellaceae] and 
78.9% of the urban samples were included in the termed BB-
type cluster (defined by Bacteroidaceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, 
Ruminococcaceae,  and Lachnospiraceae).  Additionally, 
Prevotellaceae, including only the genus Prevotella and 
consisting of mostly Prevotella copri, were more abundant 
in the feces of rural children, making up 10% of the total 
community, whereas it represented < 1% of the fecal micro-
bial sequences in most urban children. These findings may 
reflect the higher consumption of complex carbohydrates in 
rural children. [32].

Similarly, Kisuse and colleagues examined differences 
in dietary habits, fecal microbiome composition, and short-
chain fatty acid (SCFA) concentrations of children (9 to 
10 years) living in rural (Buriram) and urban (Bangkok) 
settings in Thailand [33]. Urban children consumed more 
bread, meat, and beverages and less rice and vegetables than 
the rural children. Vegetables comprised < 1.0% of total cal-
orie intake in urban children compared to 7.3% in rural chil-
dren. The fecal microbiome of the rural children displayed 
significantly greater alpha diversity (Chao1 index). The 
microbiota of rural children was enriched by bacteria in the 
order Clostridiales, containing families such as Peptostrep-
tococcaceae and unclassified Ruminococcaceae, compared 
to higher proportions of Actinobacteria, Bacteroidales, and 
Selenomadales in urban dwellers. Additionally, rural chil-
dren had significantly higher fecal butyrate and propionate 
concentrations, suggesting that the fiber-rich diet in the rural 
children promotes a microbiota composition with greater 
fermentative capacity [33].

Greater Bifidobacterium abundance in 1- to 4-year-olds 
compared to adults has been reported [28], and recent stud-
ies have shown that the relative abundance of Bifidobac-
terium in older children is related to dietary intake and is 

1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

associated  with  metabolic  phenotypes.  Studying  Dutch 
children in the KOALA Birth Cohort Study, Zhong and col-
leagues documented higher levels of Bifidobacterium at 6 
to 9 years of age compared to adults [34]. They also classi-
fied children into three enterotypes and observed that cor-
relations between dietary and metabolic phenotypes were 
dependent on fecal microbial enterotype. For example, a 
negative correlation between dietary fiber intake and plasma 
insulin was only reported in children with Bacteroides and 
Prevotella enterotypes, but not the Bifidobacterium entero-
type [34]. This latter microbiome possesses lower microbial 
gene richness, alpha diversity, and functional potential for 
butyrate and succinate production, suggesting that children 
exhibiting a Bifidobacterium enterotype have a less mature 
gut microbiome [34]. Additionally, a study of 8- to 11-year-
olds in Thailand living in two different geographical regions 
observed that frequency of vegetable intake was positively 
correlated with Lactobacillus and Prevotella, while Bifido-
bacterium spp. was negatively correlated with fish and beef 
intake [35].

A similar study of healthy 7- to 12-year-olds from China 
and Malaysia, living in three different cities, showed that 
geographical-related factors (including diet), rather than 
other potential mediating factors, such as ethnicity (e.g., 
Southern Chinese or Malay children), was a major delinea-
tor of microbiome changes [36]. Four genera (Bacteroides, 
Fecalibacterium, Bifidobacterium, and Collinsella) showed 
significant associations with the 15 food groups under obser-
vation. Bifidobacterium and Collinsella were positively cor-
related with refined-sugar enriched foods, and Collinsella 
was also positively associated with fruit and curry intake 
[36].

Parallel to these findings, comparing Bangladeshi and 
American  children  (9–14  years),  Bangladeshi  children 
exhibited lower levels of Bacteroides and higher levels of 
Prevotella,  Butyrivibrio,  and Oscillospira,  indicative  of 
their consumption of a non-Western diet low in refined-
sugar enriched foods and meat and rich in rice, bread, and 
lentils [37]. Furthermore, the American children consuming 
Western diets had higher Bacteroides abundance than chil-
dren in Bangladesh [37]. A Bacteroides enterotype is more 
common in adults consuming a Western diet, whereas the 
Prevotella enterotype is more common in those consuming 
high amounts of fiber [39].

Lastly,  a  study  comparing  Egyptian  teenagers  (mean 
13.9 years) consuming a Mediterranean-style diet to Ameri-
can teenagers (mean 12.9 years) consuming a Western diet, 
found that Egyptian children clustered to the Prevotella ente-
rotype and American children clustered to the Bacteroides 
enterotype [38]. Furthermore, the gastrointestinal environ-
ment of Egyptian children contained higher levels of SCFAs, 
microbial polysaccharide degradation-encoding genes, and 
polysaccharide-degrading genera [38].

Taken  together,  these  findings  provide  evidence  that 
the microbiome in children and adolescents is shaped to a 
greater degree by dietary intake [32–38] than by ethnicity 
[36]. While it is has been postulated that the microbiota after 
age 3 resembles that of adults [5], emerging evidence sug-
gest that, while the microbiota of children can be assembled 
into enterotypes [34, 37, 38], differences persist between 
children  and  adults.  Additionally,  children  may  also  be 
more similar to each other than adults are. For example, 
in  pre-adolescent  children  (ages  7–12)  intragroup  simi-
larity in the fecal microbiota was greater in children than 
adults [40]. Adults also displayed greater abundances of 
Bacteroides spp., while children displayed enhanced Bifi-
dobacterium spp., Faecalibacterium spp., and members of 
Lachnospiraceae [40]. However, the current literature on 
the impact of diet in this age group has some noted limita-
tions. Nearly all studies are cross-sectional, they use differ-
ent types of questionnaires to collect dietary intake data, and 
many of the studies have compared children living in rural 
vs. urban settings. While dietary intake differs between rural 
and urban communities, many other environmental factors 
are also likely contributing, including socioeconomic status, 
exposure to agricultural species and routine medical care, 
which could also be influencing the gut microbiota.

Fiber and Prebiotic Interventions in Children 
on Gut Microbiota

A consistent finding of the observational studies summa-
rized above is that consumption of a Western-style diet, 
characterized by low ratio of whole grains-to-refined carbo-
hydrates, detrimentally influences microbiome composition 
and fecal SCFA concentrations in children [30–37]. Dietary 
fiber (DF) has documented health benefits for adults, includ-
ing reducing intestinal transit time, plasma cholesterol and 
postprandial glycemic response and improving resistance 
to pathogens and epithelial barrier function [41–43]. The 
underlying mechanisms of these beneficial effects are not 
fully known; however, gut microbiome modulation and for-
mation of SCFAs by bacterial fermentation are proposed 
[43]. DF is also thought to be beneficial for gut health of 
children [44], although more studies are needed. In the USA, 
the recommended dietary fiber intake is 14 g/1000 kcal or 
25 g for females and 38 g for males. Most Americans only 
consume about half of the recommended intake (13.5 and 
18 g, respectively) [41]. The fiber intake recommendations 
for children between the ages of 1 and 13 years, range from 
5 to 31 g/day, depending on the organization, however, in 
most cases children are not meeting the recommended fiber 
intakes [44]. Thus, various strategies have been developed 
for modulation of gut microbiota, including administration 
of DFs, pre- or/and probiotics.

1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences 

In 2009, the Codex Alimentarius Commission defined 
DF as “carbohydrate polymers with 10 or more monomeric 
units, which are not hydrolyzed by the endogenous enzymes 
in the small intestine of humans” [43]. DF includes non-
digestible carbohydrates naturally occurring in food, isolated 
from food or synthesized, the latter two requiring evidence 
to support their physiological benefit to health [45]. Most 
countries adopted the 2009 Codex [43] definition by inclu-
sion of carbohydrate polymers with degrees of polymeriza-
tion between 3 and 9 [46]. DFs have been classified based 
on their physiochemical properties such as particle size, fer-
mentability, solubility, and viscosity, and these properties 
influence the functionality of a DF, including its ability to 
modulate gut microbiota [47]. Soluble and readily ferment-
able DFs are referred to as prebiotics, which are “a substrate 
that is selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring 
a health benefit.” [48]. Most prebiotics are DF, but not all DF 
are considered to be prebiotics.

Infant Formula and Prebiotics

HMOs are considered prebiotics, which may partly explain 
the differences in microbiota composition between BF and 
FF infants [4]. To narrow the gap between HM and infant 
formula, prebiotics are now routinely added to infant for-
mula. The most studied prebiotics are a 9:1 mixture of short-
chain galactooligosaccharides (scGOS) and long-chain fruc-
tooligosaccharides (lcFOS). Other prebiotics supplemented 
to infant formula, either alone or in combination, include 
GOS, FOS, polydextrose, lactulose, acid oligosaccharides, 
oligofructose, and inulin [4]. The effect of prebiotics on the 
composition of infant microbiota has been recently reviewed 
[4]; most studies show that prebiotics increase the abundance 
of Bifidobacterium and sometimes Lactobacillus compared 
to infants fed control formula [4]. Several studies reported 
a decrease in opportunistic pathogens, such as Escherichia 
coli, enterococci, and clostridia [4].

Two HMOs, 2′-fucosyllactose (2′-FL) and lacto-N-ne-
oteraose (LNnT), are added to infant formula. Both are well 
tolerated  and  support  age-appropriate  growth  of  infants 
[49–51]. A multicenter, randomized, double-blind trial com-
pared the fecal microbiota of healthy infants fed formula 
with 2′-FL and LNnT from < 14 days to 6 months of age 
to infants consuming with control formula. Findings dem-
onstrated a fecal microbiota closer to that of BF infants in 
the infants fed formula with HMO, with higher numbers of 
Bifidobacterium and lower potential pathogens than placebo 
at 3 months of age [51].

DF and Prebiotics in Children

Only a few studies have studied DFs and prebiotics on the 
gut microbiota in healthy 3–6-year-old children [52] and 

adolescents (8–15 years) [53–56] (Table 2). As prebiotic 
fibers, both GOS and inulin-type fructans have been shown 
to increase abundance of Bifidobacterium [52–54]. Several 
studies have demonstrated that the intake of DFs shape the 
gut microbes of children; however, their effects on micro-
biota  composition  depend  on  the  type  of  fiber  studied. 
For example, administration of wheat bran extract (5 g/d 
for 3 weeks) increased fecal Bifidobacterium [53], while 
consumption of soluble corn fiber (SCF; 10 or 20 g/d for 
4 weeks) modulated the overall microbiota, increased the 
alpha diversity and altered the relative abundances of some 
bacterial genera, including Parabacteroides and unclassi-
fied Lachnospiraceae [54]. This same group also showed 
that GOS [55] and SCF [56] increased calcium absorption 
in adolescent girls and boys, demonstrating a health benefit 
for this age population. The authors proposed that bacte-
rial fermentation of SCF to SCFAs reduced the luminal pH, 
which increased calcium solubility and transcellular absorp-
tion [54]. Calcium absorption was negatively correlated with 
Parabacteroides relative abundance, but positively corre-
lated with Clostridium and unclassified Clostridiaceae abun-
dance [54]. The authors speculated that the two groups of 
bacteria were cross-feeding, with the Bacteroidetes (Para-
bacteroides) fermenting SCF to acetate or lactate, and the 
Firmicutes (Clostridium) further fermenting these substrates 
to butyrate [54]. The limited studies suggest that prebiotic 
and DF doses of 5–20 g are well tolerated in children, pro-
mote the expansion of bifidobacterial populations, and may 
exert other health benefits. Further large-scale studies are 
needed with different fiber sources.

Probiotic Interventions in Children on Gut 
Microbiota

Probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered 
in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” 
[57]. The most commonly administered probiotic bacteria 
belong to the genera Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus, 
but can be provided either as single or mixtures of strains. 
The beneficial effects of probiotics in pediatric populations 
have  been  previously  reviewed  [58–61],  although  most 
studies have not been conducted in healthy children. Pro-
biotics shorten the duration of acute gastroenteritis, prevent 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea, reduce the risk of necrotiz-
ing enterocolitis in preterm infants and lower the incidence 
of eczema in high-risk children [58–61]. The mechanisms 
of action of probiotics are not fully understood; however, 
modulation of gut microbiota has been postulated as one of 
the mechanisms [62].

Two general probiotic approaches have been taken to 
influence the infant or child microbiota. The first approach 
is to administer the probiotic to the mother during pregnancy 

1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
DGGE denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, GOS galactooligosaccharides, OTU operational taxonomic unit, qPCR quantitative PCR, SCF soluble corn fiber, SCFA short-chain fatty acids, 

↔ SCFA concentrations

10 g

Fecal pH: SCF 20 g < control, SCF 
Bacteroides and Lachnospira
unclassified Lachnospiraceae, ↓ 

SCF 20 g ↑Parabacteroides and 
reclassified Ruminococcus
unclassified Lachnospiraceae, ↓ 

SCF 10 g ↑Parabacteroides and 
samples with and without SCF
Overall microbiota differed between 

pyrosequencing

quencing
454 pyrose-
rRNA gene by 

V3–V5 16S 
treatment
end of each 
Baseline and the 
DGGE, qPCR
treatment
end of each 
Baseline and the 

[56]

↑ Chao 1 and observed OTUs at 

species level

V3–V4 16S rRNA gene by 454 
Before and after each intervention

beverage
Muffin and 

(n = 27)

SCF (10 g), SCF (20 g) and control 

trial with 3–4-wk washout

Randomized double-blind crossover 

4 wk
12–15 y
USA (Indiana)

[55]

[54]

[53]

Peptostreptococcaseae

↓ Enterococcus, Anaerofustis, Coprococcus, and other 

and other Ruminococcaceae

↑ proportions of Parabacteroides, other Clostridiales 
↔ bowel movement frequency and stool consistency

10 g, control

Change in Bifidobacterium counts: GOS 5 g > GOS 
↔ numbers of DGGE bands

and stool frequency

↔ fecal pH, each SCFA levels, percentage of moisture 

groups, and F. prausnitzii
histolyticum/C. liteseburense, R. rectale/E. rectela 

↔ counts of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus, C. 
↑ Bifidobacterium level
↔ fecal pH and stool consistency

perfringens, C. difficile, and Enterobacteriaceae

↔ numbers of total bacteria, relative abundances of C. 

[52]

↑ relative abundances of Bifidobacterium and Lactoba-

Soluble maize fiber (12 g/d)

and potato chips

SCF and control (n = 23)
trial with 7-d washout

Spaghetti, hamburgers, sandwiches 

Randomized double-blind crossover 

3 wk
12–15 y
USA (Indiana)

GOS (5 or 10 g/d)
Smoothie drinks

GOS 5 g, GOS 10 g and control 

trial with 2-wk washout

Randomized, double-blind crossover 

3 wk
10–13 y
USA (Indiana)

(n = 20)

FISH

19 or 20

Baseline and d 

noxylan oligosaccharides (5 g/d)
Wheat bran extract containing arabi-
Soft drink

2-wk washout
controlled crossover trial with 
Randomized, double-blind, placebo-

Wheat bran extract and control 

(n = 29)

cillus

qPCR

week 24
Baseline and 

Inulin-type fructans (6 g/d)
Mixed with food or drink

Randomized, double-blind, placebo-

Placebo (n = 109)
Prebiotic (n = 110)
controlled trial

 wk

y 3

ven)

Belgium (Leu-

24 wk
3–6 y
Hungary (Pécs)

vention
duration of inter-
age range, and 
Country of study, 

Citations

Outcomes

Study design and participants/groupNutrition base and fiber type and 

assessment
Microbiota 

amount

Table 2  Characteristics of studies investigating effects of dietary fibers and prebiotics on the fecal microbiota of healthy children and adolescents

1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences 

and  then  to  either  the  mother  and/or  infant  postpartum 
[63–70] (Table 3), and the second is to administer the pro-
biotic directly to the infant or child [71–84] (Table 4). For 
the first approach, most studies gave probiotics to the moth-
ers of infants with high-risk of allergy, with the goal of 
prevention of allergic disease, such as eczema, asthma and 
allergic rhinitis [63–65, 69, 70]. The impact of maternal pro-
biotic supplementation on the abundances of bacterial taxa 
were studied [63–70]; however, the results are inconsistent, 
even when the same probiotic strain was used [63, 64, 69] 
(Table 3). For example, supplementation of pregnant and 
lactating women with L. rhamnosus GG (LGG), L. acidophi-
lus La-5 and B. animalis subsp. lactis BB-12 from 36-week 
gestation until 3 months postnatal during breastfeeding did 
not affect the proportions of bacteria classes and genera of 
the infants at 3 months and 2 years [67]. In contrast, a Finish 
study evaluated the effect of administration of L. rhamnosus 
LPR and B. longum BL999 to mothers 2 months before and 
2 months after delivery. They observed that infants whose 
mother received probiotics had lower counts of Bifidobacte-
rium and a higher percentage of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus 
than placebo at 6 months of age [68]. In addition, several 
groups investigated the diversity of infant microbiota, report-
ing that administration of probiotics during pregnancy and 
lactation, or directly to infants after delivery have no or lim-
ited effects on alpha and beta diversity of infant microbiota 
[65, 67, 70] (Table 3).

Probiotics have been administrated directly to infants and 
children [71–84] (Table 4). These studies varied in terms of 
age of the children (newborns to age 18), type of probiotic, 
dose administered, and duration of the intervention. Despite 
these differences in study design, no effects of probiotic 
administration were observed on microbiome alpha or beta 
diversity between children in probiotic and control groups, 
with the exception of one study [73]. In that study, formula 
or L. reuteri DSM 17938-supplemented formula was fed for 
6 months to newborns born by either vaginal or C-section 
delivery [73]. The L. reuteri-supplemented formula had a 
limited effect on the microbiota of vaginally born infants; 
however, the overall microbiota composition of C-section-
delivered infants consuming the probiotic-supplemented 
formula differed from that of placebo and was similar to 
vaginally delivered infants at 2 weeks of age [73].

Similar to the findings when probiotics were adminis-
tered  to  the  mother,  inconsistent  results  were  observed 
on the abundances of bacterial taxa when probiotics were 

supplemented  directly  to  the  children;  some  probiotics 
affected the proportions of individual bacterial taxa, while 
others did not (Table 4). These conflicting results may be 
related to differences in probiotic strain/strains used, the 
dose use, duration of administration, and the methods used 
for microbiota analysis. Furthermore, factors that influence 
the development of gut microbiota, such as delivery mode, 
children’s age, and diet, likely confound the effects of pro-
biotic supplementation in this population [73].

While some encouraging data exist on the efficacy of pro-
biotics on disease prevention, no broad consensus exists to 
recommend the use of probiotics in these conditions [59]. 
Although probiotics are safe for use in healthy population; 
several concerns have been raised related to the administra-
tion of probiotics early in life when gut microbiota is not 
fully established. Long-term consequences of such admin-
istration should be carefully evaluated [60].

Future Directions

There is a need for more dietary intervention studies in 
healthy populations, as the majority of currently published 
studies describe dietary interventions in the context of dis-
ease states, such as obesity, which is represented by micro-
bial dysbiosis [85]. In particular, randomized, controlled 
clinical trials on the effects of DFs, prebiotics, and probiotics 
are needed in pediatric populations, particularly in adoles-
cence to young adulthood (15–20 years), where there is a 
paucity of data available. Additionally, long-term follow-
up studies of early-life dietary interventions are needed to 
determine long-term effects. For example, it is not known 
whether or not early-life acceleration toward an adult-like 
microbiome has negative downstream effects on health. 
None of the reported human studies report effects on host 
gut gene expression, which is possible to do noninvasively 
in pediatric populations using exfoliated epithelial cells 
[86]. Exploring host-microbe molecular cross-talk [87] and 
incorporating other multi-omic approaches, including the 
fecal metabolome [88] will further our understanding of 
the complex relationships between diet, gut microbiota, and 
human health and disease and can lead to the development of 
low-cost, safe and efficacious dietary interventions [89, 90]. 
These “microbiota-directed foods” [90] have the potential to 
prevent or treat some of the most pressing health nutritional 
challenges facing the world’s population.

1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

year, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
interspace profiling, mo month, qPCR quantitative PCR, T-RFLP terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism, RT-qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, VD vaginally delivered, y 
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12, CFU colony-forming unit, CS cesarean section, d day, FISH fluorescent in situ hybridization, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-pro 

6 mo

Metagenomic sequencing by Illumina 
0, 3, 12 and 24 mo of age

HiSeq 2500

9 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. animalis subsp. lactis HN019
L. rhamnosus HN001
Powder in capsules

Placebo (n = 315)
HN019 (n = 50)
HN001 (n = 285)

ing); infants 5 d–2 y
6 mo postpartum if breastfeed-
Mothers at 35-wk gestation until 

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 

Wellington)

New Zealand (Auckland and 

Bacteroides at 24 mo

↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and 

perfringens/histolyticum group at 24 mo

↑ counts of Lactobacillus and C. 

bacillus, and Bacteroides at 6 mo

↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium, Lacto-

[70]

↑ count of C. perfringens/histolyticum subgroup at 

↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and Bacte-

roides at 24 mo

group at 24 mo

↑ counts of Lactobacillus and C. perfringens/histolyticum 

lus, and Bacteroides at 6 mo

↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium, Lactobacil-
↑ count of C. perfringens/histolyticum subgroup at 6 mo

FISH
6 and 24 mo of age (n = 96 infants)

[69]

↓ Colonization rate of B. longum in ST11 + BL999
↓ Colonization rate of B. infantis in LPR + BL999
Bifidobacterium in LPR + BL999 at 6 mo of age

[68]

↑ Percentage of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus and ↓count of 

FISH, qPCR
6 mo of age

L. paracasei ST11 + B. longum BL999 
L. rhamnosus LPR + B. longum BL999 or
Powder in water

(109 CFU/strain/d)

 

1010 CFU/d
LGG
Infants: powder in water
Mother: powder in capsules

(5 × 109 CFU/d)
lus La-5 (5 × 1010 CFU/d) + BB-12 
LGG (5 × 1010 CFU/d) + L. acidophi-
Fermented milk
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. breve M16V + B. longum BB536
Powder in water, milk or formula
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d

lactis W58

B. bifidum W23 + B. lactis W52 + L. 
Powder in water, milk or formula

1.0 × 1010 CFU/d
LGG
Powder in water

1.8 × 1010 CFU/d
LGG
Powder in capsules

Placebo (n = 47–52)
Probiotic (n = 46–53)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Placebo (n = 22)
ST11 + BL999 (n = 28)
LPR + BL999 (n = 28)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 

Placebo (17–45)
Probiotic (20–37)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Control (n = 26)
Probiotic (n = 122)
Open trial
Placebo (n = 17–45)
Probiotic (n = 20–37)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Placebo (n = 82)
Probiotic (n = 77)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Placebo (n = 57)
Probiotic (n = 59)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 

infants 0–6 mo
until delivery; BF mothers or 
Mothers at 2–4 wk prior to and 
Finland (Turku)

delivery during breastfeeding

until 2 mo after

Mothers at 2 mo before delivery 
Finland (Turku)

feeding
3 mo postnatal while breast-
Mother at 36-wk gestation until 
Norway (Trondheim study)

delivery; infants 0–6 mo

Mothers at 34-wk gestation until 
Japan

until delivery; infants at 0–1 y
Mothers at 6 wk before delivery 
Netherlands

delivery; infants 0–6 mo

Mothers at 36-wk gestation until 
Finland (Turku)

delivery

Mothers at 36-wk gestation until 
Australia (Melbourne)

[67]

↔ alpha and beta diversity and proportions of bacterial 

classes and genera at age of 3 mo and 2 y

MiSeq

16S rRNA gene by 454 Illumina 
3 mo and 2 y of age

pyrosequencing

↑ proportion of Bacteroidetes at 4 mo
Limited change in microbiota composition

V6–V8 16S rRNA gene by 454 
4 and 10 mo of age

lower at 2 wk
diversity for Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria were 
↔ bacterial abundances and diversity, except Shannon 

IS-pro

and 6 y of age

1 and 2 wk, 1, 3, 12, and 18 mo, 2 

[64]

↔ counts of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and Lactoba-

3, 6, and 12 mo of age (n = 96 

cillus/Enterococcus at 3, 6, and 12 mo

FISH

infants)

[63]

↑ prevalence of species belonging to B. longum group at 

90 d

qPCR, T-RFLP
Infant at 3, 7, 28, and 90 d of age

[66]

[65]

tion
Cita-

Outcomes

Microbiota assessment

amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain and 

group
Study design and participants/

tion of intervention
Country of study, age range, dura-

Table 3  Characteristics of studies investigating probiotic administration during pregnancy and after delivery on infant fecal microbiota

1 3Ion OneTouch and Ion PGM
V3 region of 16S rRNA gene by 
Before and postintervention

109 CFU/strain/d
BB-12 + LGG
Not reported

Infants at 8–13 mo; 6-mo interven-
Denmark (ProbiComp Study)

FISH
Selective plating

vention

7 wk of study and 2 wk postinter-

108 CFU/g
L. johnsonii La1
Formula

qPCR
3 y of age

1 × 107 CFU/g
L. fermentum CECT5716
Formula + 0.3 g/100 ml GOS

Selective plating
2, 4, and 11 mo of age

107 CFU/g
B. longum BB536
Formula

tion

tion

Infants at 1 mo; 13-wk interven-
Chile (Santiago)

Infants at 1 mo; 5-mo intervention
Spain

Infants at 0–7 d; 12-mo interven-
China (Shanghai)

tion

Control (n = 98)
Probiotic (n = 103)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
BF (n = 46)
Control (n = 61)
FOS (n = 44)
Probiotic (n = 48)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Control (n = 46)
Probiotic (n = 46)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Control (n = 129)
Probiotic (n = 135)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 

CLr (n = 11)
VLr (n = 9)
CCt) (n = 10)
V-Control (VCt) (n = 10)

delivery

[77]

↑ proportion of Lactobacillus
↔ overall microbiota

↑ number of Lactobacillus at 7 wk

and C. histolyticum
Enterococcus, C. perfringens, 
Enterobacteria, Bacteroides, 
↔ counts of Bifidobacterium, 

3 y of age
group and B. fragilis group at 
Bifidobacterium, C. coccoides 
↔ fecal counts of Lactobacillus, 

2, 4, and 11 mo

↔ count of Enterobacteriaceae at 

4 mo

[76]

[75]

[74]

↑ bifidobacteria level at 2 and 

time points
CLr > CCt; VLr > VCt at both 

Lactobacillus abundance: 

VLr at 2 wk
bacteriaceae: CCt > CLr, VCt, 
Proportion of unclassified Entero-

VLr at 2 wk
abundance: CCt < CLr, VCt, 
Bifidobacterium occurrence and 

at 4 mo
fered from others at 2 wk, not 
Global microbiota of CSCt dif-

C. butyricum
coccoides, C. lituseburense and 
Bifidobacterium, groups of C. 
Lactobacillus/Enterococcus, 
quency and counts of 

quencing

16S rRNA gene by 454-pyrose-
2 and 4 mo of age

1.2 × 109 CFU/L
L. reuteri DSM 17938
Formula

Vaginal (V) or C-section (C) 
placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 

Infants ≤ 3 d; 6-mo intervention
Greece (Athens)

[73]

[71]

Citation

Digestive Diseases and Sciences 

[72]

↔ colonization fre-

FISH
Entry and end of the intervention

over the first y
related to B. fragilis and Blautia 

↓ relative abundances of OTUs 
↔ alpha and beta diversity

MiSeq

16S rRNA gene by Illumina 
Monthly during intervention

1.0 × 107 CFU/d
LGG
Formula
(2.5 × 106 CFU/strain/g)
BT1 + B. longum BGT
BR3 + B. longum subsp. infantis 

B. bifidum BF3 + B. breve 
Formula

Control (n = 13)
Probiotic (n = 12)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
EBF (n = 9)
Control (n = 11)
Probiotic (n = 11)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 

Infants 0–2 mo; 6-mo intervention
Finland (Tartu)

Infants at birth; 12-mo interven-
Germany

tion

Outcomes

Microbiota assessment

and amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain 

group
Study design and participants/

tion of intervention
Country of study, age range, dura-

Table 4  Characteristics of studies investigating probiotic administration on the fecal microbiota of healthy children under 18 years of age

1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, V vaginal delivery, wk week, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
in situ hybridization, FOS fructooligosaccharides, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-Pro interspace profiling, mo month, OTU operational taxonomic unit, qPCR quantitative PCR, RT-
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12, BF breastfed, CFU colony-forming unit, C cesarean section, Ct control, d day, EBF exclusive breastfed, FF formula-fed, FISH fluorescent 

[84]

↔ Shannon index

IS-Pro
Beginning and end of intervention

6.5 × 109 CFU/d
L. casei Shirota

Control (n = 12)
Probiotic (n = 6)
Observational trial

Children 12–18 y; 6-wk interven-
Netherlands (Amsterdam)

tion

after 6 mo of intervention

↓ detection rate of C. perfringens 

6 mo of intervention
and Staphylococcus after 3 and 

↓ counts of Enterobacteriaceae 

of intervention
Lactobacillus after 3 and 6 mo 
↑counts of Bifidobacterium and 

↓ total coliform
and E. coli

↓ E. cylindroides, C. ramosum, 
aninogenica, and P. oralis
uncultured Mollicutes, P. mel-
coccus, L. gasseri, R. lactaris, 

↑relative abundance of Lacto-
↑ Proportion of Faecalibacterium

group, but not in placebo
between 0 and 10 mo in BB536 

10 d
coccus and Garnulicatella after 
linsella, Turicibacter, Entero-
Sutterella, ↓ Allobaculum, Col-
↑ proportions of Prevotella and 

tion of Bifidobacterium

↔ overall microbiota and propor-
Bacteroides and total anaerobes

↔ the numbers of enterococci, 
↓ clostridia count after 4 wk
↑ numbers of Bifidobacterium

[83]

[82]

[81]

[79]

RT-qPCR
Beginning and end of intervention

Selective plating
Beginning and end of intervention

(HITChip)

Phylogenetic microarray 
Beginning and end of intervention

4 × 1010 CFU/d
L. casei Shirota
4 × 108 CFU/d
LGG
Oily suspension

4 × 108 CFU/d
LGG
Milk

Probiotic (n = 23)
Observational trial

Children 4–12 y; 6-mo interven-
Japan (Tokyo)

Probiotic (n = 10)
Observational trial

Children 5.7 ± 2.6 y; 21-d inter-
Italy

tion

vention

Control (n = 21)
Probiotic (n = 56)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Control (n = 61)
Probiotic (n = 55)

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 

Children 2–7 y; 7-mo intervention
Finland

Children 2–6 y; 10-mo interven-
Malaysia

tion

[80]

Overall microbiota differed 

by Illumina MiSeq

V3–V4 region of 16S rRNA gene 
0 and 10 mo of intervention

5 × 109 CFU/d, 5 d/wk
B. longum BB536
Freeze-dried powder

Illumina Genome Analyzer II
V4 region of 16S rRNA gene by 

intervention
and 90 following the initiation of 

Prior to and on days 10, 30, 60, 

1010 CFU/d
BB-12
Yogurt drink

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 

Children 1–5 y; 10-d intervention
USA. (Washington, DC)

Control (n = 31)
Probiotic (n = 29)

Control (n = 13)
Probiotic (n = 13)

[78]

↑ counts of Lactobacillus after 

1 wk

1 wk after the intervention
Before, during (1, 3, 4 wk) and 

Selective plating

1.6 × 1010 CFU/d
L. paracasei A
Fermented milk

placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 

Infants 12–24 mo; 4-wk interven-
Italy

tion

Citation

Outcomes

Microbiota assessment

and amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain 

group
Study design and participants/

tion of intervention
Country of study, age range, dura-

Table 4  (continued)

1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences 

Key Findings and Implications for Clinicians

•  The gut microbiota in infancy and childhood is more 

readily shaped by nutrition than during adulthood.

•  The microbiome of BF infants is nurtured by human milk 
components, including HMO, and differs from that of FF 
infants.

•  The addition of HMO and prebiotics to infant formula at 
concentrations found in human milk promotes the growth 
of bifidobacteria and narrows the differences between BF 
and FF infants.

•  Prebiotics  and  dietary  fiber  at  doses  of  5–20  g/day 
modify the gut microbiome of children, increase SCFA 
production, and may exert other health benefits, includ-
ing increasing calcium absorption.

•  Findings on probiotic administration to pregnant or 
lactating women or directly to the infant or child are 
inconsistent, likely due to the variation in the bacterial 
strains, doses, duration and methods of microbiome 
analysis.

•  Better understanding of diet–microbiome–host interac-
tions is needed, but represents an enormous opportunity 
to refine dietary interventions with the goal of supporting 
a healthy microbiome and human well-being.

Funding  This work was supported in part by NIH R01 DK107561 
[SMD].

Compliance with Ethical Standards 

Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.

References

  1.  Li M, Wang M, Donovan SM. Early development of the gut micro-
biome and immune-mediated childhood disorders. Semin Reprod 
Med. 2014;32:74–86.

  2.  Wang M, Monaco MH, Donovan SM. Impact of early gut micro-
biota on immune and metabolic development and function. Semin 
Fetal Neonatal Med. 2016;21:380–387.

  3.  Milani C, Duranti S, Bottacini F, Casey E, et al. The first microbial 
colonizers of the human gut: composition, activities, and health 
implications of the infant gut microbiota. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 
2017;81:pii: e00036-17. https ://doi.org/10.1128/mmbr.00036 -17.
  4.  Davis EC, Wang M, Donovan SM. The role of early life nutrition 
in the establishment of gastrointestinal microbial composition and 
function. Gut Microbes. 2017;8:143–171.

  5.  Yatsunenko T, Rey FE, Manary MJ, et al. Human gut microbiome 
viewed across age and geography. Nature. 2012;486:222–227.
  6.  Derrien M, Alvarez A-S, deVos WM. The gut microbiota in the 
first decade of life. Trends Microbiol. 2019;27:997–1010.

  7.  Stewart CJ, Ajami NJ, O’Brien JL, Hutchinson DS, Smith DP, 
Wong MC. Temporal development of the gut microbiome in early 
childhood from the TEDDY study. Nature. 2018;562:583–588.
  8.  Ho NT, Li F, Lee-Sarwar KA, et al. Meta-analysis of effects of 
exclusive breastfeeding on infant gut microbiota across popula-
tions. Nat Commun. 2018;9:4169. https ://doi.org/10.1038/s4146 
7-018-06473 -x.

  9.  Savage JH, Lee-Sarwar KA, Sordillo JE, et al. Diet during preg-
nancy and infancy and the infant intestinal microbiome. J Pediatr. 
2018;203:47–54. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds .2018.07.066.
10.  Forbes JD, Azad MB, Vehling L, et al. Association of exposure 
 
to formula in the hospital and subsequent infant feeding practices 
with gut microbiota and risk of overweight in the first year of life. 
JAMA Pediatr. 2018;172:e181161.

11.  Stearns JC, Zulyniak MA, de Souza RJ, et al. Ethnic and diet-
 
related differences in the healthy infant microbiome. Genome 
Med. 2017;9:32. https ://doi.org/10.1186/s1307 3-017-0421-5.
12.  Fallani M, Young D, Scott J. Intestinal microbiota of 6-week-
 
old infants across Europe: geographic influence beyond delivery 
mode, breast-feeding, and antibiotics. J Pediatr Gastroenterol 
Nutr. 2010;51:77–84.

13.  Yang R, Gao R, Cui S, et al. Dynamic signatures of gut micro-
 
biota and influences of delivery and feeding modes during the first 
6 months of life. Physiol Genomics. 2019;51:368–378.

14.  Donovan SM, Comstock SS. Human milk oligosaccharides influ-
 
ence neonatal mucosal and systemic immunity. Ann Nutr Metab. 
2016;69:42–51.

15.  Moossavi S, Sepehri S, Robertson B. Composition and variation 
 
of the human milk microbiota are influenced by maternal and 
early life factors. Cell Host Microbe. 2019;25:324–335.

16.  Williams JE, Carrothers JM, Lackey KA, et al. Strong multivari-
 
ate relations exist among milk, oral, and fecal microbiomes in 
mother–infant dyads during the first six months postpartum. J 
Nutr. 2019;149:902–914.

17.  Hunt KM, Foster JA, Forney LJ. Characterization of the diver-
 
sity and temporal stability of bacterial communities in human 
milk. PLoS ONE. 2011;6:e21313. https ://doi.org/10.1371/journ 
al.pone.00213 13.

18.  Pacheco AR, Barile D, Underwood MA, Mills DA. The impact 
 
of the milk glycobiome on the neonate gut microbiota. Annu Rev 
Anim Biosci. 2015;3:419–445.

19.  Sitarik  AR,  Bobbitt  KR,  Havstad  SL,  Fujimura  KE,  Levin 
 
AM, Zoratti EM. Breast milk TGFB is associated with neona-
tal  gut  microbial  composition. J  Pediatr  Gastroenterol  Nutr. 
2017;65:e60–e67.  https ://doi.org/10.1097/MPG.00000 00000  
00158 5.

20.  Duranti  S,  Lugli  GA,  Mancabelli  L.  Maternal  inheritance  of 
 
bifidobacterial communities and bifidophages in infants through 
vertical  transmission.  Microbiome.  2017;5:66.  https ://doi.
org/10.1111/1462-2920.14705 .

21.  Boix-Amoros A, Puente-Sanchez F, du Toit E. Mycobiome pro-
 
files in breast milk from healthy women depend on mode of deliv-
ery, geographic location, and interaction with bacteria. Appl Envi-
ron Microbiol. 2019;85:pii: e02994-18. https ://doi.org/10.1128/
aem.02994 -18.

22.  Koenig JE, Spor A, Scalfone N. Succession of microbial consortia 
 
in the developing infant gut microbiome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 2011;108:4578–4585.

23.  Vallès Y, Artacho A, Pascual-García A. Microbial succession in 
 
the gut: directional trends of taxonomic and functional change in 
a birth cohort of spanish infants. PLoS Genet. 2014;10:e1004406. 
https ://doi.org/10.1371/journ al.pgen.10044 06.

24.  Laursen MF, Bahl MF, Michaelsen KF, Licht TR. First foods 
 
and  gut  microbes.  Front  Microbiol.  2017;8:356.  https ://doi.
org/10.3389/fmicb .2017.00356 .

1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

25.  Thompson AL, Monteagudo-Mera A, Cadenas MB, Lampl ML, 
 
Azcarate-Peril MA. Milk- and solid-feeding practices and daycare 
attendance are associated with differences in bacterial diversity, 
predominant communities, and metabolic and immune function of 
the infant gut microbiome. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2015;5:3. 
https ://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb .2015.00003 .

26.  Bergstrom A, Skov TH, Bahl MI. Establishment of intestinal 
 
microbiota during early life: a longitudinal, explorative study 
of a large cohort of Danish infants. Appl Environ Microbiol. 
2014;80:2889–2900.

27.  Bäckhed F, Roswall J, Peng Y, et al. Dynamics and stabiliza-
 
tion of the human gut microbiome during the first year of life. 
Cell  Host  Microbe.  2015;17:852.  https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chom.2015.05.012.

28.  Ringel-Kulka T, Cheng J, Ringel Y, et al. Intestinal microbiota 
 
in healthy U.S. young children and adults—a high throughput 
microarray  analysis. PLoS  ONE.  2013;8:e64315. https ://doi.
org/10.1371/journ al.pone.00643 15.

29.  De Filippo C, Cavalieri D, Di Paola M, et al. Impact of diet in 
 
shaping gut microbiota revealed by a comparative study in chil-
dren from Europe and rural Africa. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2010;107:14691–14696.

30.  Smith-Brown P, Morrison M, Krause L, Davies PSW. Dairy and 
 
plant based food intakes are associated with altered faecal micro-
biota in 2 to 3 year old Australian children. Sci Rep. 2016;6:32385. 
https ://doi.org/10.1038/srep3 2385.

31.  Berding K, Holscher HD, Arthur AE, Donovan SM. Fecal micro-
 
biome composition and stability in 4- to 8-year old children is 
associated with dietary patterns and nutrient intake. J Nutr Bio-
chem. 2018;56:165–174.

32.  Nakayama J, Yamamoto A, Palermo-Conde LA. Impact of West-
 
ernized diet on gut microbiota in children on Leyte Island. Front 
Microbiol. 2017;. https ://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb .2017.00197 .
33.  Kisuse J, La-Ongkham O, Nakphaichit M, et al. Urban diets linked 
 
to gut microbiome and metabolome alterations in children: a com-
parative cross-sectional study in Thailand. Front Microbiol. 2018;. 
https ://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb .2018.01345 .

34.  Zhong H, Penders J, Shi Z. Impact of early events and lifestyle on 
 
the gut microbiota and metabolic phenotypes in young school-age 
children. Microbiome. 2019;7:2. https ://doi.org/10.1186/s4016 
8-018-0608-z.

35.  La-Ongkham O, Nakphaichit M, Leelavatcharamas V, Keaw-
 
sompong S, Nitisinprasert S. Distinct gut microbiota of healthy 
children from two different geographic regions of Thailand. Arch 
Microbiol. 2015;197:561–573.

36.  Khine WWT, Zhang Y, Goie GJY, et al. Gut microbiome of pre-
 
adolescent children of two ethnicities residing in three distant cit-
ies. Sci Rep. 2019;9:7831. https ://doi.org/10.1038/s4159 8-019-
44369 -y.

37.  Lin A, Bik EM, Costello EK, et al. Distinct distal gut microbiome 
 
diversity and composition in healthy children from Bangladesh 
and the United States. PLoS ONE. 2013;8:e53838. https ://doi.
org/10.1371/journ al.pone.00538 38.

38.  Shankar V, Gouda M, Moncivaiz J, et al. Differences in gut metab-
 
olites and microbial composition and functions between Egyp-
tian and U.S. children are consistent with their diets. MSystems. 
2017;2:pii: e00169-16. https ://doi.org/10.1128/msyst ems.00169 
-16.

39.  Arumugam M, Raes J, Pelletier E, et al. Enterotypes of the human 
 

gut microbiome. Nature. 2011;473:174–180.

40.  Hollister EB, Riehle K, Luna RA, et al. Structure and function of 
 
the healthy pre-adolescent pediatric gut microbiome. Microbiome. 
2015;3:36. https ://doi.org/10.1186/s4016 8-015-0101-x.

41.  Slavin  JL.  Position  of  the  American  Dietetic  Associa-
 
tion:  health  implications  of  dietary  fiber.  J  Am  Diet  Assoc. 
2008;108:1716–1731.

42.  Mobley  AR,  Jones  JM,  Rodriguez  J,  Slavin  J,  Zelman  KM. 
 
Identifying practical solutions to meet America’s fiber needs: 
proceedings  from  the  Food  &  Fiber  Summit.  Nutrients. 
2014;6:2540–2551.

43.  Verspreet J, Damen B, Broekaert WF, Verbeke K, Delcour JA, 
 
Courtin CM. A critical look at prebiotics within the dietary fiber 
concept. Annu Rev Food Sci Technol. 2016;7:167–190.

44.  Korczak R, Kamil A, Fleige L, Donovan SM, Slavin JL. Dietary 
 
fiber and digestive health in children. Nutr Rev. 2017;75:241–259.
45.  Codex Alimentarius Committee. Guidelines on Nutrition Label-
 
ling CAC/GL 2-1985 as Last Amended 2010. Joint FAO/WHO 
Food Standards Programme, Secretariat of the Codex Alimenta-
rius Commission. Rome: FAO; 2010.

46.  Jones JM. CODEX-aligned dietary fiber definitions help to bridge 
 

the ‘fiber gap’. Nutr J. 2014;13:34.

47.  Holscher HD. Dietary fiber and prebiotics and the gastrointestinal 
 

microbiota. Gut Microbes. 2017;8:172–184.

48.  Gibson GR, Hutkins R, Sanders ME, et al. Expert consensus 
 
document: the International Scientific Association for Probiot-
ics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus statement on the defini-
tion and scope of prebiotics. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
2017;14:491–502.

49.  Puccio G, Alliet P, Cajozzo C, et al. Effects of infant formula 
 
with human milk oligosaccharides on growth and morbidity: 
a randomized multicenter trial. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 
2017;64:624–631.

50.  Reverri EJ, Devitt AA, Kajzer JA, Baggs GE, Borschel MW. 
 
Review of the clinical experiences of feeding infants formula con-
taining the human milk oligosaccharide 2′-fucosyllactose. Nutri-
ents. 2018;10:pii: E1346. https ://doi.org/10.3390/nu101 01346 .

51.  Vandenplas Y, Berger B, Carnielli VP, et al. Human milk oli-
 
gosaccharides: 2′-fucosyllactose (2′-FL) and lacto-N-neotetraose 
(LNnT) in infant formula. Nutrients. 2018;10:pii: E1161. https ://
doi.org/10.3390/nu100 91161 .

52.  Lohner S, Jakobik V, Mihályi K, et al. Inulin-type fructan sup-
 
plementation of 3- to 6-year-old children is associated with higher 
fecal Bifidobacterium concentrations and fewer febrile episodes 
requiring medical attention. J Nutr. 2018;148:1300–1308.
53.  François IE, Lescroart O, Veraverbeke WS, et al. Effects of wheat 
 
bran extract containing arabinoxylan oligosaccharides on gastro-
intestinal parameters in healthy preadolescent children. J Pediatr 
Gastroenterol Nutr. 2014;58:647–653.

54.  Whisner CM, Martin BR, Nakatsu CH, et al. Soluble corn fiber 
 
increases calcium absorption associated with shifts in the gut 
microbiome:  a  randomized  dose-response  trial  in  free-living 
pubertal females. J Nutr. 2016;146:1298–1306.

55.  Whisner CM, Martin BR, Schoterman MH, et al. Galacto-oli-
 
gosaccharides increase calcium absorption and gut bifidobac-
teria in young girls: a double-blind cross-over trial. Br J Nutr. 
2013;110:1292–1303.

56.  Whisner CM, Martin BR, Nakatsu CH, et al. Soluble maize fibre 
 
affects short-term calcium absorption in adolescent boys and girls: 
a randomised controlled trial using dual stable isotopic tracers. Br 
J Nutr. 2014;112:446–456.

57.  Hill C, Guarner F, Reid G, et al. Expert consensus document. The 
 
international scientific association for probiotics and prebiotics 
consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term 
probiotic. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014;11:506–514.
58.  Cuello-Garcia  C,  Brozek  JL,  Fiocchi  A,  et  al.  Probiotics  for 
 
the prevention of allergies: a systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis of randomized controlled trials. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2015;36:952–961.

59.  Szajewska H. What are the indications for using probiotics in 
 

children? Arch Dis Child. 2016;101:398–403.

1 3Digestive Diseases and Sciences 

60.  Szajewska H. Short- and long-term effects of probiotics admin-
 
istered early in life. Nestle Nutr Workshop Ser Pediatr Program. 
2011;68:65–78.

61.  Sansotta N, Peroni DG, Romano S, et al. The good bugs: the use 
 
of probiotics in pediatrics. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2019;31:661–669.
62.  Suez J, Zmora N, Segal E, Elinav E. The pros, cons, and many 
 

unknowns of probiotics. Nat Med. 2019;25:716–729.

63.  Lahtinen  SJ,  Boyle  RJ,  Kivivuori  S,  et  al.  Prenatal  probiotic 
 
administration can influence Bifidobacterium microbiota devel-
opment in infants at high risk of allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2009;123:499–501.

64.  Rinne M, Kalliomaki M, Arvilommi H, Salminen S, Isolauri E. 
 
Effect of probiotics and breastfeeding on the bifidobacterium 
and lactobacillus/enterococcus microbiota and humoral immune 
responses. J Pediatr. 2005;147:186–191.

65.  Rutten NB, Gorissen DM, Eck A, et al. Long term development 
 
of gut microbiota composition in atopic children: impact of pro-
biotics. PLoS ONE. 2015;10:e0137681. https ://doi.org/10.1371/
journ al.pone.01376 81.

66.  Enomoto T, Sowa M, Nishimori K, et al. Effects of bifidobac-
 
terial supplementation to pregnant women and infants in the 
prevention of allergy development in infants and on fecal micro-
biota. Allergol Int. 2014;63:575–585.

67.  Dotterud CK, Avershina E, Sekelja M, et al. Does maternal 
 
perinatal probiotic supplementation alter the intestinal micro-
biota  of  mother  and  child?  J  Pediatr  Gastroenterol  Nutr. 
2015;61:200–207.

68.  Grześkowiak Ł, Grönlund MM, Beckmann C, Salminen S, von 
 
Berg A, Isolauri E. The impact of perinatal probiotic interven-
tion on gut microbiota: double-blind placebo-controlled trials 
in Finland and Germany. Anaerobe. 2012;18:7–13.

69.  Rinne M, Kalliomäki M, Salminen S, Isolauri E. Probiotic inter-
 
vention in the first months of life: short-term effects on gastro-
intestinal symptoms and long-term effects on gut microbiota. J 
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2006;43:200–205.

70.  Murphy R, Morgan XC, Wang XY, et al. Eczema-protective pro-
 
biotic alters infant gut microbiome functional capacity but not 
composition: sub-sample analysis from a RCT. Benef Microbes. 
2019;10:5–17.

71.  Bazanella M, Maier TV, Clavel T, et al. Randomized controlled 
 
trial on the impact of early-life intervention with bifidobacteria 
on the healthy infant fecal microbiota and metabolome. Am J 
Clin Nutr. 2017;106:1274–1286.

72.  Vendt N, Grünberg H, Tuure T, et al. Growth during the first 
 
6 months of life in infants using formula enriched with Lacto-
bacillus rhamnosus GG: double-blind, randomized trial. J Hum 
Nutr Diet. 2006;19:51–58.

73.  Garcia Rodenas CL, Lepage M, Ngom-Bru C, Fotiou A, Papaga-
 
roufalis K, Berger B. Effect of formula containing Lactobacillus 
reuteri DSM 17938 on fecal microbiota of infants born by cesar-
ean-section. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2016;63:681–687.
74.  Wu  BB,  Yang  Y,  Xu  X,  Wang  WP.  Effects  of Bifidobacte-
 
rium  supplementation  on  intestinal  microbiota  composition 
and the immune response in healthy infants. World J Pediatr. 
2016;12:177–182.

75.  Maldonado-Lobón  JA,  Gil-Campos  M,  Maldonado  J,  et  al. 
 
Long-term safety of early consumption of Lactobacillus fermen-
tum CECT5716: a 3-year follow-up of a randomized controlled 
trial. Pharmacol Res. 2015;95–96:12–19.

76.  Brunser O, Figueroa G, Gotteland M, et al. Effects of probiotic 
 
or prebiotic supplemented milk formulas on fecal microbiota 
composition of infants. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2006;15:368–376.
77.  Laursen MF, Laursen RP, Larnkjær A, Michaelsen KF, Bahl 
 
MI, Licht TR. Administration of two probiotic strains during 
early childhood does not affect the endogenous gut microbiota 
composition despite probiotic proliferation. BMC Microbiol. 
2017;17:175. https ://doi.org/10.1186/s1286 6-017-1090-7.
78.  Marzotto  M,  Maffeis  C,  Paternoster  T,  et  al.  Lactobacil-
 
lus paracasei A survives gastrointestinal passage and affects 
the  fecal  microbiota  of  healthy  infants.  Res  Microbiol. 
2006;157:857–866.

79.  Tan TP, Ba Z, Sanders ME, et al. Safety of Bifidobacterium ani-
 
malis subsp. lactis (B. lactis) strain BB-12 supplemented yogurt in 
healthy children. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2017;64:302–309.
80.  Lau AS, Yanagisawa N, Hor YY, et al. Bifidobacterium longum 
 
BB536  alleviated  upper  respiratory  illnesses  and  modulated 
gut microbiota profiles in Malaysian pre-school children. Benef 
Microbes. 2018;9:61–70.

81.  Korpela K, Salonen A, Virta LJ, Kumpu M, Kekkonen RA, de 
 
Vos  WM. Lactobacillus  rhamnosus  GG  intake  modifies  pre-
school  children’s  intestinal  microbiota,  alleviates  penicillin-
associated  changes,  and  reduces  antibiotic  use.  PLoS  ONE. 
2016;11:e0154012. https ://doi.org/10.1371/journ al.pone.01540 12.
82.  Mogna L, Del Piano M, Mogna G. Capability of the two microor-
 
ganisms Bifidobacterium breve B632 and Bifidobacterium breve 
BR03 to colonize the intestinal microbiota of children. J Clin 
Gastroenterol. 2014;48:S37–S39.

83.  Wang C, Nagata S, Asahara T, et al. Intestinal microbiota profiles 
 
of healthy pre-school and school-age children and effects of pro-
biotic supplementation. Ann Nutr Metab. 2015;67:257–266.
84.  El Manouni El Hassani S, de Boer NKH, et al. Effect of daily 
 
intake  of  Lactobacillus  casei  on  microbial  diversity  and 
dynamics  in  a  healthy  pediatric  population. Curr  Microbiol. 
2019;76:1020–1027.

85.  Power SE, O’Toole PW, Stanton C, Ross RP, Fitzgerald FG. Intes-
 
tinal microbiota, diet and health. Br J Nutr. 2014;111:3870403.

86.  Chapkin RS, Zhao C, Ivanov I, et al. Non-invasive stool-based 
 
detection  of  infant  gastrointestinal  development  using  gene 
expression profiles from exfoliated epithelial cells. Am J Physiol 
Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010;298:G582–G589.

87.  Schwartz S, Friedberg I, Ivanov I, et al. A metagenomic study 
 
of diet-dependent interaction between gut microbiota and host 
in  infants  reveals  differences  in  developmental  and  immune 
responses. Genome Biol. 2012;13:R32. https ://doi.org/10.1186/
gb-2012-13-4-r32.

88.  Chilloux J, Neves AL, Boulangé CL, Dumas M-E. The microbial-
 
mammalian metabolic axis: a critical symbiotic relationship. Curr 
Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2016;19:250–256.

89.  Zhang N, Ju Z, Zuo T. Time for food: the impact of diet on gut 
 
microbiota and human health. Nutrition. 2018;52–52:800–885.

90.  Barratt MJ, Lebrilla C, Shapiro H-Y, Gordon JI. The gut micro-
 
biota, food science and human nutrition; a timely marriage. Cell 
Host Microbe. 2017;22:134–141.

Publisher’s  Note  Springer  Nature  remains  neutral  with  regard  to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

1 3