32_PARAGRAPHS

the dysbiosis of host gut microbiota and modulating of gut microbiota may be beneficial for
PCOS treatment. In this study, in order to verify our hypotheses, PCOS rat model was estab-
lished using letrozole induction. Microbiota interventions through Lactobacillus transplanta-
tion and fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) from healthy rats were used for the
treatments of PCOS rats. Administration of probiotics such as Lactobacillus is an attractive
concept in combating various diseases. L rhamnosus GR-1 attenuated lipopolysaccharide-
induced inflammation in pregnant CD-1 mice  Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM main-
tained insulin sensitivity in a metabolically heterogeneous group  Lactobacillus rhamnosus
GG and Lactobacillus casei DN-114-001 protected epithelial barrier function against Escheri-
chia coli-induced redistribution of the tight-junction proteins  Fecal microbiota trans-
plantation (FMT) was introduction of fecal suspension derived from a healthy donor into the
gastrointestinal tract of a diseased individual. It has been proposed as a novel therapeutic
approach to modulate gut microbiota dysbiosis. Patients with metabolic syndrome increased
insulin sensitivity after infusion of microbiota from lean donors  Our previous study
showed that FMT promoted the re-establishment of intestinal microbial communities and
mucosal barriers in mice with antibiotic-induced dysbiosis  Thus, the available animal and
human evidences suggested that Lactobacillus transplantation and FMT could serve as new
therapies for treating diseases. In the present study, after microbiota interventions through Lac-
tobacillus transplantation and FMT, the estrous cycles, sex hormonal levels, ovarian.

Six-week-old specific-pathogen free (SPF) level inbred female Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (mean
body weight, 180 g) were purchased from Animal Facility of Dalian Medical University. All
animal experiments were approved by the Animal Care Committee of Dalian Medical Univer-
sity, China (SCXK-2013-0003). All animals were feed with commercial diet (51% nitrogen-free
extract, 24.9% crude protein, 4.6% crud fat, 6.6% crud ash, 4.1% crud fiber and 8.9% moisture),
and tap water ad libitum. In this experiment, 32 female SD rats were randomly assigned into 4
groups of 8 rats each, including a control group that received a gavage of normal saline, and
three treatment groups (PCOS, PCOS FMT and PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation groups)
administered a gavage of letrozole (Novartis Pharma Schweiz AG, Switzerland) at a concentra-
tion of 1 mg/kg once daily for 21 consecutive days. The establishment of PCOS rat model was
similar to that of Kalafi. et al  On day 21, all rat fecal samples were collected. Control rat
fecal samples and PCOS rat fecal samples were used for DGGE analysis to evaluate the gut
microbiota shift in PCOS rats. In order to quantify the differences of microbita for all rats on
day 21, real-time PCR analysis was applied. Twenty four hours after the last dose of letrozole
(on day 22), PCOS FMT rats were administered a gavage of fecal supernatant with 2×109 fecal
microbiota, PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation rats were administered a gavage of 2×109 Lac-
tobacillus, the control rats and PCOS rats were administered a gavage of normal saline for 14
consecutive days. On day 36, all rat fecal samples were collected for real-time PCR analysis.
Then all rats were sacrificed by decapitation. Trunk blood samples and ovarian tissue samples
were obtained for the subsequent experiments. The treatments of the animals and sample col-
lections were showed in Fig 1..

Fig 1. Time lines of the animal experiments. To establish the PCOS rat model, SD rats were treated with
letrozole at a concentration of 1 mg/kg once daily for 21 days. After that, PCOS FMT group was treated with
2×109 fecal microbiota once daily, PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation group was treated with 2×109
Lactobacillus once daily, PCOS group and control group were treated with normal saline for 14 days. On day
21, all rat fecal samples were collected. On day 36, all rat blood samples, ovarian tissue samples and fecal
samples were collected..

On day 21 and 36, all rat fecal samples were collected for real-time PCR analysis. The abun-
dance of specific bacterial groups in the rat fecal samples including Lactobacillus, Bacteroides,
Enterococcus, Enterobacteriaceae, Bifidobacterium, Clostridium, Prevotella and Ruminococcus
were measured by real-time PCR detection system (Takara, Japan). The specific primers were
showed in S1 Table. Plasmid DNAs were obtained by PCR products cloning with the specific
primer sets and used as positive controls. No false-positive results were obtained for the plas-
mid DNA-free controls, showing that there was no reagent contamination. Each reaction was
run in triplicate..

Lactobacillus transplantation
Lactobacillus were separated from healthy rat’s cecum contents and cultured in facultative
anaerobic culture for 48 h, then the bacterial solution was collected and OD value was tested at
620 nm. This bacterial solution was centrifuged at 5000 g for 3 min then the bacteria were col-
lected and resuspended in saline. Each rat of the Lactobacillus group was administered a gavage
of 2×109 Lactobacillus daily for 14 consecutive days..

Tokyo, Japan) by two persons blinded to the origin of sections. Cystic follicles were defined
according to criteria proposed previously as those follicles devoid of oocytes, displaying a
large antral cavity, an enlarged thecal cell layer, and a thin granulosa cell compartment contain-
ing apparently healthy cells..

lanes (C2-2 and P2-3) were cut and sequenced. Band 2 and 3 were identified as Prevotella mela-
ninogenica ATCC 25845 with 93% similarity, indicating that the DGGE gel separated V3 16S
rRNA genes from different bacteria effectively. As shown in DGGE profiles, the separated and
strong bands in PCOS group were identified as Pseudomonas monteilii SB3101, Roseburia
intestinalis XB6B4, Prevotella melaninogenica ATCC25845 and Prevotella denticola F0289. The
weak bands in PCOS group were identified as Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC533 and Ruminococ-
cus torques L2-14 (Table 1)..

Enterococcus, Bacteroides, Enterobacteriaceae, Bifidobacterium and Clostridium genus in fecal
samples were chosen for further quantitative analysis on the basis of their important status in.

Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC 533 .

Prevotella melaninogenica ATCC 25845.

Prevotella melaninogenica ATCC 25845.

the gut; Lactobacillus, Prevotella and Ruminococcus genus were selected because of the results
of DGGE analysis and sequence analysis. On day 21, the copy number of Lactobacillus, Rumi-
nococcus and Clostridium were lower and Prevotella was higher in PCOS group when com-
pared with the control group. There were no significant differences in the copy number of
Bifidobacterium, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus and Bacteroides in the two groups (Table 2)..

In order to verify the effects of FMT and Lactobacillus transplantation on the composition
of gut microbiota in PCOS rats, PCOS rats were treated with FMT or Lactobacillus and the bac-
teria described above were examined. As shown in Table 2, on day 36, the copy number of Lac-
tobacillus and Clostridium were increased in both FMT group and Lactobacillus
transplantation group, to levels similar to that of the control group. The abundance of Prevo-
tella was decreased in both treated groups and the changes in FMT group were more significant.

Lactobacillus treatment group
(Mean±sem).

than that in Lactobacillus transplantation group. Though Prevotella in both groups still have
significant differences with the control, it decreased significantly when compared with the
PCOS group. There were no significant differences in the copy number of Bifidobacterium,
Escherichia coli, Enterococcus, Bacteroides and Ruminococcus in the two treated groups when
compared with PCOS group. These data indicated that PCOS resulted in a significant variation
of gut microbiota composition. Both FMT and Lactobacillus transplantation were beneficial for
restorations of normal gut residents in letrozole induced PCOS rats..

FMT and Lactobacillus transplantation improved estrous cycles in
letrozole induced PCOS rats.

Using daily vaginal smears, estrous cycles were analyzed for all rats. All control rats had regular
estrous cycles of 4–5 days, comprising proestrus, estrus, metestrus and diestrus. The PCOS rats
were constantly in diestrus stage, exhibiting predominantly leukocytes. On the 7th day after
PCOS rats were treated with FMT, epithelial keratinocytes were observed microscopically dur-
ing estrus in the vaginal smears of 3 rats; on the 14th day epithelial keratinocytes were observed
in all of the 8 rats. The estrous cycle changes occurred twice in 5 rats, once in 3 rats. In the
PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation group, 1 of 8 rats had epithelial keratinocytes on the 7th
day; 6 of 8 rats had epithelial keratinocytes on the 14th day; the remaining 2 rats were in dies-
trus at the time of sacrifice. The estrous cycle changes occurred twice in 2 rats, once in 4 rats,
and not at all in 2 rats (Fig 3)..

Under light microscopy, the control rat ovaries exhibited follicles in various stages of develop-
ment including secondary follicles, graafian follicles, and fresh corpora lutea. The granulosa
within the follicles showed multiple layers. The PCOS rat ovaries showed small follicles in early
stage of development and atretic follicles. In addition, many large cysts with virtually no granu-
losa layer or scant granulosa were observed. The FMT and Lactobacillus transplantation rat
ovaries showed increased granulosa layers and the formation of corpora lutea (Fig 4 and
Table 3)..

The serum estradiol and estrone concentrations were significantly lower in PCOS rats than
those in the control rats. When PCOS rats were treated with FMT or Lactobacillus, the estradiol
and estrone levels were increased significantly compared with those in PCOS rats (Fig 5A and
5B). FMT was more effective in elevating estradiol and estrone levels than Lactobacillus trans-
plantation as there was no significant difference between the FMT group and the control
group..

The serum testosterone and androstenedione concentrations were significantly higher in
PCOS rats than those in control rats. When PCOS rats were treated with FMT or Lactobacillus,
the testosterone and androstenedione levels were decreased significantly compared with those
in PCOS rats (Fig 5C and 5D). Also FMT was more effective in reducing testosterone and
androstenedione levels when compared with Lactobacillus transplantation. However, the dif-
ferences were still statistically significant when compared with the control..

Fig 3. Estrous cycle changes in three representative rats from each group. Cycle stages are as follows: 1, diestrus; 2, proestrus; 3, estrus and 4,
metestrus. Groups are as follows: (A) Control group; (B) PCOS group; (C) PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation group; (D) PCOS FMT group..

Fig 4. Morphological changes of ovarian tissues. (A) Sections of ovary from the control group had normal appearance. (B) PCOS group showed cystic
degenerating follicles with thin granulosa layers. (C) PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation group showed increased granulosa layers. (D) PCOS FMT group
showed increased granulosa layers and formation of corpora lutea. The larger boxed area in A, B, C, D was shown at higher magnification in E, F, G,
H, respectively. GLC: granular cell layer, TCL: theca cell layer, O: oocyte, L: luteum, AF: atretic follicle. Magnification  scale bar, 50 μm..

Number of corpora lutea (n)
Diameter of largest follicle (μm)
Thickness of granulosa cell layer
(μm).

Lactobacillus treatment group
(Mean±sem).

The present study demonstrated that the microbiota composition of letrozole-induced
PCOS rats and control rats were divided into different clusters, and PCOS group displayed a
relatively high homology indicating common characteristics of PCOS. Sequence analysis of the
excised bands showed that the strong bands in PCOS group were related to Pseudomonas,
Roseburia and Prevotella, the weak bands in PCOS group were related to Lactobacillus and
Ruminococcus. DGGE analysis is a semiquantitative technique, the band density does not accu-
rately relate to its abundance. Therefore, real-time PCR was utilized to obtain a quantitative
estimation of Lactobacillus, Enterococcus, Bacteroides, Enterobacteriaceae, Bifidobacterium,
Clostridium, Prevotella and Ruminococcus genus. The results revealed that Lactobacillus, Rumi-
nococcus and Clostridium were lower and Prevotella was higher in PCOS group, there were no
statistically significant differences for Bifidobacterium, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus and Bac-
teroides in PCOS groups when compared with the control group..

Prevotella species are constituents of host-associated ecosystems in the respiratory tract,
oral cavity and genital tract. These organisms contributed to polymicrobial infections such as.

chronic sinusitis, periodontitis and bacterial vaginosis  Recent investigations have
revealed that males not females have greater odds of carrying Prevotella intermedia in oral cav-
ity, suggesting an association between sex hormone and carriage of Prevotella  In women
with PCOS, Prevotella intermedia serum antibody levels were higher than healthy women 
It has been hypothesized that testosterone metabolites contributed to Prevotella growth and
virulence  However, there is no evidence to support this hypothesis. Prevotella intermedia
were capable of stimulating 5α-reductase activity in human gingival fibroblasts, leading to the
synthesis of dihydrotestosterone form testosterone and androstenedione  In this study,
with the testosterone and androstenedione levels increased in PCOS group, the copy number
of Prevotella also increased, which is consistent with previous study. To further understand
effects of microbiota interventions on PCOS, PCOS rats were treated with FMT and Lactobacil-
lus transplantation. The results showed that with the copy number of Prevotella decrease the
testosterone and androstenedione levels also decreased. The relationship between Prevotella
and androgen level needs further study in letrozole-induced PCOS rat model..

Lactobacillus plays an important role in the maintenance of human health by stimulating.

the natural immunity and contributing to the balance of microbiota  A previous study
showed that postmenopausal women with a more diverse gut microbiome exhibited elevated
urinary estrogens and estrogen metabolites  In the present study, with the decrease of
estradiol and estrone levels in PCOS rats, the colonization of Lactobacillus in the gut was
decreased. When PCOS rats were treated with FMT and Lactobacillus transplantation, with the
increase of Lactobacilli, estradiol and estrone levels were increased significantly. There is a limi-
tation of our study: ELISA sensitivity can fail to detect low levels of sex steroids and could not
analyze the serum steroids in female rodents according to estrus cycle stage  However, the
available data indicated that sex steroids concentrations could be regulated by microbiota inter-
ventions in PCOS rat model..

Gut microbiota such as Bifidobacteria and Lactobacillus are often referred to as “good bacte-.

ria” as they exert health-promoting properties. It is proposed that increase of Lactobacillus in
the gut lead to production of short chain fatty acids that improve gut health, increasing the bar-
rier function of the gut and reducing translocation of bacterial endotoxins across the gut wall
where they could produce inflammation and insulin resistance  Probiotic supplementation
(Lactobacillus casei Shirota (LcS)) could prevent high-fat, over-feeding induced insulin resis-
tance in human subjects  Considering the beneficial effect of Lactobacillus on insulin resis-
tance and the disorder is associated with PCOS, the present study used Lactobacillus
transplantation and FMT to treat PCOS rats. The results showed that after treating PCOS rats
with Lactobacillus transplantation and FMT, the serum androgens reduced, estrous cycles
improved and the ovarian functions normalized. These data suggested that FMT and Lactoba-
cillus transplantation were helpful for the treatments of PCOS rats..

and found that dysbiosis of gut microbiota was associated with sex hormone levels, estrus
cycles and ovarian morphological changes. Furthermore, microbiota interventions by FMT
and Lactobacillus transplantation could decrease the androgen level and increase the estrogen
level in blood serum, improve ovarian disorder and estrus cycles in PCOS rats. In addition,
compared with Lactobacillus transplantation group, FMT group had better recovery effects on
sex hormone levels and estrus cycles. This may be caused by the unknown microbiota in the
feces. We hope that this study could raise concerns about the important roles of gut microbiota
in the etiology and therapeutic effects in PCOS.