7_PARAGRAPHS

All epithelial surfaces that interface with the external world harbor microbes, but the most
dense microbial communities are those in the distal intestinal tract. Recent estimates suggest
that 10 to 100 trillion microbes (including up to 1000 species) reside in this location 
Remarkably, although more than 70 bacterial divisions (deep evolutionary lineages) are
known to exist on the planet, human gut microbial communities are dominated by just four
lineages. Two dominant divisions, the Bacteroidetes and the Firmicutes, comprise over 95%
of the total community; most of these organisms are strict anaerobes such as the Bacteroides
and Clostridium species  The remainder of human gut microbes are often from two
other divisions: Actinobacteria (e.g., Bifidobacterium species) and Proteobacteria. The
phylum Proteobacteria contains the gram-negative enterics that despite being well known to
clinicians, represent only a fraction of the gut microbial community  The dominance of
these four bacterial phyla and the relative absence of all other phyla suggests that, under
normal circumstances, the human-microbe relationship is highly selective and highly stable.
Throughout most of a person’s life, this relationship is either symbiotic (mutually beneficial)
or commensal (providing benefit to one member without harming the other); pathogenic
host-microbe interactions are indeed the exception rather than the rule .

Genomic analysis of gut bacteria offers vivid examples of the role of microbes in nutrient
utilization. For example, in 2003, Xu, et al. published the complete genome sequence of the
gram-negative anaerobe Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, a prominent member of the normal
intestinal microbiota  Annotation and analysis of the genome revealed a sophisticated
apparatus for acquiring and digesting otherwise unusable dietary polysaccharides. This
apparatus, including a complex, multi-component, multi-enzyme complex starch utilization
system (SUS), consists of over 230 glycoside hydrolase and 15 polysaccharide lyase genes
 The genomic analysis demonstrated that B. thetaiotaomicron has evolved the
remarkable capacity to sense the availability of carbohydrates in its microenvironment, and
that it also has the ability to forage and utilize host-derived glycans (e.g., mucin and
heparin). Mechanistic studies in gnotobiotic animals further demonstrated that, when B.
thetaiotaomicron senses a scarcity of fucose in the intestinal lumen, it actually induces the
gut epithelium to upregulate expression of fucosylated glycans that can be used by the
bacteria as an energy source without harming the host  This body of work illustrates
how the remarkable host-microbe symbiosis can be teased apart by pairing genomic
sequencing efforts with creative in vivo laboratory studies..

Two recent studies harnessed the power of high-throughput DNA sequencing to profile
changes in microbial ecology during fasting in animal models. Crawford, et al. performed a
fascinating study of myocardial ketone body metabolism by the intestinal microbiota during
nutrient deprivation  After a 24 hour fast, the authors observed a significant increase in
the abundance of Bacteroidetes species and a corresponding decrease in Firmicutes; this is
the converse of what was observed in models of caloric excess. They proceeded to provide
convincing evidence that the microbiota plays an integral role in fasting-induced hepatic
ketogenesis, an important energy source during stress and starvation. In GF animals,
ketogenesis was markedly reduced, and it was shown that myocardial metabolism was
redirected towards glucose utilization. To understand further how microbial ecology is
altered during fasting, Costello, et al. performed an innovative study in which they studied
the Burmese python, a vertebrate that consumes large meals between long intervals of
fasting  These authors also demonstrated an abundance of Bacteroidetes during fasting
that shifted towards a post-prandial abundance of Firmicutes. Species that were enriched in
the post-prandial state included Clostridium and Lactobacillus. These innovative studies
serve as a foundation to study gut microbes in hospitalized patients that are not candidates
for enteral nutrition..

If one accepts that a “healthy” intestinal microbiota serves important biological functions,
then it is reasonable to hypothesize that gut microbial communities can be manipulated or
“optimized” during critical illness to increase the chances of achieving desired clinical
outcomes. In theory, manipulation of the gut microbiota could be used to improve energy
balance and decrease the incidence of infectious complications. A fundamental problem
with clinical application of this theory has been that we lack a detailed understanding of if
and how the microbiome is altered during critical illness. As a result, interventions in this
field have been introduced with a limited scientific foundation. Nonetheless, several
strategies to optimize the microbiome have now been evaluated clinically. Some, such as the
recent description of fecal transplantation for Clostridium difficile colitis  will not be
discussed here. Others with obvious relevance to nutrition are discussed..

Over the past two decades, several clinical trials have documented that selective
decontamination of the gastrointestinal tract and/or the oropharynx improves outcomes in
critically ill patients while simultaneously promoting the growth of antibiotic resistant
bacteria  Accepted approaches to decontamination consist of administering a regimen
of broad-spectrum nonabsorbable antibiotics that theoretically spares the colonic anaerobes,
and instead targets yeast, gram-negative pathogens ( e.g., the Enterobacteriaceae and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa), and gram-positive pathogens (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus) in
the oral cavity or the GI tract. These protocols drastically alter the ICU microbiota  and
by extension decrease both mortality and the incidence of infectious complications such as
ventilator-associated pneumonia  Importantly, although these landmark studies
serve as proof of principle that the intestinal microbiota can be manipulated in the ICU to
achieve desirable outcomes, no studies utilized molecular techniques to profile the ICU
microbiome before, during, or after decontamination. As a result, a precise understanding of
how decontamination protocols work is lacking. Nevertheless, enthusiasm for
decontamination protocols has diminished due to unacceptable increases in drug-resistant
bacterial strains within the ICU..

The practice of administering live microbes with putative health benefits to unhealthy
patients dates back to the early twentieth century. Much of the early work in the field was
performed at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, where Nobel laureate Eli Metchnikoff and others
advanced the notion of a differential gut microbiota in health and disease  These
scientists hypothesized that the protective effects of specific diets in some regions of Europe
could be attributed to the diet-induced growth of beneficial microbes. Interestingly, this led
almost instantly to commercial attempts to capitalize upon these ideas, hence the
development of probiotics. The most commonly used probiotic species are nonpathogenic
yeasts and organisms from the genera Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium  The most
commonly used prebiotics are the naturally occurring oligosaccharides known as fructans
that are normally found in foods such as garlic, artichokes, and bananas  Another well-
studied class of prebiotics is resistant starches, such as those found in unripe bananas and
raw potatoes. As knowledge of the intestinal microbiome expands, it is likely that many
more potential probiotic species and prebiotic supplements will be identified..

Another possible approach to improve outcomes for critically ill patients is to manipulate the
intestinal microenvironment to maintain the local microbial ecology of the GI tract
indirectly. It is well established that the use of vasoactive pressors, antibiotics, and highly
processed nutrients will change not only the local microbiota, but also pH, oxygen tension,
SCFA production, and various critical micronutrients that maintain the health of normal
intestinal microbes. Our group and others have shown that maintenance of a more acidic
intestinal pH through the course of surgical injury and administration of oral pH solutions
enhance local intestinal immunity and prevent lethal gut-derived sepsis . Most recently
we have shown that surgical injury causes a rapid depletion of mucus phosphate, thereby
inducing certain strains of pathogenic bacteria to upregulate their virulence against the
intestinal epithelial barrier  Most bacteria that cause serious infections in ICU patients
are equipped with exquisite sensory mechanisms to detect the level of local phosphate
concentration. Phosphate concentration is a key trigger by which bacteria activate their
virulence machinery to, in some cases, cause lethal sepsis. When phosphate levels are high
at sites of local microbial colonization, such as the intestinal mucus, microbes use the PhoB
phosphosensory/phosphoregulatory system to repress virulence activation. However, during
phosphate depletion, the PhoB system is derepressed and virulence is activated even to the
point of tissue invasion, immune activation, and organ failure  The PhoB and analogous
systems are highly conserved among microbes and offer an opportunity for clinicians to
understand the precise host signals that trigger microbes to transform from indolent
colonizers to lethal pathogens rapidly. We have shown in animal studies that maintenance of
local phosphate concentration can suppress virulence activation among highly pathogenic
bacteria such as P. aeruginosa even during periods of severe physiologic stress  This
also appears to be the case for other pathogens such as C. albicans and E. faecalis
(unpublished observations). Therefore, providing therapies at the microenvironmental level
could be a novel approach to create molecular diplomacy between pathogen and host
through the course of severe physiologic stress such as that which occurs during human
critical illness.