12_PARAGRAPHS

In unadjusted analyses of 4 genera selected a priori based
on prior literature suggesting associations with early diet and
health outcomes,7-10,22-25 we found that high maternal intake
of vegetables and low intake of processed meats and deep fried
foods was inversely associated with Bacteroides spp (decrease.

in 0.19 log counts for every 1 increase in PC 1; P = .03) and
Clostridium spp (decrease in 0.15 log counts for every 1 increase
in PC 1; P = .03) counts (Table IV). However, after adjusting
for demographic variables (mode of delivery, age, treatment,
maternal education, and race/ethnicity), breastfeeding vs
formula feeding and solid food introduction, the only asso-
ciation between the maternal diet and taxa selected a priori
for analysis was a positive association with Lactobacillus spp
(mean difference = 0.48; P = .02)..

In crude analyses, both the Shannon diversity index and rich-
ness were signiﬁcantly lower among breastfed infants com-
pared with formula-fed infants (1.92 ± 0.42 vs 2.37 ± 0.36,
P < .001; and 26.5 ± 7.13 vs 34.8 ± 6.40, P < .001, respectively,
Table IV). These differences remained after adjustment for de-
mographic and other dietary variables. In analyses of genera
selected a priori for analysis, adjusted for demographic factors,
we observed signiﬁcantly higher relative abundances of
Biﬁdobacterium spp (mean difference 0.51; P = .02), Lactoba-
cillus spp (mean difference 3.87; P < .001), and Clostridium spp
(mean difference 0.75; P = .05) among breastfed vs formula-
fed infants. Results were similar after adding solid foods and
maternal diet as covariates to the adjusted model..

30.5 ± 7.40, P = .001, respectively; Table IV). However, these
differences were attenuated and no longer statistically signiﬁcant
after adjustment for demographic factors alone, and after ad-
justment for demographic and other dietary factors. We did
not detect an association between solid foods and relative abun-
dance of Bacteroides spp, Biﬁdobacterium spp, Lactobacillus spp,
or Clostridia spp in unadjusted analyses. After adjusting for de-
mographic variables, solid food introduction was positively as-
sociated with Clostridium spp (mean difference = 0.80 log
counts; P = .03) and this association remained signiﬁcant after
addition of infant breastfeeding vs formula feeding status and
maternal diet to the adjusted model (mean difference = 0.75
log counts, P = .05)..

We next asked whether race/ethnicity inﬂuenced the
association between the infant’s diet and the intestinal
microbiome by including an interaction term between race/
ethnicity and breast milk vs formula in models adjusted for
demographic and other dietary variables. There was no sig-
niﬁcant interaction with regard to Shannon Index (P = .17),
richness (P = .66), Bacteroides spp counts (P = .55), or
Clostridium spp counts (P = .65). There was a trend toward race/
ethnicity × breastfeeding status interactions with regard to
Biﬁdobacterium spp counts (P = .10) and Lactobacillus spp
counts (P = .09). Consequently, we analyzed the association
between breastfeeding status and those taxa (Biﬁdobacterium
and Lactobacillus), stratiﬁed by race/ethnicity. We found that
Biﬁdobacterium spp counts were similar among breastfed and
formula-fed African American infants, and Hispanic and white
breastfed infants had higher levels of Biﬁdobacterium spp com-
pared with formula-fed Hispanic and White infants (African.

Significant (P <.05) results are in bold.
The PC 1 of maternal diet during pregnancy was dichotomized at its mean for comparisons of low and high groups, and used as a continuous variable in regression models.
Mean, SD for normally distributed variables (Shannon index, Richness).
Median, 25%-75% range for count data.
Linear regression was used in analyses of Shannon Index, and richness and negative binomial regression was used in analysis of bacterial counts. b coefficients of bacterial counts represent a
difference in the log count, formula fed is reference.
The Shannon index is a measure of diversity that accounts both for number of species present and for how evenly distributed bacterial counts are across the species that are present.
*Demographic variables: treatment, mode of delivery, age, maternal education, and race/ethnicity of child.
†Dietary variables: infant breastfeeding vs formula feeding and infant solid food.
‡Dietary variables: infant solid food and first principal component of maternal diet (high in vegetables and low in processed meats and deep fried foods).
§Dietary variables: infant breastfeeding vs formula feeding and first principal component of maternal diet (high in vegetables and low in processed meats and deep fried foods)..

American mean difference = 0.38 log counts, Hispanic mean
difference = 0.52, White mean difference 0.50; Table V and
Figure 2). Conversely, Lactobacillus spp counts tended to be
higher among breastfed African American infants compared
with breastfed Hispanic and White infants (African Ameri-
can mean difference = 6.34 log counts, Hispanic mean
difference = 2.53, White mean difference 3.08; Table V and
Figure 2)..

When maternal education was added as a covariate,
the strengths of interactions between breastfeeding vs
formula feeding status and race/ethnicity were weakened
(Biﬁdobacterium spp P = .12; Lactobacillus spp P = .21). Because
maternal education and race/ethnicity were highly associ-
ated (P = < .001 for c2 test), it is likely that interaction strengths
were attenuated due to collinearity. Excluding race/ethnicity
from the model, the interaction between breastfeeding status
and maternal education was not signiﬁcant for either
Biﬁdobacterium spp (P = .45) or Lactobacillus spp (P = .73),
further supporting stronger associations of microbial differ-
ences by infant diet group with race/ethnicity than maternal
education..

We identiﬁed signiﬁcant differences in relative abun-
dances of taxa between breastfed and formula- fed infants in
adjusted analyses stratiﬁed by race/ethnicity (Figure 3 and
Table VI; available at www.jpeds.com). As in our stratiﬁed
analysis of a priori taxa, Lactobacillus spp were signiﬁcantly
enriched in African American and Hispanic infants who are
breastfed. We note overlap and heterogeneity in the response
to breastfeeding among the top associations among taxa and
diet. Among African Americans and Hispanics, Lachnospiraceae
spp and Ruminococcaceae spp are reduced in infants who are
breastfed and Staphylococcus spp are enriched among His-
panic infants who are breastfed and Eubacterium spp are
reduced among White infants who are breastfed. With ma-
ternal education included as a covariate, these results are largely
unchanged (Table VII; available at www.jpeds.com)..

Figure 2. Average (±SE) counts per 1000 reads of A, Bacteroides, B, Biﬁdobacterium, C, Lactobacillus, and D, Clostridia spp
among infants fed breast milk or formula, stratiﬁed by race/ethnicity. There were interactions between race/ethnicity and breastfeeding
vs formula on relative abundances of Biﬁdobacterium and Lactobacillus (P ≤ .10) in negative binomial regression analyses..

microbiome in a multiethnic population using untargeted se-
quencing techniques. The strongest associations we identi-
ﬁed were between breastfeeding vs formula feeding and the child
intestinal microbiome. Breastfed infants had higher counts of
genera thought to be beneﬁcial: Biﬁdobacterium, Lactobacillus,
and Clostridia. In analyses stratiﬁed by race/ethnicity, we found
positive associations between ingestion of breast milk (vs
formula) and relative abundances of Lactobacillus spp in African
American and Hispanic infants, and with Staphylococcus spp
in Hispanic subjects. These associations are consistent with ob-
servations that both Lactobacillus and Staphylococcus spp are
present in breast milk and grow in the presence of human milk
oligosaccharides.27-29.

Comparison of our ﬁndings with those of other studies is
not straightforward due to different ages studied, variable mi-
crobial proﬁling methods, and heterogenous analytic tech-
niques. In an ethnically homogeneous population using targeted
quantitative polymerase chain reaction on stool samples col-
lected at age 1 month, Penders et al showed breastfed infants
had less Clostridia difﬁcile compared with formula-fed infants.7,30
This contrasts with our ﬁnding of a positive association between
breastfeeding and overall Clostridia spp, though we expect that
the inﬂuence of breastfeeding differs among individual species
within this genus. Consistent with our results, breastfeeding
is thought to increase Biﬁdobacterium spp. However, we did
not observe the decrease in Bacteroides spp with breastfeeding
that has been seen in other studies,7,8 possibly because of the
relatively old age of our participants.