8_PARAGRAPHS

The group- or genus-specic oligonucleotide probes targeted
the bacterial 16S rRNA, including the Bacteroides–Prevotella
group (Bac303, 50-CCAATGTGGGGGACCTT), the Clostridium
I & II group (Chis150, 50-TTATGCGGTATTAATC-
cluster
the Enterobacteriaceae group (Enter1432, 50-
TYCCTTT),
the Lactobacillus group (Lab158, 50-
GTTTTGCAACCCACT),
GGTATTAGCA(C/T)CTGTTTCCA), the Eubacterium rectale group
(Mib724, 50-GCTTCTTAGTCARGTACCG), the Atopobium group
(Ato291, 50-GGTCGGTCTCTCAACCC), the Bidobacterium group
(Bif164, 50-CATCCGGCATTACCACCC), the Enterococcus faecalis
(Enf191, 50-GAAAGCGCCTTTCACTCTTATGC), and the Clos-
tridium coccoides–Eubacterium rectale cluster group (Erec482, 50-
GCTTCTTAGTCA- GGTACCG) were used for enumeration of
dominant members of the gut microbiota. The EUB338 probe
used to determine total counts was labeled with uorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC), while the group- or genus-specic probes
were labeled at the 50-end with indocyanine (Cy3; Sangon
Biotech, Shanghai, China)..

FISH analysis, as a quantitative molecular-based technique, was
applied to assess the microbiota composition. The relative
abundance of the major bacterial groups indicated that, even
when considering a degree of interindividual variation, the HF
diet induced the gut microbiota dysbiosis . The results
of principal coordinate analysis showed that HF microbiomes
were clearly diﬀerent from those in CT and HF-RES mice
. Moreover, the principal coordinate analysis scores plot
in Fig. 2B supports the presence of overlapping clusters between
HF-RES and CT groups, which illustrated the relative similarity
of CT and RES treated mice in microbiotal proles. Lactobacillus
was reduced by 1.8-fold in HF mice and Bidobacterium was
decreased by 1.9-fold, whereas Enterococcus
faecalis was
increased by 1.8-fold in the HF group compared with CT mice
. Aer RES treatment, Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium
were signicantly increased, whereas Enterococcus faecalis was
signicantly decreased to that of control levels . In.

The correlations between body weight and the colonic bacterial
content were calculated . Body weight was positively and
signicantly correlated with Enterococcus faecalis (P < 0.05)
, and body weight was negatively correlated with
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium . In addition, a
negative correlation was found between the body weight and the
ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes (r ¼ (cid:4)0.805, P ¼ 0.002)
..

Gut microbes, as environmental factors, may regulate fat
storage and aﬀect energy metabolism homeostasis, by acceler-
ation of the processing of dietary polysaccharides and induction
of de novo lipogenesis.6,28 In the present study, both the relative
abundance of the major bacterial divisions and principal coor-
dinate analysis showed that, the HF diet induced the gut
microbiota dysbiosis. These ndings are in line with Cani et al.,29
who found that the high-fat diet disrupted gut microbiota by
promoting the growth of endotoxin producers. Resveratrol
treatment signicantly improved the gut microbiota dysbiosis
induced by the HF diet . Few studies have inves-
tigated the eﬀect of dietary resveratrol on the complex gut
microbiota, and they focused mainly on selected bacterial pop-
ulations. In addition, there was a decrease in the Lactobacillus
and Bidobacterium frequencies and an increase of Enterococcus
faecalis in HF mice compared with CT mice, which agree with
our previous studies that a high-fat diet signicantly decreases
the number of Lactobacillus and increases the number of
Enterococcus faecalis.30 Aer resveratrol intake, the numbers of
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium were signicantly increased. In
contrast, Enterococcus faecalis, an important, multidrug-resistant
nosocomial pathogen, was signicantly decreased in HF-RES
mice. Similar results were reported by Larrosa et al.,31 who
observed that the increase of Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium
counts in feces of the DSS-Res group became signicantly
increased aer 20 days of resveratrol intake..

Fig. 2 Microbial proﬁling analysis of the intestinal contents. (A) The
division-level composition of gut microbiome comparing CT, HF, and
HF-RES animals (n ¼ 6). (B) The principal component analysis (PCA) of
the ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization data from intestinal bacterial
communities (n ¼ 6). (C) Colonic bacterial content of the Lactobacillus
group, the Biﬁdobacterium group, and Enterococcus faecalis. Bacte-
rial quantities are expressed as a percentage of EUB338 (n ¼ 8). (D) The
Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes ratios contributed by the indicated target
bacterial populations (n ¼ 8). Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean values were
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF group: † P < 0.05.
CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES,
mice fed with HF supplemented with RES..

Fig. 3 Correlation between the body weight and the colonic bacterial content of (A) the Lactobacillus group, (B) the Biﬁdobacterium group, (C)
Enterococcus faecalis, and (D) the ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes. Mice were fed either a control diet (CT) or a high-fat diet (HF), or a high-
fat diet supplemented with resveratrol (HF-RES). Bacterial quantities are expressed as relative abundance (%). Body weight values (g) are pre-
sented as means (n ¼ 8 animals per group), with standard errors represented by vertical bars..

and the Bacteroides phylum. These ndings are consistent with
previous studies. For instance, Vendrame et al.39 described that
wild blueberries, a rich source of polyphenols, signicantly
increased the number of Bidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus
acidophilus, and Neyrinck et al.40 demonstrated that a poly-
phenol-rich extract of pomegranate peel increased the caecal
content weight and caecal pool of Bidobacteria spp. and
Lactobacillus spp. The antimicrobial activity of resveratrol could
not explain these results. Therefore,
there are additional
mechanisms, by which resveratrol mediates the composition of
gut microbiota, which should be further elucidated..

activity, exerting their inhibitory eﬀect on certain bacterial
groups by binding to bacterial membranes.35,36 Diﬀerences in
cell surface structures could explain why Gram-positive bacteria
are more sensitive to the bactericidal eﬀects of
these
compounds than are Gram-negative species.37 On one hand, in
our study, resveratrol has an inhibitory eﬀect on the growth of
these bacteria, which includes Enterococcus faecalis and the
Enterobacteriaceae group—an important pathogen closely
related to obesity and insulin resistance on a high-fat diet but
not on a normal chow diet.38 However, on the other hand, this
study showed that resveratrol intake positively aﬀected the
growth of the Lactobacillus group, the Bidobacterium group,