24_PARAGRAPHS

of intravaginal nonoxyl-9 (an ingredient in spermicide and a commonly used cytotoxic control) and univer-
sal placebo gel (isotonic) found that both have inflammatory effects on cells of the cervix and endometrium12. 
Additionally, individual ingredients commonly used in vaginal products have been found to alter the electrical 
resistance and morphology of ectocervical tissue13, and hyperosmolar lubricants have been demonstrated to be 
cytotoxic to vaginal epithelial cells, some of them also altering inflammatory mediators14. While these products 
have been shown to negatively impact cells of the female reproductive tract, little is known about how vaginal 
lubricants impact potentially protective Lactobacillus spp. or strains of uropathogenic E. coli. The aim of this study 
was to better understand the interaction between various vaginal products, commensal vaginal bacteria and a 
significant uropathogen. We evaluated the in vitro effect of lubricants, moisturizers and a pH balancing gel on the 
growth of clinical and lab strains of E. coli and a common vaginal Lactobacillus spp..

Results
E. coli growth.  To assess the ability of products to inhibit E. coli growth, a mixture of E. coli broth culture, nutrient 
media and product (neat, or diluted 1:2 in sterile phosphate buffered saline (PBS) to facilitate pipetting for Trimo-San 
and Replens Long-Lasting) was incubated at 37 °C and compared to the addition of nutrient media alone. A 50uL vol-
ume of product was used in a 150uL total experimental volume, effectively a 1:3 or 1:6 dilution, which is comparable to 
what might be expected in vivo. Over six hours of co-culture, the growth of one laboratory and 6 clinical strains of E. 
coli were significantly inhibited in coculture with all vaginal products tested (Table 1) except coconut oil (p < 0.02 for 
all), with an effect seen as soon as 2 hours . Lactic acid and methylparaben both signif-
icantly inhibited growth of all E. coli strains (p < 0.01). Laboratory and clinical strains overall showed similar inhibition 
patterns, with the exception of clinical strain D, which demonstrated relatively poor growth overall (Supplemental 
Fig. 1). After six hours of co-culture, both the laboratory strain and a representative clinical strain of E. coli (from a 
postmenopausal woman with cystitis) were similarly impacted by the tested products ..

To test the observed interactions in a more high-fidelity model, the vaginal products with the most significant 
inhibitory effects in simple co-culture were then co-cultured with bacteria in the presence of an immortalized 
vaginal epithelial cell line (VK2, ATCC, VA) grown in keratinocyte serum-free (KSF) media. A 1:100 dilution of 
products was used to have a uniform dilution that also maintained viability of human cells with all products, and 
was chosen based on prior publications and preliminary experiments (Supplementary Fig. 2). When exposed to a 
1:100 dilution of KY Jelly, Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer, or Trimo-San in KSF, the laboratory strain of E. coli 
was inhibited compared to a KSF media control (p = 0.01, Fig. 2a). However, in the presence of human vaginal 
epithelial cells, E. coli demonstrated no inhibition in the presence of KY Jelly, and increased growth with Replens 
Long-Lasting and Trimo-San compared to control (p < 0.05, Fig. 2a). Cytotoxicity to VK2 cells among the prod-
ucts versus no product control was not significantly different (Supplemental Fig. 2)..

Lactobacillus spp. growth.  Over 12 hours of co-culture, L. crispatus growth in MRS (deMan, Rogosa and 
Sharpe) broth was inhibited by Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer and Trimo-San (p < 0.01), but not by KY Jelly or 
coconut oil (p > 0.05, Fig. 1b). L. crispatus growth was stimulated by Replens Silky Smooth (p < 0.01). As expected, 
methylparaben killed L. crispatus (p < 0.01), and lactic acid did not have a significant effect compared with control.
We then repeated these experiments in the presence of the immortalized human vaginal epithelial cells, using 
the same 1:100 dilution described above. When exposed to a 1:100 dilution of KY Jelly, Replens Long-Lasting 
moisturizer, or Trimo-San in KSF media, the growth of L. crispatus was no longer inhibited (p > 0.05, Fig. 2b). 
This lack of inhibition persisted in the presence of human vaginal epithelial cells (p > 0.05, Fig. 2b)..

Discussion
We demonstrate that several vaginal lubricant and moisturizing products commonly used by postmenopausal 
women inhibit both uropathogenic E. coli and commensal Lactobacillus spp. in an in vitro co-culture model 
without vaginal epithelial cells. However, when human vaginal epithelial cells were included in the co-culture, the 
products demonstrated less inhibition of E. coli. None of the products inhibited the growth of Lactobacillus spp. 
at a 1:100 dilution, regardless of whether immortalized human vaginal epithelial cells were added to the model..

Laboratory E. coli
Clinical E. coli strain F.

1000
Change in L. crispatus 106 CFU/mL.

Figure 1.  Change in bacterial growth with exposure to vaginal products. (a) Final change in growth, as 
measured by OD600, for laboratory strain of E. coli is similar to that for representative strain (F) of clinical E. 
coli across all test conditions (p > 0.05). (b) Final change in growth of L. crispatus, as measured in CFU (simple 
co-culture, without vaginal epithelial cells), demonstrating inhibition by Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer 
and Trimo-San (p < 0.01). L. crispatus growth was stimulated by Replens Silky Smooth (p < 0.01). As expected, 
methylparaben killed L. crispatus (p < 0.01), and lactic acid did not have a significant effect compared with 
control..

1024
4096
Change in E. coli 106 CFU/mL.

Change in L. crispatus 106 CFU/mL.

Figure 2.  Change in bacterial growth with exposure to vaginal products in the presence of vaginal cells. (a) 
Final change in growth of E. coli, as measured in CFU (in 1:100 diluted product and KSF cell culture media 
as control), in the absence and presence of vaginal epithelial cells, demonstrating growth in Trimo-San and 
Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer in the presence of human cells (p < 0.05). (b) Final change in growth of 
L. crispatus, as measured in CFU (in 1:100 diluted product and MRS/KSF cell culture media as control), 
demonstrating a lack of inhibition by KY Jelly, Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer and Trimo-San, regardless of 
the presence of human vaginal epithelial cells (p > 0.05)..

Our results expand on previous in vitro studies which showed that KY Jelly is bactericidal to L. crispatus and 
L. jensenii15. Inhibitory effects of vaginal lubricants could be due to several of the ingredients, including glyc-
erin, parabens, sorbic acid, chlorhexidine gluconate, all of which have been shown to have antimicrobial prop-
erties. Previously, parabens in mouthwash and vaginal moisturizer have been found to decrease or inhibit oral .

www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/Lactobacillus spp.16. We found that Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer significantly inhibited L. crispatus growth 
while Replens Silky Smooth increased growth. Replens Silky Smooth is marketed as a preservative free lubricant 
and does not contain parabens, while the Replens Long-Lasting contains methylparaben. Both formulations of 
Replens, and all products except coconut oil inhibited E. coli, suggesting that L. crispatus may be less susceptible 
than E. coli to antimicrobial effects of these products..

When we added cultured, immortalized vaginal epithelial cells to the model, we demonstrated less inhibition 
of E. coli by the products that had been most inhibitory in the co-culture without vaginal cells. We used a 1:100 
dilution of products to maintain viability of human cells, but even at this dilution E. coli growth was inhibited by 
all three products in the absence of human cells. One possible explanation for the difference in E. coli inhibition 
in the presence of cells involves the ability of bacteria to adhere to and proliferate on epithelial cell surfaces17. Not 
only does adherence potentially permit bacterial proliferation over that seen in liquid media, bacterial microcol-
onization of epithelial cell surfaces may also allow bacteria to access additional food sources. An inspection of the 
surface of bovine intestinal epithelial cells showed that adherent bacteria were digesting sloughed dead epithelial 
cells, suggesting another resource for bacterial survival and proliferation18. At the 1:100 dilution no products 
inhibited the growth of Lactobacillus spp., thus we were unable to assess how the presence of human vaginal epi-
thelial cells modified lubricant inhibition of Lactobacillus spp..

We are unaware of any studies specifically examining the effect of vaginal products on factors that affect an 
individual’s risk of UTI. While it is reassuring that these products have a uniformly negative effect on uropath-
ogenic E. coli in vitro, the abrogation of this effect in the presence of human vaginal epithelial cells suggests that 
the interaction may not be that simple. While the co-culture experiments that do not include human cells use a 
concentration of products that is more akin to what might be seen in actual use, the more dilute concentrations 
necessary to maintain human cells do inhibit E. coli when human cells are not present. This suggests factors in 
addition to concentration of product may contribute to bacterial survival or growth. In addition, the negative 
impact of some vaginal products on Lactobacillus spp. is worrisome..

Our study is limited by the lack of a better human vaginal model. The 1:100 product dilution needed to allow 
vaginal epithelial viability is not realistically translated to clinical use. In addition, the viscous properties of lubri-
cants and moisturizers introduce additional variation to the results between technical replicates as well as between 
experiments. We did not assess mechanisms for the inhibitory effects, which could range from chemical toxicity 
to pH to osmolality. Strengths of this study include the addition of several clinical strains of uropathogenic E. coli 
taken from clinical urine cultures of women with acute cystitis, demonstrating equivalence between clinical and 
laboratory strains. The addition of vaginal epithelial cells brings the co-culture model closer to a human vaginal 
model and the differing results for E. coli demonstrate the potential drastic difference between in vitro and in vivo 
studies. We only tested the effects of products on L. crispatus, which is one of the most common vaginal species, 
and is being tested as a potential live biotherapeutic. However, results may not be generalizable to other vaginal 
Lactobacillus spp..

Materials and Methods
Bacterial culture preparation.  The bacterial species used in these experiments include a laboratory strain 
of E. coli (ATCC 8739) and 6 clinical strains of E. coli provided by the Massachusetts General Hospital microbi-
ology lab, which had been isolated from women with cystitis. The Institutional Review Board at Massachusetts 
General Hospital has determined that this work does not meet the definition of human subjects’ research. The 
following reagent was obtained through the NIH Biodefense and Emerging Infections Research Resources 
Repository, NIAID, NIH: L. crispatus, Strain JV-V01, HM-103. Bacterial suspensions of E. coli were created by 
inoculating BD Difco Nutrient Broth (Fisher Scientific, MA) and incubating for 6 hours at 37 °C with agitation. 
For the L. crispatus suspensions, deMan, Rogosa Sharpe broth (MRS, BD Difco, Fisher Scientific, MA) was inoc-
ulated and incubated for 12 hours at 37 °C in an anaerobic chamber without agitation..

www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/E. coli co-culture. 
In a 96-well microplate, the following were added to each well: 75 µL fresh nutrient broth, 
50 µL test product, 25 µL E. coli broth culture at 0.5 OD, adapted from Kalyoussef et al.21. Each of the seven E. 
coli strains were tested against the five products and four controls (Table 1). Corresponding control wells, which 
served as blanks in calculations of optical density at 600 nm (OD600), were created for every test condition con-
taining 25 µL of nutrient broth medium instead of 25 µL of bacterial broth culture. Plates were incubated at 37 °C 
with agitation for 6 hours. OD600 measurements were taken at every 2 hours with a Biotek Gen5 plate reader 
(Burlington, VT)..

Lactobacillus spp. co-culture. 
In a 48-well microplate, the following were added: 400 µL fresh MRS media, 
200 µL test product, 200 µL Lactobacillus spp. broth culture at 0.5 OD. Lactobacillus crispatus was tested against 
the five products and four controls (Table 1). The plates were incubated anaerobically at 37 °C without agitation 
for 12 hours. Supernatants were serially diluted and plated on MRS agar to count colony forming units (CFU) at 
both the start and end of incubation. After initial experiments to ensure that OD and CFU were measuring com-
parable phenomena (Supplemental Fig. 3), we continued with OD only for E. coli. However, for lactobacilli, OD 
results were very different from CFU results due to significant clumping of bacteria in the presence of lubricants, 
thus only CFU were used..

For both the E. coli and L. crispatus co-cultures, all experiments were performed at least twice, with each 
biological replicate containing technical triplicates for each condition, including blank control conditions. All 
ingredients were plated on agar to confirm viability of the broth pre-cultures and sterility of test materials. At the 
conclusion of the experiment, co-culture broth and negative controls were plated to confirm no contamination 
during experiments..

Vaginal epithelial cell co-culture with vaginal product and bacteria.  To test the observed interac-
tions in a more high-fidelity model, the vaginal products with the most significant inhibitory effects in simple 
co-culture were then co-cultured with bacteria in the presence of human vaginal epithelial cells. Bacterial broths 
were prepared as described previously, and then centrifuged at 1000 RPM for 5 minutes. The bacteria pellet was 
re-suspended in Gibco keratinocyte serum free media (KSF, Fisher Scientific, MA) (supplemented with epidermal 
growth factor, bovine pituitary extract and CaCl2 per manufacturer’s instructions) to an OD600 of 0.15..

After a 24-hour equilibration to allow vaginal cells to adhere to the plate and become confluent, 25 µL of the 
laboratory strain E. coli suspended in KSF were added to the vaginal epithelial cells with 75 µL of fresh KSF media 
and incubated for 1 hour. Then 50 µL of KY Jelly, Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer, or Trimo-San were added, 
diluted 1:100 with KSF cell culture medium. The co-culture was incubated at 37 °C, 2 hours aerobically with 
agitation for E. coli. At the conclusion of the co-culture, the bottoms of the wells were scraped with a pipette tip 
to release the adherent human cells. The entire well contents (cells, bacteria, medium) were serially diluted and 
plated to count CFU for each bacterium. For all vaginal epithelial cell co-cultures, KSF cell culture media was used 
as a negative control, and at least two experiments were performed for each condition, with technical triplicates 
of each condition. The experiment was simultaneously performed without vaginal cells, using 1:100 diluted prod-
ucts, KSF medium and bacterial suspension..

Similarly, the vaginal epithelial cells were separately co-cultured with L. crispatus, though in anaerobic con-
ditions for 1 hour prior to addition of experimental substance. However, because the growth of the Lactobacillus 
spp. was inhibited in the KSF media alone, a 1:1 mixture of MRS/KSF medium was utilized for that portion of the 
experiment, which was found to have a minimal impact on human cell viability (Supplemental Fig. 4)..

Statistical analysis.  Growth of each bacterial strain or species was determined by change in OD600 or CFU 
from the first baseline OD measurement (Supplemental Table 1) or a starting CFU/mL count of the L. crispatus 
innoculum, respectively. Using GraphPad Prism 6.0, the change in OD600 or CFU was compared between vaginal 
products and control with unpaired t-tests or ANOVA, with adjustment for multiple comparisons as appropriate. 
Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.