9_PARAGRAPHS

in  phylum-  or  genus-level  relative  abundance  between  diet  arms, 
with the exception of the Verrucomicrobia phylum which was sig-
nificantly  increased  during  UF  (Extended  Data  Fig.  3).  At  a  finer 
taxonomic level, we were able to identify four 16S ribosomal RNA 
sequence  variants  that  were  significantly  associated  with  the  diet 
arm (independent of order): A. muciniphila, Bacteroides coprocola, 
a  Lachnospiraceae  sp.  and  a  Ruminoccoccus  sp.  .  Taken 
together,  these  results  indicate  the  overall  resiliency  of  the  gut 
microbiota faced with differences in caloric intake while also high-
lighting  a  small  number  of  diet-responsive  bacterial  species  that 
could contribute to the observed differences in nutrient absorption.
Next, we used metagenomic sequencing to confirm and extend 
the  observed  shifts  in  gut  bacterial  relative  abundance.  Samples 
were  selected  from  18  individuals  at  four  key  time  points  includ-
ing a baseline  sample,  midpoint samples  during  each 3-d UF and 
OF period, a sample during the washout period in between and a 
sample during the vancomycin or placebo arm. In total, we gener-
ated 381.7 giga base pairs of sequencing data from the 95 samples 
during  phase  I  (Supplementary  Table  6).  Differentially  abundant 
bacteria  on  each  diet  arm  (independent  of  order)  were  identified 
using  a  paired  Wilcoxon  test.  This  analysis  revealed  nine  bacte-
rial  species  that  were  significantly  different  between  the  two  diet 
arms , including an enrichment 
for A. muciniphila during UF, consistent with our 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing-based  analysis  .  We  also  detected  an  enrich-
ment for multiple Alistipes species during UF..

Metagenomic sequencing confirmed the broad and reproducible 
differences between the vancomycin and placebo groups. Analysis 
using unpaired Wilcoxon tests revealed 41 bacterial species with a 
significant difference (false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05) in relative 
abundance  ,  with  a  skew  towards  decreased  abundance 
in the vancomycin group  Consistent 
with  our  16S  rRNA  gene  sequencing  data,  these  vancomycin-
depleted  bacteria  spanned  multiple  gram-positive  (Actinobacteria 
and  Firmicutes)  and  gram-negative  (Bacteroidetes)  phyla.  Three 
Veillonella  species21  were  significantly  enriched  in  vancomycin-
treated  individuals.  We  also  detected  an  enrichment  for  multiple 
Lactobacillus  and  Klebsiella  species  in  the  vancomycin  group,  in 
addition  to  a  virulent  bacteriophage  that  infects  lactobacilli  (Lc-
Nu)22,  consistent  with  evidence  in  mouse  models  that  antibiotics 
induce phage production23..

Despite increased stool calorie loss with both UF versus OF and 
vancomycin  versus  placebo,  we  found  markedly  different  effects  of 
these interventions on the gut microbiota. UF and OF produced little 
perturbation at the phylum or finer levels, while vancomycin resulted 
in widespread changes in gut microbial community structure. Despite 
these differences, we were able to identify two bacterial species that 
consistently changed in response to both perturbations  based 
on  16S  rRNA  sequence  variants  analysis:  A.  muciniphila,  a  mucin-
degrading  bacterium  with  a  putative  role  in  preserving  gut  barrier .

ArticlesNature MediciNefunction24–26,  which  was  enriched  during  UF  and  in  the  vancomy-
cin group, and an unidentified species belonging to Lachnospiraceae 
NK4A136 group, which decreased during UF and vancomycin inter-
ventions. Metagenomic sequencing confirmed the enrichment for A. 
muciniphila  during  UF  ,  and  a  trend  towards  increased  A. 
muciniphila abundance in the vancomycin group (P = 0.25)..

Mechanistic insights into host–microbiome interactions relevant 
to  metabolic  disease  in  UF  versus  OF  and  vancomycin  versus 
placebo  interventions.  To  gain  further  insight  into  the  specific 
bacterial  genes,  enzymes  and  metabolic  pathways  associated  with 
nutrient absorption, we annotated our metagenomic datasets using 
HUMAnN2 (ref.  27). Consistent with our taxonomic analyses (Fig. 
4), which revealed modest perturbation of gut microbial commu-
nity structure with UF versus OF, functional profiling of the micro-
biome  datasets  did  not  reveal  any  significant  differences  in  gene 
family  or  metabolic  pathway  abundance  between  the  diet  arms. 
In  contrast,  we  found  significant  differences  in  the  abundance  of 
760 of a total of 3,553 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG)  functional  orthologs  (KEGG  Orthology)  (FDR < 0.1, 
Supplementary  Table  9)  between  vancomycin  and  placebo,  con-
sistent  with  the  widespread  changes  in  gut  microbial  community 
structure . At the pathway level there was a more modest 
difference between groups; only 3 of 290 metabolic pathways were 
differentially abundant (all decreased) with vancomycin compared 
with placebo (Extended Data Fig. 5). Interestingly, two of the three 
significant  pathways  (pyruvate  fermentation  to  butanoate  and  the 
superpathway of Clostridium acetobutylicum acidogenic fermenta-
tion) were related to the fermentation of sugars to the major short-
chain  fatty  acid  butyrate  (aka  butanoate),  suggesting  that  there 
could  be  reduced  butyrate  production  or  bacterial  metabolism  by 
the gut microbiota during vancomycin treatment..

Veillonella dispar
Veillonella parvula
Veillonella sp.
Lactobacillus rhamnosus
Klebsiella sp.
Lactobacillus phage Lc_Nu
Lactobacillus salivarius
Klebsiella oxytoca
Megasphaera micronuciformis
Odoribacter splanchnicus
Parabacteroides merdae
Alistipes putredinis
Erysipelotrichaceae bacterium 21_3
Lachnospiraceae bacterium 7_1_58FAA
Ruminococcus sp 5_1_39BFAA
Clostridium leptum
Oscillibacter sp.
Subdoligranulum sp.
Collinsella aerofaciens
Eubacterium rectale
Lachnospiraceae bacterium 3_1_46FAA
Ruminococcus obeum
Ruminococcus torques
Clostridium symbiosum
Gordonibacter pamelaeae
Flavonifractor plautii
Clostridium bolteae
Clostridium hathewayi
Lachnospiraceae bacterium 1_4_56FAA
Ruminococcaceae bacterium D16
Alistipes onderdonkii
Alistipes senegalensis
Eubacterium eligens
Roseburia hominis
Ruminococcus lactaris
Eubacterium ramulus
Holdemania filiformis
Dorea formicigenerans
Coprococcus comes
Anaerostipes hadrus
Lachnospiraceae bacterium 5_1_63FAA.

Fig. 5 | changes in the gut microbiome in response to oral vancomycin. a, Overall gut microbial colonization, represented as 16S rRNA gene copies per 
gram wet weight, between vancomycin and placebo groups (P = 0.26, two-sided unpaired Wilcoxon test). Each data point represents the mean value 
of samples from each subject (n = 63 samples from 23 subjects). b, Shannon diversity in microbial communities of vancomycin and placebo groups 
(P < 0.0001, two-sided unpaired Wilcoxon test). Each data point represents the mean value of samples from each subject (n = 70 samples from 24 
subjects). Boxplots in a and b indicate the interquartile range (IQR, 25th to 75th percentiles), with a center line indicating the median and whiskers 
showing the value ranges up to 1.5 × IQR above the 75th or below the 25th percentiles. c, Principal coordinate analysis of Bray–Curtis dissimilarity for 
ordination of microbial communities of subjects on vancomycin or placebo. Each data point shows the mean and standard deviation of samples from each 
subject (n = 70 samples from 24 subjects; P < 0.0001, determined using Adonis comparing effect of treatment and accounting for repeated measures 
per subject). d, Heatmap of differentially abundant species, determined by shotgun metagenomic sequencing, between vancomycin (n = 8) and placebo 
(n = 10) groups (FDR < 0.05, two-sided unpaired Wilcoxon test). Letters represent subject identity. e, Venn diagram of 16S rRNA sequence variants 
significantly different between vancomycin and placebo, or UF and OF, respectively (FDR < 0.1, two-sided unpaired or paired Wilcoxon test). Two bacterial 
species consistently changed in response to both perturbations: A. muciniphila and an unidentified species belonging to Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group..

Our  results  provide  insights  into  potential  mechanisms  that 
could explain the increased stool calories loss. Both perturbations 
(UF and vancomycin) resulted in a significant increase in the rela-
tive abundance of A. muciniphila, which is recognized for its ability 
to forage on host mucins42. In mice, A. muciniphila counteracts the 
effect of the decrease in mucous layer thickness produced by a high-
fat diet26, producing weight loss without changes in food intake. A. 
muciniphila increases turnover of the mucous layer preventing dis-
ruption of tight junctions, which may reduce gut permeability43,44. 
In  humans,  a  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  pilot 
study revealed a trend towards decreased body weight and fat mass .

in  response  to  A.  muciniphila  supplementation45.  Administration 
of  pasteurized  A.  muciniphila  cells45  in  this  study  increased  stool 
energy content, consistent with our results. Additional studies are 
warranted to elucidate the role and mechanisms of A. muciniphila 
in nutrient absorption.