12_PARAGRAPHS

Interventions
The treatment group received oral probiotic capsules con-
taining 2.5 billion CFUs each of L. rhamnosus GR-1and L.
reuteri RC-14, while the placebo group received identical
capsules containing excipients alone (Chr. Hansen, Hør-
sholm, Denmark). The contents of both capsules are stable
at room temperature, and enough capsules were provided
to each participant at the time of enrolment to last until
42 weeks’ gestation. We cultured the lactobacilli
from a
sample of the probiotic capsules before the start of the trial
to ensure they were viable and could be detected by our
culture techniques. Participants were instructed to take one
capsule daily until delivery and self-report compliance at
each study visit.25.

Outcomes
Our primary outcome was the rate of BV at 18–20 weeks’
gestation, measured using the Nugent
(Nugent
score ≥7 shows presence of BV). Secondary outcomes were
vaginal colonisation rates at 18–20 weeks’ gestation of the
probiotic or other Lactobacillus spp., two common neonatal
pathogens (Escherichia coli and Group B streptococcus),
and the composition of the vaginal microbiota..

Sample size
A sample size of 366 was calculated to estimate the propor-
tion of recruited women who would complete the study.
Based on studies carried out on non-pregnant women trea-
ted orally with the same lactobacillus strain,20 this sample
size would allow us to detect with at least 80% power a
decrease in BV of at least 50%, assuming a baseline risk of
25%, following treatment with the Lactobacillus spp. inter-
vention.26.

There were no differences in characteristics of partici-
pants between the two groups at baseline (Table 1). In a
random sample of probiotic capsules tested for Lactobacilli,
the mean count was 2 9 109 for L. rhamnosus GR-1 and
1 9 109
for L. reuteri RC-14. No other bacteria were.

At 18–20 weeks’ gestation, the rate of BV in the probi-
otic group was 15% 
in the placebo group. There were no differences between
the groups
in the rates of vaginal colonisation with
L. rhamnosus GR-1  E. coli
or Group B strepto-
cocci  Vaginal colonisation with
L. reuteri RC-14 was not detected in either
group
(Table 1). After adjusting for Nugent score at baseline,
there were no differences between the groups in the odds
of BV (adjusted OR 1.82, 95% CI 0.64–5.19; P = 0.26)..

Participants (n = 152) who attended at all time-points
were selected for the microbiome analysis. PCR ampliﬁca-
tion at baseline failed in two participants in each group,
and the 18–20 weeks’ gestation swabs from three partici-
pants were unavailable, leaving 147 participants who pro-
vided 299 samples (75 in each group at baseline, and 74
and 75 in the probiotic and placebo groups, respectively, at
18–20 weeks’). The 16S rRNA genes were successfully
ampliﬁed and sequenced from these, and 6714 sequence
reads were sub-sampled from each sample. The composi-
tion of the vaginal community was as expected, with sub-
sets dominated by Lactobacillus crispatus, Lactobacillus.

iners or Lactobacillus jensenii. A further group was charac-
terised by a diverse community, which included anaerobic
species and Gardnerella vaginalis (Figure 3)..

The aim of this trail was to compare the effects on the
vaginal microbiota of oral probiotic capsules containing
L. rhamnosus GR-1 and L. reuteri RC-14 versus placebo
taken orally from early pregnancy until delivery. The bio-
logical effects were measured by Nugent scoring and cul-
three time points
ture of vaginal samples collected at
during pregnancy..

Main ﬁndings
The oral administration of L. rhamnosus GR-1 and L. reu-
teri RC-14 daily from early pregnancy did not affect the
prevalence of BV or common neonatal pathogens, or alter.

Maternal characteristics
Age (years)
Body mass index
Ethnicity
White
Black
Asian
Mixed/Other
Participant born preterm
Supplements/Medication use at baseline
Antibiotics
Other probiotics
Microbiological assessment at baseline
Bacterial vaginosis
(Nugent score ≥7)
Lactobacillus colonisation
reuteri
rhamnosus
Others
Escherichia coli
Group B Streptococcus.

Microbiological assessment at 18–20 weeks
Bacterial vaginosis
(Nugent score ≥7)**
Lactobacillus colonisation
reuteri
rhamnosus
Others
Escherichia coli
Group B Streptococcus.

conclusive evidence has been hampered by inadequacies in
trial design (for example sample size), variations in the
interventions strains that were used, in the outcome mea-
sures, mode of administration, and control of confounding
factors such as use of antibiotics and topical antimicrobials.
Our ﬁndings
those recently reported by Gille
et al.44 In a randomised, controlled trial, 320 women at
<12 weeks’ gestational age were allocated to once-daily oral
capsules of L. rhamnosus GR-1 or L. reuteri RC-14 or pla-
cebo for 8 weeks. No differences were found in the preva-
lence of BV assessed by Nugent score between probiotic
and placebo groups before (placebo group 5.4% versus
probiotic group 2.8%, P = 0.376) and after the intervention
period (placebo group 1.5% versus probiotic group 2.2%,
P = 1.000).