9_PARAGRAPHS

Bacterial infections and sepsis are major causes of infant
mortality worldwide  Due to their underdeveloped im-
mune system, premature babies have a particularly high risk
for developing such infections; as such, it is often standard
practice to use empiric antibiotics in these infants until in-
fection has been ruled out  Furthermore, pregnant
mothers with a high risk for preterm labor are often given
intrapartum antibiotics prophylactically (IAP) to reduce the
risk for infection in the mother and in the neonate 
Indeed, IAP has been enormously beneﬁcial and has vastly
reduced the risk for early-onset sepsis in neonates  How-
ever, recent studies suggest that perinatal exposure to antibi-
otic treatment may have a profound and sustained impact on
the developing microbiome of newborn infants. IAP treat-
ment was shown to have more of an impact on the developing
microbiome than direct exposure to antibiotics  This study
reported higher proportions of Leuconostaceae 
and Micrococcaceae and Propionibacteriaceae 
in infants born to antibiotic-treated mothers. By day 30 after
birth, the intestinal microbiome of infants exposed to IAP in
utero had higher proportions of Comamonadaceae, Staph-
ylococcaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, and an unclassiﬁed bacilli,
along with reduced proportions of Biﬁdobacteriaceae, Strep-
tococcaceae, an unclassiﬁed Lactobacillales, and an unclassiﬁed
Actinobacteria  Treating infants with ampicillin and gen-
tamicin within 48 h of birth has also been demonstrated to
have long-lasting effects on the microbiome, resulting in in-
creased Proteobacteria and concurrent reduced proportions of
Actinobacteria, Biﬁdobacterium, and Lactobacillus in the in-
testinal microbiome compared with untreated controls 
Although intrapartum antibiotics can prevent early-onset in-
fections, which present within 72 h of birth, the sustained
dysbiosis associated with perinatal antibiotic exposure has
been linked to downstream complications and may even
render newborn infants more susceptible to necrotizing en-
terocolitis or late-onset sepsis  which predominantly
occurs after the ﬁrst week of life..

these pups rapidly succumbed to experimental infection with
Escherichia coli or Klebsiella pneumoniae. The deleterious effects
of antibiotics could be reversed by treating mice with G-CSF or
by adoptive transfer of microbiota from normal neonatal mice.
This process was dependent on intact IL-17A signaling, high-
lighting a potential role for the IL-17A/G-CSF axis in medi-
ating the effects of the microbiota on neutrophil production in
the BM. It is important to emphasize that the antibiotic-
mediated effects in this model must reﬂect vertical transfer
from the mother to the pup, because the treatment was started
during pregnancy and discontinued prior to weaning. These
studies indicate that caution needs to be applied when con-
sidering the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics during labor or
the perinatal period and perhaps suggest potential beneﬁts of
coadministering probiotics under these circumstances..

In the experiments above, the effects of antibiotics could
reﬂect an inﬂuence on the microbiota of the mother, the
neonate, or both. To assess the impact of the maternal
microbiota alone, without any inﬂuence from microbial col-
onization of the pups after birth, Gomez de Ag€uero et al. 
transiently colonized germ-free dams during gestation with an
auxotrophic mutant strain of E. coli, termed HA107. This
model allows microbial colonization to occur only during
pregnancy so that the dam becomes germ-free again prior to
giving birth to her germ-free pups. This study revealed that
maternal Ab-mediated vertical transfer of maternal microbial
components vastly altered gene expression in the intestine of.

FIGURE 1. Microbial signals in early life shape the repertoire of immune cell development in the BM. A child’s immune system can be modulated by microbial
signals at various stages in development. Microbial metabolites, such as SCFAs, and Abs carrying microbial molecules can pass from mother to fetus during gestation
(A) or from mother to child via breast milk (B). This has been shown to impact the immune cell repertoire in the intestine and may affect susceptibil-
ity to intestinal pathogens. (B and C) From birth onward, children are exposed to microbes in the environment (i), which
(Figure legend continues).

 In mice, although early B cells that express RAGs are
absent from the small intestine at birth, they are found to
accumulate in the gut mucosa at weaning, coincident with
increasing microbial colonization in early life  This
suggests that microbes (and potentially dietary Ags) may play
an important role in shaping the primary Ab repertoire in
early life  and this may occur outside of the BM..

In addition to stimulation following early life colonization,
recent studies have shown that steady-state hematopoiesis can
be regulated by the commensal microbiota; this is likely im-
portant for ﬁne-tuning immunity . Indeed, there is
evidence to suggest that even subtle changes in the commensal
microbial repertoire (e.g., in response to diet or antibiotic
usage) can inﬂuence immune responses via effects on pro-
genitor cells  The absence or reduction in mi-
crobial signals in germ-free or antibiotic-treated mice is
associated with reduced numbers of neutrophils and mono-
cytes in the BM and peripheral sites  Numerous
studies show that the early stages of myelopoiesis in the BM
are impaired in germ-free mice  with reduced
numbers of HSCs, multipotential progenitors (MPPs), and
 Treatment with
common myeloid progenitors
broad-spectrum antibiotics, or even neomycin alone, can
phenocopy these abnormalities when given to adult speciﬁc
pathogen–free mice  Although one report suggested
that there were no differences in the proportions or numbers
of early progenitors in the germ-free BM  this might be
due to differences in the microbiota of the speciﬁc pathogen–
free mice used as a baseline in that study. As well as being
reduced in number in germ-free and antibiotic-treated mice,
granulocyte–monocyte precursors have been shown to have
an impaired capacity to differentiate into granulocytes and
macrophages ex vivo  Together, the im-
paired myelopoiesis seen in mice lacking a normal microbiota
results in increased susceptibility to bacterial pathogens, such
as Listeria monocytogenes, E. coli, and Staphylococcus aureus.


Although the factors mediating emergency myelopoiesis
have been characterized in some detail (see below), the reg-
ulation of steady-state hematopoiesis by the normal microbiota
remains less well understood. Nevertheless, recognition of
microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) is likely to be
important; indeed, intestinal colonization of germ-free mice
with a combination of E. coli, Staphylococcus xylosus, and
Enterococcus faecalis stimulates myelopoiesis in a MyD88 and
TRIF–dependent manner  Although it was unclear what
cell types mediated this response, one possibility is that it
reﬂects regulation of secondary mediator production by in-
testinal enterocytes stimulated by MAMPs from the com-
mensal bacteria. This would be consistent with experiments
showing that epithelial cell–derived CXCL5 can regulate the.

The identity of the organisms mediating the effects of the
steady-state microbiota on hematopoiesis is largely unknown,
as are many of the mechanisms that might alter these processes
during pathogenic infection or after treatment with antibiotics.
Although it has long been known that diet plays a pivotal role
in shaping the intestinal microbiota  the subsequent
effects on immune cells are only now being elucidated. Recent
work showed that microbial dysbiosis caused by feeding mice
a high-fat diet was associated with a shift in hematopoiesis in
favor of myelopoiesis at the expense of the lymphoid lineage
 These changes appeared to reﬂect an increase in MPPs
and common myeloid progenitors and a concomitant re-
duction in common lymphocyte progenitors (CLPs) and
immature B cells. As a result, the host mice were less able to
regenerate leukocytes following BM ablation with 5-ﬂuoro-
uracil. Microbial dysbiosis in mice fed a high-fat diet was
characterized by an increased abundance of Verrucomicrobia,
Actinobacteria, and Proteobacteria species in the cecum and
ileum, with a relative decrease in Bacteriodetes and Firmicutes.
Importantly, the BM phenotype could be rescued by treat-
ment with the antibiotic vancomycin, suggesting the in-
volvement of Gram-positive organisms, and it could be
phenocopied by transferring microbiota from mice fed the
high-fat diet to normal mice, suggesting a causative role for
the microbiota in mediating the hematopoietic changes. The
increased abundance of Proteobacteria was interesting, be-
cause they are thought to be strong drivers of inﬂammation
and metabolic disease, yet they are Gram-negative bacteria
and are increased by vancomycin treatment. Similarly, Ver-
rucomicrobia are Gram-negative and increased during van-
comycin treatment; in contrast to Proteobacteria, members of
this phylum, such as Akkermansia muciniphila, promote a
healthy gut, possibly through colonizing the outer mucous
layer and producing SCFAs  In contrast, Actinobacteria
are Gram-positive and depleted by vancomycin treatment.
Exactly which bacteria may be playing a role is not clear,
because Actinobacteria are the third most dominant bacterial
phylum in humans and can be pathogens, like Mycobacterium,
or commensals, such as Biﬁdobacterium. Another study found
that feeding mice with a ﬁber-rich diet led to an outgrowth of
Bacteriodetes at the expense of Firmicutes, leading to an in-
crease in the levels of the SCFAs propionate and acetate in the
circulation  When challenged intranasally with house
dust mite Ag, mice on the high-ﬁber diet developed less severe
airway inﬂammation than mice fed regular chow. Allergic
airway inﬂammation could be suppressed in mice receiving a
normal diet by the administration of propionate or acetate
alone, prompting the investigators to look for changes in
immune cells. They found that exogenous administration of
the microbial metabolite propionate led to alterations in he-
matopoiesis, with a reduction in macrophage and dendritic
cell (DC) precursors in the BM. In addition, newly differ-
entiated DCs expressed lower levels of MHC class II and
costimulatory molecules and were less effective at reactivating
effector Th2 cells. Thus, deﬁned changes in the microbiota,
resulting from antibiotic use or changes in our diet, may have
drastic effects on how our immune system tackles challenges
as a result of effects on hematopoiesis..

A number of factors can contribute to infection-associated
emergency myelopoiesis. G-CSF, M-CSF, and GM-CSF all
play a key role in regulating the lineage commitment of BM
progenitors in steady-state  These growth factors are
known to increase in the circulation during infection and
inﬂammation, thereby stimulating further differentiation of
progenitors down the myeloid lineage  The pro-
duction of these growth factors and, thus, the driving of
emergency myelopoiesis and myeloid cell deployment from
the BM, are primarily driven by the activation of pattern
recognition receptors, such as TLRs and NOD-like receptors,
which are expressed by immune and stromal cells within the
host. Many studies report a defect in myelopoiesis in animals
deﬁcient in TLRs or TLR-speciﬁc adapter molecules (42, 43,
50–52). In the case of
infection with E. coli, a TLR4-
dependent increase in circulating G-CSF leads to a massive
release of mature neutrophils into the circulation, as well as an
expansion of monocytes and immature neutrophils in the BM
 These effects were abrogated in mice speciﬁcally lacking
the adaptor molecule MyD88 in endothelial cells  In-
fection with Candida albicans drives an early TLR2-
Sca-1+c-kit+ (LSK) cells, which
dependent expansion of Lin
include HSCs and noncommitted MPPs, ultimately leading
to expanded populations of myeloid cells in the BM and the
periphery  TLR2 is also crucial for the emergency mye-
lopoiesis that occurs during Mycobacterium tuberculosis in-
fection in mice 