11_PARAGRAPHS

in  the  exercised  group  belonged  to  phyla 
Tenericutes, Bacteroidetes, and Firmicutes. 
The most striking change in exercised mice 
was a decrease in Erysipelotrichaceae bacterium 
C11_K211 from phylum Tenericutes, which 
decreased dramatically in exercised compared 
with seden tary mice..

Species
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida strain CGMCC 2093.

Pseudomonas plecoglossicida strain R18.

Pseudomonas putida strain SRI156
Streptococcus infantis.

Candidatus aquirestis calciphila.

Staphylococcus epidermidis
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron strain 8669.

Enterococcus faecium
Enterococcus faecium
Staphylococcus gallinarum
Escherichia coli O157:H7
Enterococcus faecium
Streptococcus pseudopneumoniae
Bacillus trypoxylicola
C11_K211.

The  development  of  chronic  diseases 
related to the exposure to environmental toxi­ 
cants are associated with age, and the bene­ 
fits of exercise are also being emphasized in 
older  individuals;  therefore,  we  used  aged 
mice   in  the  pres­ 
ent study. Older mice tend to have higher 
body  mass  than  younger  animals.  In  fact, 
the average body weight of sedentary mice 
in the present study was 46.8 ± 1.4 g, and 
body weight of exercised mice was approxi­ 
mately 30% lower. Recent evidence from Ley 
et al. indicated a strong association of 
the intestinal microbiome with the develop­ 
ment of obesity. Genetically obese ob/ob mice 
were charac terized by a major decrease in the 
abundance of Bacteroidetes and an increase 
in Firmicutes compared with lean ob/+ wild­ 
type littermates and lean  ob/+ mothers fed 
the same diets. Similar changes were observed 
in wild­type mice fed a high fat/high poly­ 
saccharide diet (Turnbaugh et al. 2008) and 
in obese humans (Ley et al. 2005). An increase 
in  Firmicutes  (such  as  Lactobacilli)  and  a 
decrease in Bacteroidetes have been confirmed 
in obese humans (Armougom et al. 2009). In 
another study, overweight pregnant patients 
had  reduced  abundance  of  Bifidobacteria 
and Bacteroidetes and increased abundance 
of selected Firmicutes (e.g., Staphylococcus) 
and Proteobacteria (e.g., Enterobacteriaceae) 
(Santacruz et al. 2010). In line with these 
reports,  it  is  relevant  that  we  detected  an 
increased abundance of several Firmicutes, 
primarily Enterococcaceae (e.g., Enterococcus 
faecium), in the exercised mice. .

Although  Enterococci  are  commensal 
bacteria, they are also important nosocomial 
pathogens  that  cause  bacteremia,  endo­ 
carditis, and other infections in humans. Some 
strains are resistant to multiple anti biotics and 
possess  virulence  factors,  such  as  adhesins, 
invasins, pili, and haemolysin (Willems et al. 
2011). Nevertheless, E. faecium isolates from 
clinical outbreaks are different strains than 
E. faecium from animals, food, and humans 
in  the  community  (Franz  et  al.  2011).  In .

fact, several enterococci, including E. faecium 
strains, are used as probiotics in the form of 
pharmaceutical preparations. They are adminis­ 
tered to treat diarrhea, antibiotic­associated 
diarrhea,  and  irritable  bowel  syndrome;  to 
lower cholesterol levels; or to improve host 
immunity (Franz et al. 2011). .

The  most  striking  change  we  found  in 
the gut microbiome of exercised mice was a 
>  300­fold  decrease  in  the  abundance  of 
Erysipelotrichaceae (Table 3). This family plays 
an important role in metabolic disorders and 
energy metabo lism (Chen et al. 2012). Chen 
et al. reported that Erysipelotrichaceae 
were enriched in obese humans and mice, as 
well as in mice fed a high­fat diet, and noted 
that  the  abundance  of  Erysipelotrichaceae 
was  also  increased  in  patients  with  colo­ 
rectal cancer. Thus, our data are consistent 
because we observed a decrease in the num­ 
ber of Erysipelotrichaceae in exercised mice 
that had lost a substantial amount of body 
weight;  this  is  associated  with  the  role  of 
Erysipelotrichaceae in energy production and 
adiposity (Claus et al. 2011; Goodman et al. 
2011; Zhang et al. 2009). 