Diet helps shape the composition of the intestinal microbiota. Differences in the distribution 
of bacteria are associated with dietary patterns and this influences host exposure to microbial 
metabolites. De Filippo et al. showed that the gut microbiome of children living in Burkina 
Faso was significantly different than European children of the same age.5 The microbiome 
of the children from Burkina Faso was more varied, produced more butyrate, and had more 
Prevotella than Bacteroides. The children in Burkina Faso consumed a diet high in fiber and 
non-animal protein whereas the European children consumed a diet higher in refined 
carbohydrates and animal protein. Similar trends were seen in other studies that compared 
residents in non-industrialized and industrialized societies.6, 7 Although these observational 
studies lay the ground work for the connection between diet and the microbiome in human 
populations, factors other than diet may influence the composition and function of the 
microbiome in these different habitats.8
Histone proteins are involved in tightly packing chromosomes into chromatin in the nucleus. 
Modification of histone proteins loosens the chromatin, making it more available for 
transcription. Post-translational modifications of the N-termini of histone 3 or histone 4, 
occur by acetylation, methylation, ubiquitination, phosphorylation, or sumoylation. The 
enzymes involved in these reactions include: histone acetyltransferases (HATs) which adds 
acetyl groups; histone deacetylases (HDAC), which removes them; histone 
methyltransferases (MHTs), which add methyl groups to lysine and/or arginine groups; and 
histone demethyltransferases (DMHTs), which removes them. HATs catalyze the addition 
Glucosinolates are converted into isothiocyanates (ITC) by either the plant myrosinases, or 
bacterially produced thioglucosidases. Cooking cruciferous vegetables deactivates the plant 
myrosinases, and given that most cruciferous vegetables consumed by humans are cooked, 
gut bacteria play a critical role in converting glucosinolates to ITC. Previous studies have 
shown that certain species of bacteria, such as Escherichia coli, Bacteroides 
thetaiotaomicron, Enterococcus faecalis, Enterococcus faecium, Peptostreptococcus sp. and 
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is a polyphenol found in green tea that has been reported 
to impact human health including anti-oxidative, blood cholesterol and sugar level lowering, 
and cancer preventive activities. However, epidemiologic studies show inconsistent results 
when evaluating green tea consumption in relation to colon cancer risk.66-70 This is in part 
due to differences in tea consumption habits and failure to account for other factors, such as 
alcohol consumption or tobacco smoke, which may modify the effect of green tea 
consumption on health.71, 72 A recent study found that green tea consumed at least three 
times per week for more than 6 months was associated with reduced risk of colorectal cancer 
by 23% in non-smokers.67
Ellagitannins are polyphenols that are found in fruits, such as pomegranate, raspberries, 
strawberries, blackberries, and nuts, such as walnuts and almonds. Ingested ellagitannins are 
hydrolyzed in the stomach and small intestine to ellagic acid. The gut microbiome 
metabolizes ellagitannins to urolithins by removal of one of the lactone rings and subsequent 
dehydroxylation in the colon. Enterohepatic circulation of urolithins and ellagic acids alters 
host exposure to these compounds, and there is large between person variation in urolithin 
production.83 Recent studies suggest that bacteria from the C. coccoides group and 
Colon cancer is associated with a high-fat diet in western populations and rates in non-
western populations are increasing as a more western, non-traditional diet is adopted.98, 99 
Recent studies in mice suggest that the gut microbiome influences the size and composition 
of the bile acid pool throughout the enterohepatic system and exposure may influence cancer 
risk.100 For example, R. gnavus can convert 7-oxo-lithocholic acid to UDCA.101 A study of 
the microbiome in colorectal and healthy subjects found a 63% increase in the amount of 
UDCA in stools of healthy individuals correlated with Ruminococcus sp.102 Secondary bile 
acids, deoxychloate (DCA), lithodeoxycholate (LDA), and ursodeoxycholate (UDCA) 
increase in response to high fat diets and are increased in populations with higher incidence 
of colorectal cancers. In particular, there was a positive association with DCA and colorectal 
adenomas, a precursor to colorectal cancer.103-109 In contrast, UDCA has been shown in 
animal and in vitro studies to reduce the risk of cancer dysplasia and cancer 
development110, 111 and, in a phase III clinical trial, UDCAs reduced the degree of dysplasia 
in colonic polyps.,112 Recent mechanistic studies suggest that, in contrast to butyrate, 
UDCA induced cell differentiation and senescence in colon cancer cells via histone 
hypoacetylation.113