75_PARAGRAPHS

The present-day view of the gastrointestinal microbiota
composition is quite different than prior to the molecular
revolution. Most importantly, it is evident that still many
of the gastrointestinal microorganisms have not yet been
cultured and this in particular concerns phylogenetically
distinct bacterial groups belonging to the Firmicutes phy-
lum (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., 2007). Furthermore, several
of the bacterial groups that based on cultivation studies
had been recognized as dominant gastrointestinal genera,
have been reclassiﬁed and renamed. Most notably this
concerns the Bacteroides spp. that have been reclassiﬁed
into the genera Alistipes, Prevotella, Paraprevotella, Para-
bacteroides, and Odoribacter. Moreover, it is evident that
different members of the Bacteroidetes phylum and not the
Bacteroides genus sensu stricto are dominant in the human
gastrointestinal tract. Furthermore, the abundance of the
Peptostreptococcus spp. demonstrated in cultivation-based
studies, could primarily be attributed to Peptostreptococco-
cus productus (Holdeman et al., 1976). However, SSU
rRNA gene analysis has shown that this species does not
belong to the genus Peptostreptococcocus, and the species
was reclassiﬁed ﬁrst as Ruminococcus productus (Ezaki
et al., 1994) and ﬁnally as Blautia producta (Liu et al.,
2008). Today, it is clear that Blautia spp., in contrast to Pe-
ptostreptococcus spp.,
the most abundant
form one of
groups in the human gastrointestinal tract. Many other so-
called dominant genera are still in need for major reclassi-
ﬁcation, and the best example of this is the Clostridium
genus, for which a detailed phylogenetic analysis led to a
proposed grouping into 19 clusters (Collins et al., 1994).
Bacteria belonging to the Clostridium spp. are highly abun-
dant in the adult gastrointestinal tract, and in particular,
the members of the species that cluster within the Clostrid-
ium cluster IV (C. leptum group, which major constituent
is the Ruminococcacea family) and the Clostridium cluster
XIVa (C. coccoides group, which resembles the Lachnospir-
aceae family). Furthermore, the Ruminococcus genus is
polyphyletic or paraphyletic and its members cluster
within two families — the Ruminococcaceae and Lachno-
spiraceae. A recent metagenomic study reported that the
abundance of Ruminococcus spp. is a driver of one of the
proposed enterotype status of the microbiota (Arumugam
et al., 2011). However, as the present metagenomic analy-
ses do not provide accurate phylogenetic information, it is
unclear which of the two distinct groups of Ruminococcus
spp., is the actual driver of this enterotype status. This
example illustrates the need for a systematic and detailed.

very
dynamic, and in the last decade, 239 novel gastrointesti-
nal tract species have been detected or described, con-
ﬁrming the earlier notion that
the
gastrointestinal microorganisms are cultivable but not yet
cultured. While traditional cultivation media and strate-
gies are efﬁcient in obtaining novel species within the
Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria
phyla, for the detection of the gastrointestinal representa-
tives of the phyla Verrucomicrobia and Lentisphaerae, the
development of speciﬁc media and culturing approaches.

was needed (Zoetendal et al., 2003; Derrien et al., 2004).
This suggests that for the cultivation of the gastrointesti-
nal microorganisms belonging to phyla that lack any cul-
tured representatives
from the human intestine (e.g.,
TM7 candidate phylum or the Oscillospira genus), alter-
native and creative cultivation approaches
should be
developed and applied. Some new and promising devel-
opments include the use of high-throughput solid phase
growth
culturing
approaches using gnotobiotic mice (Goodman et al.,
2011), or gel microdroplet culturing (Fitzsimons et al.,
2013). The use of high-throughput culturing systems that
employ a large set of growth media coupled to genomic
characterization has proven to be very fruitful (Lagier
et al., 2012a; Dubourg et al., 2013; Hamad et al., 2013;
Pﬂeiderer et al., 2013). This recent attention for culturing
the gastrointestinal microorganisms reﬂects the perceived
need for detailed physiological, ecological and genetic
studies. While a variety of
functional metagenomics
it is the
approaches have been described and applied,
integration with culturing approaches that is needed to
further advance the understanding of the function of the
intestinal ecosystem in health and disease. The power of
this combination has recently been illustrated with the
example of the abundant mucus-utilizing bacterium, Akk-
ermansia muciniphila as a paradigm (Belzer & de Vos,.

age (Scardovi & Trovatelli, 1974), an intestinal origin can
be suspected, showing the high adaption of this genus to
the gastrointestinal tract. Phylogenetically, Biﬁdobacterium
spp. form a homogenous group, with 20 cultured species
linked to the human gastrointestinal tract . The
ﬁrst Biﬁdobacterium spp. was recovered from infant feces
in 1900 by Henri Tissier, as a part of his PhD thesis work
(Tissier, 1900). It was named Bacillus biﬁdus-communis.
Already in 1924, this bacterium was renamed to Biﬁdo-
bacterium biﬁdum, but Biﬁdobacterium was not recognized
as an independent genus until 1974 (Biavati et al., 2000).
The members of the Biﬁdobacterium genus are nonmotile,
anaerobic or microaerophilic bacteria that produce ace-
tate and lactate as major fermentation products from sug-
sugars by these bacteria is
ars. The degradation of.

Eggerthella are assacharolytic bacteria that produce
acids only from glucose, but not from other sugars. The
ﬁrst representative of this bacterial group was isolated in
1935 by Arnold Eggerth (Eggerth, 1935). These bacteria
produce formate and lactate. Until now, only Eggerthella
lenta and the still not fully characterized Eggerthella sp.
YY7918 are associated with the human gastrointestinal
tract. Eggerthella lenta has been implied in producing
anti-tumor substances that stimulate natural killer cells
(Hatta, 1995), while Eggerthella sp. YY7918 has been
reported to produce s-equol (Yokoyama & Suzuki, 2008),
which has anticarcinogenic properties (Yuan et al., 2007).
Slackia spp. are asaccharolytic bacteria with the com-
mon feature of converting dietary isoﬂavones. These isof-
lavones have been proposed to prevent hormone-
dependent diseases, while their conversion by gastrointes-
tinal bacteria
effectiveness.
Among the bacterial products, s-equol appears to be the
most relevant to human physiology (Yuan et al., 2007).
At least two Slackia spp. are capable of equol production
from isoﬂavones (Matthies et al., 2009; Jin et al., 2010),
while Adlercreutzia equolifaciens that also belongs to the
Coriobacteriales order, is another gastrointestinal species
capable to produce equol (Maruo et al., 2008). The ability
to produce s-equol is more abundant among microbiota
of Asian than the Caucasian subjects (Song et al., 2006)
and can be explained by the adaptation of the microbiota
isoﬂavones — particularly
to the higher availability of
those derived from soy beans..

The gastrointestinal Actinomycetales also include Rothia
spp. that are frequently detected in the upper gastrointesti-
nal tract (Ou et al., 2009), but rarely in fecal samples. These
species contribute to the degradation of gluten (Zamakh-
chari et al., 2011) and their abundance and activity might
be relevant for celiac disease and other conditions related
to gluten digestion. Another species of this order — Actino-
myces graevenitzii — which is detected in an increased
abundance in the small intestine of celiac disease patients,
might be a relevant risk factor for the development of this
disease (Ou et al., 2009). Various other Actinomyces spp.
can be detected in low abundance in the fecal samples of
healthy humans (Hoyles et al., 2012; Hoyles et al., 2013),
and while the role of these bacteria in the gastrointestinal
tract is still to be determined, it is noteworthy that an Acti-
nomyces spp. was detected as colonizer of the infant gastro-
intestinal tract using sensitive molecular methods already
in the ﬁrst days of life (Favier et al., 2002)..

Micrococcus spp. are relatively prevalent (present
in
20% of the analyzed subjects) in the samples of the upper
gastrointestinal tract in patients predisposed to the devel-
opment of the small intestinal bacterial overgrowth syn-
drome (Bouhnik et al., 1999). Although representatives of
this genus can be detected in the fecal samples (Finegold
et al., 1974), these bacteria typically inhabit human skin.
Similar applies to six Kocuria spp., which are human skin
and oropharynx mucosa commensals (Savini et al., 2010),
although two recent studies have reported presence of
Kocuria spp.
in gastrointestinal samples (Lagier et al.,
2012a; Fitzsimons et al., 2013).
The other members of.

The Gram-negative bacteria that belong to the phylum
Bacteroidetes are common, abundant and diverse within
the human gastrointestinal tract. The ﬁrst Bacteroides spe-
cies — Bacteroides fragilis — was isolated in 1898 as a
human pathogen linked to appendicitis among other clin-
ical cases (Veillon & Zuber, 1898). Although some Bacte-
roides
spp. are still considered to be opportunistic
pathogens, several decades of research have testiﬁed that
many Bacteroidetes species are highly adjusted to the gas-
trointestinal tract, where they live in high abundance (up
(cid:1)1 of intestinal material; Eggerth & Gagnon,
to 1011 cells g
1933; Moore & Holdeman, 1974a; Benno et al., 1986).
Hence,
that are
they perform metabolic conversions
essential for the host, often related to the degradation of
proteins or complex sugar polymers. The colonization of
the gastrointestinal tract with the Bacteroidetes is pro-
moted already in infants, as mother milk’s nondigestible
oligosaccharides support the growth of both Bacteroides
and Biﬁdobacterium spp. (Marcobal et al., 2011). Further-
more, animal model experiments have shown that the
colonization of the normal gastrointestinal tract, as illus-
trated by experiments with pure cultures of Bacteroides
spp., is a result of the recognition and selection by the
immune system of
(Rakoff-Nahoum et al.,
2004), mediated through the toll-like receptors (Round
et al., 2011; Lopez-Siles et al., 2012) and other speciﬁc
host-microorganism interactions (Hooper et al., 2012)..

For a long time, it was thought that the majority of
Gram-negative gastrointestinal tract bacteria belonged to
the Bacteroides genus, but in recent years many earlier
designed Bacteroides spp. were assigned to other genera
within the Bacteroidetes phylum. Currently, only four gas-
trointestinal Bacteroides spp. form deep branches in the
phylogenetic tree , suggesting that these bacteria
and
(B. ureolyticus, B. galacturonicus, B. pectinophilus,
B. coagulans) still should be reclassiﬁed to other phyloge-
netic groups. A similar situation applies to Anaerorhabdus
furcosa, which is still classiﬁed as a member of the Bacter-
family, but based on its SSU rRNA gene
oidaceae
sequence clusters within the Firmicutes phylum. The
majority of the gastrointestinal Bacteroidetes spp. belongs.

Bacteroides dorei, AB242143
Bacteroides vulgatus, AB510712
Bacteroides massiliensis, AY126616.

Bacteroides coprocola, AB200225.

Bacteroides coprophilus, AB260025.

Bacteroides intestinalis, AB437413.

Bacteroides oleiciplenus, AB490803.

Bacteroides cellulosilyticus, AB510698.

Bacteroides graminisolvens, AB363973.

Bacteroides timonensis, JX041639
Bacteroides nordii, AY608697.

Bacteroides salyersiae, AY608696.

Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, AE015928.

Bacteroides finegoldii, AB222699.

Bacteroides ovatus, AB050108
Bacteroides caccae, EU136686
Bacteroides xylanisolvens, AM230650
Bacteroides eggerthii, AB510700.

Bacteroides stercoris, AB510708.

Bacteroides uniformis, AB050110.

Bacteroides ureolyticus, FN401327.

Fig. 6. Phylogenetic tree of the human gastrointestinal species that belong to the class of the Bacteroidia. GenBank Accession Numbers of the
SSU rRNA gene sequence are provided for each species and the family names are indicated. Deeply rooted Bacteroides spp., which based on the
SSU rRNA gene sequence cluster within distant phylogenetic groups are depicted in the gray area..

to the following bacterial families: Bacteroidaceae, Prevo-
tellaceae, Rikenellaceae, and Porphyromonadaceae .
These bacterial species share the common feature that
they produce succinic acid, acetic acid, and in some cases
end-products. Species
propionic acid, as
belonging to the genera Alistipes, Bacteroides, Parabactero-
ides, Prevotella, Paraprevotella, Alloprevotella, Barnesiella,
and Tannerella are saccharolytic, while species belonging
to Odoribacter and Porphyromonas are predominantly
asaccharolytic. Some Bacteroides spp. and Prevotella spp.
can degrade complex plant polysaccharides such as starch,
cellulose, xylans, and pectins (Wu et al., 1992; Morotomi
et al., 2009; Sakamoto & Ohkuma, 2012). The Bacteroide-
tes species play also an important role in protein metabo-
lism, as some species have proteolytic activity, assigned to
the proteases that are linked to the cell wall (Macfarlane
et al., 1986; Macfarlane et al., 1988), while some Bactero-
ides spp. have a potential to utilize urea as a nitrogen
source (Yatsunenko et al., 2012). Other important func-
tions of Bacteroides spp. include the deconjugation of bile
acids (Narushima et al., 2006) and growth on mucus (Le-
itch et al., 2007). The Bacteroidetes contribute to the
recently proposed classiﬁcation of
the gastrointestinal
microbiota into enterotypes (Arumugam et al., 2011).
The importance of the Bacteroidetes is further illustrated
by the fact that this group is the most stable component
of the gastrointestinal microbiota over time in healthy
adults (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., 2013b). Anecdotally, a
unique case report described the microbiota of a critically
ill patient that harbored no Bacteroidetes — this patient
passed away soon after sampling (Dubourg et al., 2013)..

complex: while the reduced abundance of the Bacteroide-
tes in some cases is associated with obesity (Ley, 2010)
and irritable bowel syndrome (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al.,
2011),
this bacterial group appears to be enriched in
patients suffering from type 1 and type 2 diabetes (Larsen
et al., 2010). Moreover, Bacteroides spp.
in contrast to
Prevotella spp. were recently found to be enriched in the
metagenomes of subjects with low gene richness that were
associated with adiposity, insulin resistance and dyslipida-
emia as well as an inﬂammatory phenotype (Le Chatelier
et al., 2013)..

The ﬁrst representative of the Bacilli class retrieved from
the gastrointestinal tract was a member of Lactobacillales
order and was isolated in 1900 — Bacillus acidophilus
(Moro, 1900). The description of this species is vague,
based on the currently accepted standards, and as the ori-
ginal strain was lost, it is not clear if this species is Lacto-
bacillus acidophilus or one of
the other ﬁve species
derived from the so-called L. acidophilus group (Mits-
uoka, 1992). Lactobacilli comprise a group of gastrointes-
inhabitants that has received particular scientiﬁc
tinal
attention (Tannock, 2004), mainly because of the health
claims proposed by Metchnikoff in the beginning
of the nineteenth century and their later application as
probiotics. Although highly important for the health, Lac-
tobacilli are rarely detected as markers of the gastrointes-
tinal microbiota dysbiosis, but such reports exist and.

include a reduced abundance in patients suffering from
inﬂammatory bowel disease (Keighley et al., 1978; Ott
et al., 2004), type 1 diabetes (Murri et al., 2013). This
might be related to the fact that lactobacilli are only a
minor fraction of the fecal microbiota where they can
(cid:1)1 (Simon & Gorbach,
reach counts of up to 108 cells g
1984), and most of the analysis of the gastrointestinal
microbiota is based on the use of stool samples. In the
small intestine Lactobacillus spp. represent one of the pre-
dominant groups obtained by culturing (Reuter, 2001).
However, while molecular studies could conﬁrm their
presence in the upper intestinal tract, these also showed
that the Lactobacilli are quite variable and not as abun-
dant as other gastrointestinal genera at that location, such
as Streptococcus and Veillonella (Booijink, 2009; Booijink
et al., 2010). This may explain why Lactobacillus spp.
should be part of the diet, as consumed probiotic strains
of Lactobacillus spp. have a beneﬁcial effect on human
health and speciﬁc induction of gene expression has been
observed in duodenal biopsies after exposure of Lactoba-
cillus plantarum (van Baarlen et al., 2009). Speciﬁc media,
developed already in the 1950s (Rogosa et al., 1951),
enabled the isolation of numerous Lactobacillus spp. Nev-
ertheless, new Lactobacillus spp. from human gastrointes-
tinal tract are still being reported (Roos et al., 2005; Oki
et al., 2012), indicating that even the 38 known gastroin-
testinal Lactobacillus sp.  are not covering the
group’s full diversity. Several previously misclassiﬁed Lac-
tobacillus spp. have now been reclassiﬁed into novel gen-
and
including Weissella, Atopobium, Eggerthia,
era,
Kandleria (Collins & Wallbanks, 1992; Bjorkroth et al.,
2002; Salvetti et al., 2011). Currently, only Lactobacillus
rogosae is strongly outgrouping from the remaining Lacto-
bacillus spp., although even after exclusion of the strongly
outgrouping species, the species show a large degree of
the SSU rRNA gene variation and form several groups in
the phylogenetic tree  As Lactobacillus spp. pro-
duce lactic acid as the major fermentation production
that can be accompanied with ethanol and carbon dioxide
in some species and under some conditions, traditionally
Lactobacillus spp. are classiﬁed into three groups: obli-
gately homofermentative, facultatively homofermentative,
and obligately heterofermentative. However, the phyloge-
netic position of the species does not seem to be related
to their fermentation proﬁle..

lactic
acid bacteria can be detected in the gastrointestinal tract.
Members of the genera Leuconostoc and Weissella used to
be considered as occasional and possibly transient mem-
bers of the gastrointestinal microbiota. However, a recent
study showed that Leuconostoc spp. and Weissella spp. are
abundant (representing up to 24% of
total microbial
community) and widely distributed in colonic mucosa.

Brochothrix thermosphacta , FJ512270.

Gemella spp. are abundant in the upper gastrointestinal
tract and specially the proximal small intestine (Ou et al.,
2009). While their function in the gastrointestinal tract
has not been determined, these species can include patho-
genic strain that translocate to other organs. For instance,
Gemella spp. have been described as likely causing agents
of endocarditis, particularly in patients that suffer from
gastrointestinal disorders (such as colon cancer; Lopez-
Dupla et al., 1996)..

Numerous members of the Bacillus and Paenibacillus
genera have been detected in the samples of the human gas-
trointestinal tract. The ﬁrst representatives of this group of
bacteria were isolated in 1919 by Marjorie Batchelor, who
reported Bacillus cereus as the most prevalent member of
the aerobic sporogenic bacteria in infant feces (Batchelor,
1919). Members of the Bacillus genus were often reported
in the older cultivation-based studies, but the vast majority
this genus and related genera were
of
reported only recently (Hoyles et al., 2012; Lagier et al.,
2012a; Zoetendal et al., 2012). One of these studies was
designed for the targeted cultivation of Bacillus and related
species from human samples (Hoyles et al., 2012). It has
been shown that Bacillus spp. could be retrieved from all
analyzed samples, although these bacteria have very low
abundance of 102–104 cells mL
intestinal content.
Many of the Bacillus spp. isolated in this study exhibited
notable antimicrobial activity. This feature is in line with
the use of several Bacillus spp. as potent probiotics with
immunomodulatory potential (Duc et al., 2004). Little is
known about the function of these bacteria in the ecosys-
tem, but it is noteworthy that two independent studies have
shown that members of the Bacillales order, more speciﬁ-
cally Aneurinibacillus spp., have an increased abundance in
(Krogius-
feces of
Kurikka et al., 2009; Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., 2011), while a
signiﬁcantly higher abundance of Bacillus subtilis was found
in the feces of bottle-fed than breast-fed babies (Benno
et al., 1984)..

geneous and many of its members were initially assigned
to Clostridium genus and subsequently reclassiﬁed into
novel genera. The Clostridium sensu stricto — the real
Clostridium spp. — are grouped around the type species
Clostridium butyricum and belong to the Clostridium clus-
ter I within the Clostridiaceae family (Fig. 12; Stacke-
brandt et al., 1999). In addition to Clostridium spp., the
Clostridiaceae ofﬁcially groups Sarcina spp., Butyricicoccus
pullicaecorum and Lactonifactor longoviformis, Anoxynatro-
num sibiricum while the latter three, based on their SSU
rRNA gene sequence, should be assigned to various other
Clostridiales
(Figs 13, 14 and 16). The ﬁrst
human gastrointestinal Clostridium isolate, C. perfringens,
was recovered in 1905 (Passini, 1905). The same species,
previously known as Bacillus aerogenes capsulatus and
Clostridium welchii, was earlier isolated from a case of
endocarditis (Welch & Nuttall, 1892). Both isolation sites
ﬁt
the nowadays known properties of C. perfringens,
which is a commensal gastrointestinal bacterium that can
cause bacteraemia (Petit et al., 1999). Up to now, 72
Clostridium spp. have been detected in the human gastro-
intestinal samples, of which 30 belong to the Clostridium
sensu stricto . The other Clostridium spp. belong
to different families within the Firmicutes phylum, while
Clostridium rectum belongs to the Fusobacteria phylum.
Members of the Clostridium sensu stricto are generally
perceived as pathogenic, although cultivation-based stud-
ies show that C. perfringens and other real clostridia can
(cid:1)1 intestinal
be found in densities of up to 1010 cells g
content of healthy individuals (Finegold et al., 1974), and
up 107 cells g
intestinal content of healthy infants
(Mevissen-Verhage et al., 1987). Still,
the presence of
these bacteria, notably as seen for C. perfringens in elderly
is interpreted as an indicator of a less
Irish subjects,
healthy microbiota (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2013)..

The most abundant and diverse gastrointestinal family
is the Lachnospiraceae. This family groups 24 different
genera, most of which can be detected in the human gas-
trointestinal tract. In addition, a number of species that
are ofﬁcially classiﬁed into the genera Clostridium, Eubac-
terium, and Ruminococcus, cluster within the Lachnospira-
ceae based on their SSU rRNA gene sequence .
Members of the Lachnospiraceae are also among the ﬁrst
to be established in the gastrointestinal tract. A recent
study showed that Ruminococcus gnavus is an exclusive
representative of this family in 2-months old breast-fed
infants, while infants fed with cow-milk based formula
have a more diverse Lachnospiraceae community (Tan-
nock et al., 2013). Analysis of the microbiota of children
and adults showed that this group of bacteria is predomi-
nant in both young children and in adults, which indicates
the early establishment of these bacteria (Ringel-Kulka
et al., 2013)..

Bacteroides galacturonicus, DQ497994
Lactobacillus rogosae, GU269544.

Blautia is a recently described bacterial genus that
groups
several abundant gastrointestinal bacteria that
were previously assigned to the Ruminococcus genus –
notably those related to Ruminococcus obeum .
The common feature of Blautia spp. is the utilization of
hydrogen and carbon dioxide to form acetate (Bernalier
et al., 1996). Blautia spp. are among the most abundant
tract and can
the entire gastrointestinal
members of
encompass between 2.5% and 16% of the total microbi-
ota (Zoetendal et al., 2002). This abundant bacterial
group is signiﬁcantly depleted in elderly subjects (Hayashi
et al., 2003; Biagi et al., 2010) and in mucosal samples of
colorectal cancer patients (Chen et al., 2012). In contrast,
increased levels of Blautia spp. are observed in irritable
bowel syndrome patients (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., 2011),
but this could reﬂect the adaption of the ecosystem to
the larger amount of gasses produced by Dorea spp.,
which can be utilized by Blautia spp..

of important metabolic functions. R. torques and other
currently uncultured species related to R. torques, are
among the most potent mucus utilizes that enable mucus
degradation by secretion of several different extracellular
glycosidases
the
abundance of these bacteria is strongly associated with
the level of triglycerides in blood serum (Lahti et al.,
2013). Several studies of the microbiota of irritable bowel
syndrome patients and controls have shown that organ-
isms related to these misclassiﬁed Ruminococcus spp. are
signiﬁcantly elevated in patients (Kassinen et al., 2007;
Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c
et al., 2011).
Moreover, the abundance of these bacteria is positively
correlated with irritable bowel syndrome symptoms (Mal-
inen et al., 2010) and signiﬁcantly reduced by probiotics
consumption that reduces these symptoms (Lyra et al.,
2010)..

recognized members of the Clostridium cluster IV (Clos-
tridium leptum group) are either members or are closely
related to this family . The true Ruminococcus
spp. are an abundant fraction of the human gastrointesti-
can reach densities of up to
nal microbiota that
(cid:1)1 of intestinal content (Finegold et al., 1977).
1010 cells g
Being strictly anaerobic cellulolytic cocci, Ruminococcus
spp. were isolated from human gastrointestinal samples
only after the improvement of the anaerobic techniques
and media for
(Hungate,
1947). The ﬁrst human gastrointestinal Ruminococcus spp.
reported is Ruminococcus bromii isolated in 1972 (Moore
et al., 1972). Similar to the other gastrointestinal bacteria,
the initially deﬁned Ruminococcus spp. are a heteroge-
neous group, which based on the SSU rRNA gene
sequence clusters within the Ruminococcaceae and Lachno-
spiraceae families. Recently, ﬁve gastrointestinal Rumino-
coccus spp. were reclassiﬁed into Blautia genus,
leaving
seven others to be reclassiﬁed (Liu et al., 2008; Figs 9 and
10). Bacteria that belong to the Ruminococcus sensu stricto
degrade complex sugars to produce acetate as the major
fermentation product. Both in vitro and in vivo studies
have shown that R. bromii is the major degrader of the
resistant starch in the human gastrointestinal tract (Ko-
vatcheva-Datchary et al., 2009; Walker
et al., 2011).
Application of the resistant starch in the diet has a wide
range of health-promoting effects, suggesting the impor-
tance of the metabolic activity of R. bromii for the wellbe-
ing of the host (Higgins & Brown, 2013). The importance
of the members of the Ruminococcus sensu stricto for the
intestinal health is indicated by their reduced abundance
in feces of Crohn’s disease (Kang et al., 2010) and ulcera-
tive colitis patients (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., 2013a)..

Among the Ruminococcaceae family, Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii (previously known as Fusobacterium prausnitzii)
is the most prevalent and abundant gastrointestinal micro-
organism (Holdeman et al.,
1976). Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii can utilize glucose, fructose, and fructo-oligosa-
charides, as well as complex molecules such as pectin and
N-acetylglucosamine to produce butyrate, formate and lac-
tate (Duncan et al., 2002a; Lopez-Siles et al., 2012). It is
one of the major butyrate producers in the gastrointestinal
tract, which is a relevant feature because of the health-pro-
moting properties of butyrate. The reduced abundance of
this bacterium is detected in association with Crohn’s dis-
ease (Sokol et al., 2006; Kang et al., 2010) and with colon
cancer (Chen et al., 2012). This bacterium is important for
the gastrointestinal microbiota homeostasis as it has found
to show anti-inﬂammatory properties in mice (Sokol et al.,
2008) and is associated with a range of metabolic processes
in the human mucosa (Lepage et al., 2011). Health-pro-
moting properties are also exhibited by B. pullicaecorum,
another species with the SSU rRNA gene sequence that is.

related to the Ruminococcaceae family. This bacterium is
signiﬁcantly reduced in inﬂammatory bowel disease
patients, while its oral administration strengthens the epi-
thelial barrier function in animal models by increasing the
trans-epithelial resistance (Eeckhaut et al., 2013)..

The ﬁrst Eubacterium spp. from a human gastrointesti-
nal sample was isolated already in 1908 when Henri Tis-
sier plated Bacillus
renamed into
ventriousus,
Eubacterium ventriosum (Tissier, 1908). The genus Eubac-
terium was for a long time recognized as one of the most
abundant genera of the human gastrointestinal microbi-
(cid:1)1 of intestinal
ota, with densities of up to 1010 cells g
content (Moore & Holdeman, 1974a). However, Eubacte-
rium, similar to Clostridium,
is very
rod-shaped,
vaguely described. Deﬁned as anaerobic,
Gram-positive bacteria that do not
form endospores,
Eubacterium genus includes a consortium of distantly
related species. Some Eubacterium spp. have been reclassi-
ﬁed into novel genera within two bacterial phyla —
Actinobacteria and Firmicutes — of which six genera
(Dorea, Collinsella, Eggerthella, Flavonifractor, Mogibacteri-
um and Pseuodramibacter) can be members of the gastro-
intestinal microbiota (Willems & Collins, 1996; Kageyama
et al., 1999a, b; Nakazawa et al., 2000; Taras et al., 2002;
Carlier et al., 2010). Further reclassiﬁcation of the genus
can be expected, as only four gastrointestinal Eubacterium
spp. belong to the Eubacterium sensu stricto . In
a recent study of the gastrointestinal microbiota of cente-
narians, Eubacterium spp. (notably those related to Eubac-
terium limosum) were reported as signature bacteria of
the long life, being 10-fold increased in centenarians
(Biagi et al., 2010). It is known that E. limosum has the
ability to transform dietary phytoestrogens into forms
that might have a positive impact on health (Clavel et al.,
2006; Possemiers & Verstraete, 2009). Furthermore,
E. limosum is selectively stimulated by prebiotics that
improve the symptoms of
inﬂammatory bowel disease
patients (Kanauchi et al., 2005)..

Mogibacterium is a genus established by reclassiﬁcation
of the intestinal bacterium – Eubacterium timidum. Mogi-
bacterium spp. are enriched in mucosa-associated micro-
biota in colon cancer patients but not much is known
about this group of bacteria belonging to Clostridium
Family XIII Incertae Sedis (Chen et al., 2012)..

stridia class, form distinct branches in the phylogenetic
tree . Two of
these gastrointestinal bacteria,
namely Catabacter hongkongensis and C. minuta, form a
the
separate cluster within the Clostridiales order of
Clostridia class and are the only cultured representatives
of a phylogenetic group that was previously detected only
in various molecular studies and was in a previous review
designated as uncultured Clostridiales II (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojano-
vi(cid:1)c et al., 2007). These two species are ofﬁcially assigned
to two different families (Catabacteriaceae and Christense-
nellaceae), although based on the SSU rRNA gene
sequence similarity  they should be grouped in
the same family, and, most likely,
in the same genus.
Catabacter hongkongensis was isolated in 2007 from a
blood sample, although the intestinal origin of the bacte-
rium was suspected (Lau et al., 2007). This bacterium
was later isolated from patients with acute appendicitis,
but also from other tissues where it was a causative agent
of fatal bacteremia (Lau et al., 2012). Christensenella min-
uta is an intestinal isolate, described in 2012 (Morotomi
et al., 2012). Not much is known about the role of this
group of strictly anaerobic bacteria in the human gastro-
intestinal tract, but it is noteworthy that bacteria that
belong to the Christensenella/Catabacter group were
reported to be dramatically depleted in fecal
samples of ulcerative patients relative to controls (Rajili(cid:1)c-
Stojanovi(cid:1)c
(ﬁvefold)
depleted in fecal samples of patients with postinfectious
irritable bowel syndrome (Jalanka-Tuovinen et al., 2013).
family were
the human gastrointestinal.

Bacteroides coagulans, DQ497990.

from Clostridia sensu stricto. Peptococcus niger is the only
representative of the genus. This strictly anaerobic bacte-
rium has been isolated from various body sites, while the
strain isolated from feces showed an ability to desulfate
transformation of steroid
and perform other chemical
molecules
feature of
(Van Eldere et al., 1987). This
P. niger makes it an important player in enterophatic cir-
culation of various steroid molecules, primarily steroid
hormones, which has a major impact on human metabo-
lism. Another member of the Peptococcaceae family, Des-
ulﬁtobacterium hafniense, has been reported only once as
an inhabitant of the human gastrointestinal tract (van de
Pas et al., 2001). In contrast to other members of the
genus, the human D. hafniense is not able to use chloro-
ethenes or chlorophenol as terminal electron acceptors
(Smidt & de Vos, 2004). This bacterium is capable of
using sulﬁte as terminal electron acceptor and hence pro-
duces hydrogen sulﬁde. Hydrogen sulﬁde is also produced
by P. niger (Wilkins et al., 1975), and this property that
may be detrimental to health as described below for the
Deltaproteobacteria..

Finally, Halanaerobaculum tunisiense has been identiﬁed
by pyrosequencing of the V6 variable region of the SSU
rRNA gene in a recent study that compared efﬁciency of
culturomics and pyrosequencing approach for studying
the gastrointestinal microbiota diversity (Lagier et al.,
2012a). Halanaerobaculum tunisiense
recently
described anaerobic bacterium that was isolated from
hypersaline lake in Tunisia (Hedi et al., 2009). Given the
conditions
this bacterium
the isolated strain of
requires for its growth (the minimal required NaCl con-.

It has been suggested that members of the Tenericutes
are involved in inﬂammatory bowel disease, as they have
the ability to adhere to and to fuse with epithelial and
immune system cells, which could explain intracellular
epithelial structures in the Crohn’s disease patients’ biop-
sies detected by electron microscopy (Roediger & Macfar-
lane, 2002). A molecular survey has revealed that a
cultured representative of this group — the pathogenic
Mycoplasma pneumoniae — can be detected in mucosal
biopsies of both inﬂammatory bowel disease patients and
healthy controls alike, although Crohn’s disease patients
had a signiﬁcantly higher abundance of this bacterium
than ulcerative colitis patients and healthy subjects (Chen
et al., 2001). The ﬁrst report of the Mycoplasma in the
human gastrointestinal tract dates from 1973 (Bhat et al.,
1973), while speciﬁc searches for Ureaplasma urealyticum
and Mycoplasma hominis revealed the presence of these
two species in anal swaps of more than half of the ana-
lyzed subjects (Munday et al., 1981)..

The ﬁrst bacterium from the Betaproteobacteria class —
Alcaligenes faecalis — was isolated from a human fecal
sample in 1896 (Petruschky, 1896). This asaccharolytic
rod that can utilize urea, a range of amino-acids, and can
produce nitric oxide (NO; Denault et al., 1953) has fre-.

quently been detected in later studies of the gastrointesti-
nal microbiota. A number of other bacteria within this
class have been detected in recent years, showing that
Betaproteobacteria are diverse and ubiquitous members of
the gastrointestinal microbiota . Among them,
Sutterella and Parrasutterella are the most
frequently
encountered and the abundant gastrointestinal microor-
ganisms (Nagai et al., 2009; Mukhopadhya et al., 2011).
These bacteria are typical for the gastrointestinal microbi-
ota ecosystem, assacharolytic and inactive in classical
microbiological
tests. Their abundance is increased in
autistic children (Williams et al., 2012) and in patients
suffering from type 2 diabetes (Larsen et al., 2010).
Hence, it is of interest to deﬁne which metabolic transfor-
mations are catalyzed by these bacteria, as they might be
particularly relevant for understanding the global impact
of the gastrointestinal microbiota on human health. Alca-
ligenes faecalis and related bacteria are common gastroin-
testinal tract inhabitants, notably of the ileum. Alcaligenes
spp. may be opportunists that inhabit Peyers’ patches and
signal to the immune system as shown in model animals
(Obata et al., 2010). Moreover, Alcaligenes spp. produce
NO, which is an important biological regulator (Culotta
& Koshland, 1992; Anderson et al., 1993)..

intestinal
inhabitant. It has been isolated in 1985 and described as a
unique intestinal bacterium that degrades exclusively oxa-
(cid:1)1 of feces
late and can reach densities of up to 107 cells g
(Allison et al., 1985). Due to its metabolic activity, O. for-.

Within the class Gammaproteobacteria, nine different fam-
ilies distributed within six different orders have been
detected in the human gastrointestinal samples. Escherichia
coli was the ﬁrst bacterial isolate of the Gammaproteobac-
teria characterized from human gastrointestinal samples in
1885 (Shulman et al., 2007). Escherichia coli belongs to the
Enterobacteriaceae family, which is the most diverse, pre-
valent and abundant of all gastrointestinal Proteobacteria
. Most of Enterobacteriaceae members are associ-
ated with diarrhea (Thielman & Guerrant, 2004), although
representatives of this family are not necessarily causing
any symptoms and are actually one of the ﬁrst to be found
in the newborn gastrointestinal tract (Favier et al., 2002).
The abundance of this bacterial group increases with age,
but it remains subdominant and in elderly subjects repre-
sents about 1% of the total gastrointestinal microbiota
(Hopkins et al., 2001). Escherichia coli is the most preva-
lent representative of this family that is often the most
abundant facultative anaerobe in the gastrointestinal sam-
ples. The different strains of E. coli can exhibit different
properties, varying from probiotic (Kruis et al., 2004) to
pathogenic causing diarrhea or infections on other sites
(Ron, 2006). The majority of other Enterobacteriaceae spp.
are infrequently isolated from gastrointestinal samples
(Bucher & von Graevenitz, 1982; M€uller, 1986). In that
line, a study of dedicated isolation of the Morganella-
Proteus-Providencia group from feces of almost 3000
healthy subjects and patients suffering from enteric dis-
eases, showed that species of this group are subabundant
and have joined prevalence between 10% and 20%,
depending on the health status (M€uller, 1986). Still, the
the most comprehensively
Enterobacteriaceae is one of
described gastrointestinal families, which can be explained
by its development as a paradigm for genetic studies and
its clinical relevance (Grimont et al., 1981; Hickman-Bren-
ner et al., 1984; Farmer et al., 1985; Hickman-Brenner
et al., 1985a, b). A speciﬁc case is represented by the
so-called adherent-invasive E. coli strains that have been.

Aeromonas spp. are medically signiﬁcant as these spe-
cies are implicated in the development of the gastroenter-
itis and diarrhea. The role of these bacteria in human
health has been a subject of a long-lasting debate result-
ing in a conclusion that at least four gastrointestinal spe-
cies (A. caviae, A. hydrophila, A. jandaei, and A. veronii),
are pathogenic (Janda & Abbott, 1998). The presence of
these species in the gastrointestinal tract is not necessarily
inducing any symptoms, although in vitro experiments
have indicated that they are cytotoxic and induce lesions
in the intestinal mucosa (Pitarangsi et al., 1982)..

Eight different Pseudomonas spp. can be detected in the
human gastrointestinal tract. Among them, Pseudomonas
frequently
aeruginosa is
reported as a member of the fecal microbiota of healthy
humans
(Finegold et al., 1974; Benno et al., 1986).
Although a member of the normal gastrointestinal micro-
biota, Pseudomonas aeruginosa can act as an opportunistic
pathogen in critically ill or immuno-suppressed patients
and cause sepsis as it can interact with our immune sys-
tem (Wu et al., 2005) and can disrupt the intestinal epi-
et al., 2006). Pseudomonas
thelial barrier
ﬂuorescens is a less prevalent member of the genus that
has been implicated in the development of Crohn’s dis-
ease (Wei et al., 2002). A recent study showed that Pseu-
domonas spp., among other Proteobacteria, have increased
abundance in infants with colic (de Weerth et al., 2013)..

Until today, only two bacteria from Xanthomonadaceae
have
samples:
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia from a stool and an ileal
sample derived from atypical clinical cases (Tamura et al.,
1988; Apisarnthanarak et al., 2003), and Lysobacter soli in
a recent high-throughput cultivation of the normal gas-
trointestinal microbiota (Lagier et al., 2012a). In addition,
four other related bacterial species were detected based
on the SSU rRNA gene sequence. These bacteria were
previously isolated from different ecosystems and include
Nevskia ramose
ginsenosidimutans
and Rhodanobacter
from soil, Pseudoxanthomonas mexicana from sludge and
urine, and Silanimonas lenta from a hot spring. Based on
their low prevalence in the gastrointestinal tract,
it is
most likely that Xanthomonadaceae are transient members
of the gastrointestinal microbiota..

Bacteroides ureolyticus, FN401327.

bacter and Helicobacter. Campylobacter is a genus that
groups diverse isolates from mucosal surfaces of gastroin-
testinal, oral and urogenital tract. The ﬁrst report of Cam-
pylobacter isolation from the human gastrointestinal tract
dates from 1946 (Levy, 1946). Campylobacter spp. were
originally described as members of genus Vibrio, and
reclassiﬁed into an independent genus in 1973 (Veron &
Chatelain, 1973). Species of this genus are principally con-
sidered to be pathogenic organisms involved in diarrheal
illness. However, Campylobacter hominis has been isolated
from a gastrointestinal sample of a healthy subject (Lawson
et al., 2001), while C. concisus is a clinical isolate that also
has been recovered from healthy individual (Engberg et al.,
2000). Finally, a recent study of the microaerophilic fecal
microbiota of children revealed diverse and prevalent colo-
nization of Campylobacter spp. of gastrointestinal tract of
both healthy and children suffering from inﬂammatory
bowel diseases (Hansen et al., 2013). The presence of Cam-
pylobacter spp. in the gastrointestinal tract can cause watery
or bloody diarrhea, whereas it also can be associated with
intestinal diseases such as ulcerative colitis (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojano-
vi(cid:1)c et al., 2013a). However, Campylobacter spp. can also
remain asymptomatic, suggesting that at least some species
of this genus are commercial members of the gastrointesti-
nal microbiota..

The genus Helicobacter has been derived from Cam-
pylobacter after reclassiﬁcation of
the latter (Goodwin
et al., 1989; Vandamme et al., 1991). Helicobacter spp. are
spiral-shaped bacteria that were detected in human gastric
mucosa as late as in 1906 (Krienitz, 1906). They received
exceptional attention once Helicobacter pylori was discov-
ered to induce the gastric and duodenal ulcers (for recent
review see, Fock et al., 2013). Helicobacter spp. are mainly
located in the stomach but can be detected in the other
gastrointestinal samples of healthy individuals but only
when highly sensitive techniques are applied, suggesting
that they may lyse and disappear in transit from the
stomach (MacKay et al., 2003; Ceelen et al., 2005).
Hence, their prevalence is low in samples from the lower
gastrointestinal tract (Hansen et al., 2013)..

Victivallis vadensis is the only species within the phylum
of Lentisphaerae that has been isolated from the gastroin-
testinal tract . This species was isolated in 2003,
liquid
as a bacterium that was able to grow in basal.

Nitrososphaera gargensis , NR_102916.

electron microscopy images (Gad et al., 1977). Another
factor might be relevant to the currently undeﬁned role of
the Spirochetes in human health. A recent molecular study
showed that
in addition to the two cultured species,
another, currently uncultured Brachyspira spp. is more fre-
quent than the other two Brachyspira spp. in the human
colonic biopsies. Although this
study conﬁrmed the
absence of a correlation between these species and physical
complaints, it appeared that B. pilosicoli is associated with
intestinal inﬂammation (Westerman et al., 2012)..

0.01% in human fecal samples (Horz et al., 2006). The ﬁrst
attempt to detect this group of bacteria in the human gas-
trointestinal tract yielded a sole SSU rRNA gene sequence
that is identical to that of a later on cultured Cloacibacillus
evryensis (Ganesan et al., 2008). Cloacibacillus spp. are
amino acid degrading bacteria that use sulfate as terminal
electron acceptor and that are capable to use mucin as sole
carbon source (Looft et al., 2013). Their presence in the
human gastrointestinal microbiota was conﬁrmed by
Furthermore,
several molecular
recent
high-throughput
study retrieved another
gastrointestinal Synergistetes bacterium — Pyramidobacter
piscolens (Lagier et al., 2012a). Pyramidobacter piscolens was
described in 2009, as an asaccharolytic, anaerobic oral
isolate capable of hydrogen sulﬁde production..

Currently, only two species within the Verrucomicrbia
phylum have been detected in the human gastrointestinal
tract. Akkermansia muciniphila was described in 2004 as a
unique human gastrointestinal bacterium that is able to
grow on intestinal mucus as a sole carbon source (Derri-
en et al., 2004). This bacterium is widely distributed and
can be detected in fecal material of humans of all age
groups (Collado et al., 2007), and although its abundance
varies between subjects, it is probably one of the members
that
of.

for a healthy host as its
A. muciniphila is important
decreased abundance is associated with compromised
health including acute appendicitis
(Swidsinski et al.,
2011), ulcerative colitis (Vigsnæs et al., 2012; Rajili(cid:1)c-
Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., 2013a), autism (Wang et al., 2011a),
and atopic diseases (Candela et al., 2012). Finally, the
abundance of A. muciniphila is inversely correlated with
obesity (Karlsson et al., 2012). A recent study suggests
that A. muciniphila plays a pivotal role in obesity as its
duodenal delivery regulates
fat-mass gain, metabolic
endotoxemia, adipose tissue inﬂammation, and insulin
resistance in an animal model experiment (Everard et al.,
2013). Given the very short history of the research related
to A. muciniphila, the wealth of data that support its
beneﬁcial
remarkable
importance of this bacterium. In addition, one other spe-
cies of the Verrucomicrobia — Prosthecobacter ﬂuviatilis —
has been detected in the study of bacteria of a patient
with ileal pouch (McLaughlin et al.,
2010), while
sequences classiﬁed within this genus were detected in the
study of the microbiota of infants (Palmer et al., 2007)..

There are a few gastrointestinal bacterial phyla with low
diversity that have not yet been discussed, including the
Deinococcus-Thermus bacteria,
the Melainabacteria the
Gemmatimonadetes and the Planctomycetes . The
Deinococcus-Thermus bacteria were for the ﬁrst time asso-
ciated with the human gastrointestinal microbiota in
2006, when uncultured phylotypes within this phylum
were recovered in a molecular survey of the microbiota of
the human stomach (Bik et al., 2006). Several studies
have conﬁrmed the presence of these bacteria in the gas-
trointestinal microbiota, while a recent high-throughput
culturing study detected a single cultivated bacterium of
this phylum (Lagier et al., 2012a). Currently, no particu-
lar function has been assigned to this bacterial group,
although there is evidence that these bacteria are active in
the distal parts of the gastrointestinal tract (Peris-Bondia
et al., 2011).
Molecular.

In addition to the bacterial phyla that are reproducibly
detected by many studies of the human gastrointestinal
microbiota, some bacterial phyla are only occasionally
found. For instance, some studies have reported the pres-
ence of the Gemmatimonadetes in the human gastrointes-
(Andersson et al., 2008), but even when
tinal
present, these bacteria constitute an extremely minor frac-
tion, as indicated by the fact that only one of over 15 000
SSU rRNA gene sequences in the study of the microbiota
of inﬂammatory bowel disease patients and controls orig-
inated from a Gemmatimonadetes bacterium (Frank et al.,
2007). Furthermore, a few pyrosequencing studies have
reported Nitrospira bacteria in the human gastrointestinal
tract (Hung et al., 2011). It is interesting to note that in
a recent study of the microbiota of pediatric irritable
bowel syndrome patients only one Nitrospira phylotype
was detected by pyrosequencing. However, the further
attempts to retrieve this bacterium revealed that
the
detected sequence was actually retrieved from a novel
taxon related to the genus Ruminococcus (Saulnier et al.,
2011). This example testiﬁes to the fact that identiﬁcation
of sequences based on very short reads, such as those
produced by currently used high-throughput sequencing
technologies, are not always reliable (Werner et al., 2012).
The presence of the Planctomycetes in the human gas-
trointestinal tract was reported only in molecular-based
studies (Wilson & Blitchington, 1996; De Filippo et al.,
2010; Hong et al., 2011). A sequence of an uncultured
bacterium (Gene Bank Accession Number U58225) was
reported in one of
the
human gastrointestinal microbiota, and was designated as
an uncultured Plantomycetes bacterium (Wilson & Blitch-
ington, 1996). However, the detected SSU rRNA gene
sequence was probably retrieved from a representative of
a new genus within the Lentisphaerae phylum, since it has
the highest similarity with V. vadensis (that was
isolated and described after publication of the molecular
study). Nevertheless, Plantomycetes might be a part of the
human gastrointestinal microbiota, as a recent review
indicated the detection of a diverse community of the
Planctomycetes in the human gastrointestinal tract (Lagier
et al., 2012b). When analyzing the publicly available data,
we found that only one (JQ287572) had high similarity
to the SSU rRNA gene sequence of a cultured bac-
terium—Schlesneria paludicola. However, based on the
it grows in the
characteristics of this bacterium (e.g.,.

Bacteria are the dominant but not an exclusive compo-
nent of the human gastrointestinal microbiota. Archaea,
primarily the methanogenic ones, can be relatively abun-
dant component of the gastrointestinal microbiota with
densities of up to 1010 cells g
feces (Bond et al.,
1971; Miller & Wolin, 1986). In total, eight archaeal spe-
cies have been associated with the human gastrointestinal
tract . In an early cultivation study,
which dates from 1968, a single methanogenic species,
isolated from four of ﬁve individuals, was identiﬁed as
Methanobrevibacter ruminantium (Nottingham & Hun-
gate, 1968). Today, Methanobrevibacter smithii is recog-
nized as the most abundant, and often an exclusive
methanogen of human gastrointestinal microbiota (Miller
& Wolin, 1986; Dridi et al., 2009), which suggests a pos-
sible misidentiﬁcation of the isolates in the earlier study.
In addition to M. smithii, Methanosphaera stadtmaniae is
a relatively prevalent, but atypical methanogenic archaea
that reduces methanol and that can be found in human
feces in low concentrations (Miller & Wolin, 1985; Dridi
et al., 2009). Similar to M. stadtmaniae, a recently iso-
lated Methanomassiliicoccus luminyensis can also utilize
methanol in the presence of hydrogen, but these two gas-
trointestinal archaeal species are phylogenetically distant
(Dridi et al., 2012). Methanogenic archaea have been
extensively studied as the process of methane synthesis
from carbon dioxide and hydrogen results in a signiﬁcant
gas removal
tract. The role of
methanogenic archaea might be particularly relevant for
bloating, which is one of the symptoms of irritable bowel
syndrome, and a recent study has shown a highly signiﬁ-
cant (fourfold) reduction of methanogenic archaea in irri-
to controls
table bowel
(Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., 2011). In addition to methano-
genic archaea, two cultured species of halophilic archaea
have been detected in the study of the microbiota of Kor-
ean subjects (Nam et al., 2008), while the presence of low
numbers of these organisms was conﬁrmed by the analy-
sis of the colonic mucosa of inﬂammatory bowel patients
(Oxley et al., 2010). In addition to the conﬁrmed pres-
ence of the Euryarchaeota phylum members, the human
gastrointestinal archaea might also include a number of
yet uncultured species within the Thermoplasma and the
Crenarchaeota phylum and putative novel orders, as
detected in molecular-based studies and recently reviewed
(Dridi et al., 2011). The presence of Crenarchaeota phy-
lum representatives was detected by retrieving the speciﬁc
partial SSU rRNA gene sequences in a study that dates.

from 2005 (Rieu-Lesme et al., 2005). One of the ampli-
ﬁed SSU rRNA gene sequences (AY887079) shows 97%
sequence similarity with SSU rRNA gene sequence of
Sulfolobus
(AY887074) 99%
sequence similarity with the SSU rRNA gene of Candida-
tus Nitrososphaera gargensis. It should be noted that both
Sulfolobus solfataricus and Nitrososphaera gargensis are hy-
perthermophilic species, and it
is highly unlikely that
these species inhabit the gastrointestinal tract of humans.
Until cultured representatives or at least the full SSU
rRNA gene sequences of the Crenarchaeota species are
obtained in the future independent studies, the presence
of the this archaeal phylum in the human gastrointestinal
tract remains questionable..

infections, primarily
the
gastrointestinal tract. All Apicomplexa species that can be
retrieved from the human gastrointestinal tract are con-
sidered to be pathogenic (Farthing, 2006). Cryptosporidi-
um parvum is the most widely distributed representative
of the group, and it has a high prevalence of infection in
children of the developing world (Checkley et al., 1997).
Although infections with Cryptosporidium parvum can be
asymptomatic, even when it does not cause diarrhea, this
organism affects absorption of nutrients and has a nega-
tive effect on weight gain of children (Checkley et al.,
1997)..

Blastocystis spp. (classiﬁed within the Stramenopiles) are
single-celled protozoan organisms. Blastocystis spp. was
for the ﬁrst time isolated from the human gastrointestinal
tract in 1911 and was reported under name Blastocystis
enterocola, which was, at the time, designated as yeast
(Alexieff, 1911). According to the current convention, all
Blastocystis isolated from humans are identiﬁed as Blasto-
cystis hominis, although their SSU rRNA gene sequence
analysis showed that nine different phylotypes of these
organisms can be detected in the human gastrointestinal
tract (Arisue et al., 2003; Scanlan & Marchesi, 2008). This
‘within species’ diversity of the B. hominis can explain the
fact that the role of Blastocystis in human disease is still
not deﬁned (Zierdt, 1991). Longitudinal study of
the
Eukarya in the human gastrointestinal tract has shown
that Blastocystis spp. are stable and frequently detected
organisms
(Scanlan & Marchesi,
2008). Although some authors have suggested the link.

is the only representative of the
Ciliophora phylum. Neobalantidium coli is the largest pro-
tozoan parasite that infects humans, but its natural hosts
are pigs. Although the organism can reproduce within the
intestinal lumen of humans without attacking the tissues
and therefore remain asymptomatic, the infection with
this species is typically followed by diarrhea and bloody
stools (Katz et al., 1982)..

(Saklatvala, 1993). There are several studies that show the
successful detection of Entamoeba spp. in clinical samples
using molecular methods, typically in stool samples taken
from patients with diarrhea. Molecular studies of the Euk-
arya as part of the ecosystem in the human gastrointestinal
tract already conﬁrmed the presence of two Entamoeba spe-
cies: Entamoeba coli (Scanlan & Marchesi, 2008) and Ent-
amoeba
the
gastrointestinal tract of a healthy man..

Members of the phyla Micosporidia, Parabasalia and
Metamonada are micro-eukaryotic organisms that contain
ﬂagella and are often commonly termed as ﬂagellates.
Micosporidia are obligate intracellular protozoan parasites
that spread in the environment via spores. Four species
of Micosporidia can infect the human gastrointestinal tract
— Enterocytozoon bieneusi (Desportes et al., 1985), En-
cephalitozoon intestinalis (Weber et al., 1994), Encephalito-
zoon cuniculi (Franzen et al., 1995), and Retortamonas
intestinalis (Jones-Engel et al., 2004; Fig. 28, Table S3).
for which SSU rRNA gene
Retortamonas
sequence is not available,
is the oldest isolate of this
time cultured in 1879
group that was
(Hogue, 1933). Other Micosporidia were isolated from the
gastrointestinal tract of a subject infected with HIV (Des-
portes et al., 1985). The presence of Micosporidia in the
gastrointestinal tract is typically associated with diarrhea,
mostly in immuno-suppressed patients, although spores
of these organisms can be detected in gastrointestinal
samples of asymptomatic subjects (Cegielski et al., 1999;
Mungthin et al., 2005; Wichro et al., 2005). If asymptom-
atic, the presence of Micosporidia in the gastrointestinal
tract is associated with malnutrition..

two species can be associated
with the human gastrointestinal tract. Pentatrichomonas
hominis is generally regarded as a harmless commensal
organism, although it
is occasionally designated as a
causal agent of diarrhea. This organism, which actually
represents the oldest gastrointestinal isolate retrieved in
1854, has a low prevalence of the human gastrointestinal
from 0.1% to 30.9%
tract
depending on the geographical
location (Honigberg,
1990). In 1918 another member of this group, Dient-
in the
amoeba fragilis was reported as a commensal
human
latter
the
research has suggested that D. fragilis might be associ-
ated with a number of diseases
including diarrhea,
irritable bowel syndrome or
abdominal pain, anorexia,
allergic colitis (reviewed in Johnson et al., 2004). The
uncertainty of the pathogenicity of D. fragilis might be,
similar to B. hominis, due to the presence of different
phylotypes, since two different phylotypes of this species,
with 2% SSU rRNA gene sequence divergence, have
been identiﬁed (Johnson & Clark, 2000)..

The Metamonada phylum includes Giardia lamblia
and two rarely detected and principally nonpathogenic
species — Enteromonas homins and R. intestinalis (Katz
et al., 1982). Giardia lamblia is the most common ﬂagel-
late of the human gastrointestinal tract. When ingested,
typically via contaminated food or water, G. lamblia
attaches to the mucosal surface of
the duodenum or
jejunum and multiplies by binary ﬁssion (Wolfe, 1992).
and
Infection with G. lamblia is
although it may remain asymptomatic, giardiasis can be
followed by a range of symptoms that include steator-
rhoea, diarrhea and weight loss (Wolfe, 1992). It is not
clear why some infections are asymptomatic, but already
in the 1970s, it was suggested that the symptoms might
depend on the relation between the parasite and the
enteric gastrointestinal microbiota (Tandon et al., 1977).
Postinfective to the giardiasis, patients might develop a
range of novel symptoms that resemble those of the irri-
table bowel syndrome (Hanevik et al., 2009). This con-
infection with
dition, which can be developed after
other infectious agents, such as Campylobacter spp.,
is
syndrome
recognized as postinfectious
(Spiller & Garsed, 2009). A recent study showed that
the bacterial fraction of the gastrointestinal microbiota
of the postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome patients
have a distinct composition relative to controls, which
most likely reﬂects a consequence of an intensive inter-
action between the ecosystem and the infectious agent
(Jalanka-Tuovinen et al., 2013). This
that
infectious agent, although not true members of the gas-
trointestinal microbiota should be kept in mind when
studying the gastrointestinal microbiota, as their short-
and long-term impact on the microbiota composition
and function can be profound.