5_PARAGRAPHS

Variance and abundance of taxa across three microbiota
phases
Taxonomic analysis of all samples identified 16 phyla, 38
classes, 73 orders, 158 families, and 383 genera. Compos-
itional differences across the phases at all taxonomic levels
were characterized and pairwise comparisons were made
between phases. The average composition of the samples
in each phase at the genus level is shown in Fig. 1f, which
represents the abundance of genera relative to bar size.
The most significantly differentially abundant taxa between
P2 and P3 were a variety of Clostridiales elevated in P3, in-
cluding the genera Veillonella, Finegoldia, Clostridium, and
Anaerococcus. The most significant differences between P1
and P3 were observed among Staphylococcaceae which
were elevated in P1, and among Clostridiales genera Fine-
goldia and Veillonella which were elevated in the P3. A
complete list of differentially abundant taxa can be found
in Additional files 4 and 5: Tables S3 and S4A–C..

Effect of nutrition and medication on microbiota taxa in
each phase
We next examined the effects of nutrient intake and med-
ications on the microbiota within each phase. Changes in
taxa abundance would suggest adaptation of the micro-
biota in response to factors that the preterm infant en-
counters while in the NICU and may affect development
of a mature, functional gut microbiota. Using a multivari-
ate mixed-effects regression model
that accounts for
subject-specific variations, we assessed changes in taxa
abundance at each phase, with PMA, gestational age at
birth, total calories per kilogram in the past week, propor-
tion of enteral calories in the past week, ratio of lipids,
carbohydrates and protein in the past week, antibiotics
and corticosteroid received during the past week, and add-
itional medications as covariates. We found phase-specific
changes in the microbiota significantly associated with the
ratio of
lipids, proteins, or carbohydrates in nutrition
(total enteral and parenteral), with the dominant effect of
all three nutrients in P3. At the phylum level, Actinobac-
teria and Proteobacteria are significantly associated with
lipid intake, Firmicutes with protein and Actinobacteria,
Proteobacteria, and Firmicutes with carbohydrates. Abun-
dance of Bifidobacterium, an Actinobacterium most com-
monly linked with development and maintenance of the
healthy infant gut microbiota  is significantly asso-
ciated with lipid and protein intake in P3, with increased
Bifidobacterium abundance associated with increased lipid
in the diet and decreased abundance with greater amounts
of protein. Among the commonly used NICU medica-
tions, increased abundance of Bifidobacterium was signifi-
cantly associated with use of corticosteroids and H2
receptor antagonists in the past week in P3. A complete
list of nutrition and medication variables significantly
associated with changes in microbiota taxa in all the three
phases can be found in in Additional file 7: Table S6..

sought to identify dynamic aspects of host biology that
correspond to phase transition. Emerging evidence sug-
gests that the initial newborn infant gut microbiota is
partially acquired by maternal transmission from the
amniotic fluid and placenta before birth  In
utero, the fetus swallows large quantities of amniotic
fluid that is colonized with bacteria in those mothers
who deliver prematurely  Genera in common
between amniotic fluid and the meconium, the earliest
fecal material passed by infants, suggests that pioneer
colonizers of
the infant gut are from this maternal
source. In addition to amniotic fluid that has been con-
sumed, meconium is formed from sloughed off gastro-
intestinal epithelial cells which are generated as debris
during periods of rapid digestive tract development and
convolution of the intestinal epithelial surface. It has
in preterm infants, passage of
been established that
meconium as stool is both delayed and prolonged and is
observed well beyond the first stool, with final clearance
occurring up to several weeks after birth .

The succession of gut microbiota in our preterm co-
horts revealed a low level of initial diversity in P1, which
is dominated by facultative anaerobes, followed by in-
creasing diversity and abundance of obligate anaerobes
and a shift to fermentation based metabolism in P3.
Consistent with other studies, we determined that this
programmed, non-random developmental succession of
microbiota is largely determined by PMA  What
drives this patterned succession toward a homeostatic
relationship between the infant and colonizing microbiota
is not known, but likely involves complex interactions be-
tween the mucosal immune system as well as metabolic
interactions within the gut microbial community and the
surrounding tissue and microenvironment, which remain
dynamic during periods of gastrointestinal development in
early life. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) produced by
Paneth cells (PCs) in the epithelium of the small intestine
establish a feedback loop between the host and com-
mensal bacteria that is essential for intestinal homeostasis
and microbiota colonization  Although the number of
immune-competent PCs are significantly higher after
37 weeks of gestation when compared to preterm infants,
the number of immune-competent PCs are higher in in-
fants with GA above 29 weeks compared to infants with
GA under 29 weeks  This period around PMA
29 weeks corresponds to the PMA ~ 30 weeks where we
observed the transition from P2 to P3 in our preterm co-
horts, suggesting that PC AMPs are one factor that modu-
lates the shift toward a community dominated by obligate
anaerobes. Streptococcus and Veillonella in P3, which fre-
quently co-occur and interact metabolically in microbial
communities, through the production of lactic acid by
Streptococcus which is used as a carbon source by Veillo-
nella  Similar metabolic interactions that contribute.

Genomic DNA extraction
Total genomic DNA was extracted with a modified
method using the QIAGEN Fecal DNA kit and FastPrep
mechanical
lysis (MPBio, Solon, OH). 16S ribosomal
RNA (rRNA) was amplified with Phusion High-Fidelity
polymerase (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and
dual indexed primers specific to the V3-V4 hypervari-
able regions (319F: 5′ ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG
3′; 806R: 3′ ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG 5′) 
Amplicons were pooled and paired-end sequenced on
an Illumina MiSeq (Illumina, San Diego, CA) in the
University of Rochester Genomics Research Center.
Each sequencing run included positive controls con-
sisting of a 1:5 mixture of Staphylococcus aureus, Lacto-
coccus lactis, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Streptococcus
mutans, and Escherichia coli and negative controls
consisting of sterile saline.