14_PARAGRAPHS

Defects in host genes controlling bacterial homeostasis or al-
terations of the gut microbiota composition have been associ-
ated with complex diseases, including inflammatory bowel dis-
ease (IBD), diabetes mellitus (Pflughoeft and Versalovic 2012)
and asthma (Maslowski et al. 2009). Although in some partic-
ular cases complex diseases have been linked with the pres-
ence of specific bacteria (e.g. Prevotella in reactive arthritis;
Scher et al. 2013), it seems likely that bacterial communities
and not specific bacteria determine susceptibility towards com-
plex diseases, a concept that has been introduced as the ‘the
pathobiome’ (Vayssier-Taussat et al. 2014). The identification and
manipulation of such disease-associated communities will un-
doubtedly be the topic of intensive research. Interestingly, the
composition of gut bacterial communities is genetically deter-
mined (Garrett et al. 2007; Brinkman et al. 2011; Lepage et al.
2011). Although a direct link between the microbiome and dis-
ease susceptibility is difficult to establish, proof of concept stud-
ies argue that manipulation of the microbiome represents an ap-
pealing treatment strategy. Gastrointestinal abnormalities can
be improved by probiotic treatment in autism spectrum disor-
ders (Hsiao et al. 2013), and fecal microbiota transplantation is
highly effective for the treatment of recurrent Clostridium difficile
infection (Van Nood et al. 2013). Likewise, disease phenotypes
can be transferred by microbiota transplantation. For example,
obesity can be transferred successfully using feces from obese
humans to lean mice, which was associated with decreased fer-
mentation of short-chain fatty acids, increased metabolism of
branched amino acids and decreased transformation of bile acid
species as compared to the lean phenotypes (Ridaura et al. 2013).
In addition, simply cohousing lean and obese animals prevented
the obese phenotype and was associated with transfer of Bac-
teroidales, suggesting a phenotypic impact of horizontal micro-
bial transfer (Ridaura et al. 2013)..

light on bacterial functionality. Such techniques have led to the
development of the first human intestinal gene catalog (Qin
et al. 2010) and enabled a better understanding of the link be-
tween obesity-associated comorbidities and reduced bacterial
richness (Cotillard et al. 2013; Le Chatelier et al. 2013). Although
predetermining functional effects to specific gene sets provides
first information about the functionality of a given microbiome,
these analyses do not always assess the true functionality of the
encoded genes in a specific environment. Metagenomic li-
braries, typically cloned into Escherichia coli vectors, permit func-
tional screening of microbiota in vitro (Troeschel et al. 2010). In
addition, the exact impact of the microbial presence on the host
can be studied using other ‘-omic’ approaches, providing a mul-
tifaceted view by combining metagenomics with metatranscrip-
tomics, metaproteomics or metabolomics (Raes and Bork 2009;
Holmes et al. 2012)..

GF animals were applied in the study of the involvement of
microbiota in diabetes, rheumatic arthritis and IBD (Bleich and
Hansen 2012). For example, although the severity of colitis in
the commonly used dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) model criti-
cally depends on the presence of bacteria (Kitajima et al. 2001),
GF mice develop more severe colitis as compared to convention-
alized mice. This suggests that bacteria may play a protective
role in the metabolism of DSS, or that GF mice respond less ef-
ficient because of their immature intestinal immune system.
Important mechanistic insights in colonization resistance, the
mechanism whereby a microbial community is protected from
colonization of new and often harmful bacteria, were raised by
the use of sequential introduction of Bacteroides species into GF
mice (Lee et al. 2013), showing that colonization of Bacteroides
is species-specific and saturable. Finally, since immune struc-
tures in GF mice remain immature, much of our understanding
of host–microbe interactions involved in the development of the
immune system arose from the study of GF animals and is dis-
cussed in more detail later in this review..

An important limitation in murine microbial studies is the dif-
ference in bacterial composition between mice and humans.
Whereas in humans three enterotypes can be identified, only
two can be found in mice (Hildebrand et al. 2013; Wang et al.
2014). Although the microbiota similarity between mice and
humans at the phylum level is remarkable, at the species
level, many differences are found (Dethlefsen, McFall-Ngai and
Relman 2007). As in humans, the two most abundant bacte-
rial phyla in C57BL6/J mice are the Firmicutes (60–80% of se-
quences) and the Bacteroidetes  however, 85% of the
murine sequences represent species that have not been detected
in humans (Ley et al. 2005). ‘Humanization’ of the mouse mi-
crobiome is frequently used to overcome this limitation, and
it was recently shown that mice humanized with different hu-
man donors generate a similar microbiome composition and
metabolomic profile compared to the donor, with preservation
of individual-specific features (Marcobal et al. 2013). However,
microbial species seem to be critically adapted to specific hosts.
Gut bacterial numbers and phylum abundance were similar in
mice containing mouse and human microbiota, but bacterial
species differed markedly (Chung et al. 2012). Mice harboring
human microbiota had low levels of mucosal CD4+ and CD8+
T cells, few dendritic cells and reduced antimicrobial peptide
expression. Even rat microbiota failed to fully expand intesti-
nal T-cell numbers in mice. Importantly, mice with mouse mi-
crobiota conferred better protection against Salmonella infection
than those with human microbiota. Together, these data sug-
gest a highly specific coexistence and mutual interaction be-
tween species-associated microbiota and the host immune sys-
tem, and that microbiota–host interactions in humans cannot
be completely mirrored in ‘humanized’ mice..

contrast, colonization of 8-week-old GF mice could not reverse
the elevated numbers of iNKT cells (Olszak et al. 2012). Accord-
ingly, the administration of probiotics might lead to optimal re-
sults only when given at early ages. The probiotic Lactobacillus
johnsonii strain La1, for example, was effective in inhibiting the
development of atopic dermatitis in NC/Nga mice only when ad-
ministered right after weaning (Inoue et al. 2007)..

Although considerable literature exists about microbiota
transfer into GF animals, little is known about transferring mi-
crobiota into animals with non-GF intestines. Intuitively, one
would treat such animals with antibiotics to allow the introduc-
tion of the donor microbiota. However, antibiotic treatment is
not necessary to establish an exogenous microbiota (Manichanh
et al. 2010). In fact, antibiotic pretreatment even worsened the ef-
ficiency of engraftment. Transplantation has also been used in
mouse models of enteric infections. For example, mice infected
with C. difficile could be cured with feces from healthy mice
(Lawley et al. 2012), in accordance with the successful treatment
of human relapsing C. difficile colitis. In addition, a so-called coli-
togenic flora, retrieved from transgenic mice that spontaneously
develop colitis, can successfully transmit intestinal inflamma-
tion to wild-type mice (Garrett et al. 2007; Elinav et al. 2011). We
demonstrated that cohousing of mice from the age of 4 weeks
determines the sensitivity towards DSS-induced colitis, inde-
pendent of the specific genotype (Brinkman et al. 2013). Conse-
quently, randomly distributing and cohousing mutant and wild-
type mice in cages before the experiment could lead to loss of
phenotype as a result of microbiota transfer (Brinkman et al.
2013)..

Despite continuous exposure to bacteria and bacterial
constituents such as lipopolysaccharides and flagellin, the
intestinal mucosa maintains a homeostatic immunological en-
vironment. The host preserves a state of tolerance towards col-
onizing bacteria, inhibits bacterial overgrowth and at the same
time acts appropriately towards pathogens (Kamada et al. 2013;
Lawley and Walker 2013; Sommer and B ¨ackhed 2013).Vice versa,
the established adult microbiota provides protection against
potential pathogens via direct inhibition or nutrient depletion.
In addition, bacterial metabolites such as short-chain fatty acids
are well-known regulators of the host immune response (Macia
et al. 2012), and the generation of antigen-specific populations
of Treg cells in response to the commensal microbiota is thought.

Emerging evidence demonstrates an important role of innate
signaling in preserving a healthy microbiome through the in-
teraction of PAMPs with NOD-like receptors (NLRs), Toll-like re-
ceptors (TLRs) and ILCs (Hooper, Littman and Macpherson 2012).
NOD2, one of the first and most replicated risk factors for ileal
Crohn’s disease, recognizes intracellular muramyldipeptide, a
constituent of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacte-
ria, and induces proinflammatory cytokines and stimulates de-
fensin production in the ileum. Mice deficient in Nod2 are not
able to control Helicobacter hepaticus infection. In addition, a sig-
nificantly higher amount of Bacteroides and Firmicutes is found in
the terminal ileum of Nod2-deficient mice compared with their
wild-type littermates. Of note, this difference is less prominent
in fecal samples (Robertson et al. 2013), probably reflecting the
highest expression of Nod2 in Paneth cells of the ileum. Genetic
inactivation of the Nlrp6 inflammasome results in increase sus-
ceptibility to DSS and the generation of a colitogenic flora (Eli-
nav et al. 2011). In general, intestinal epithelial cells are hypore-
sponsive towards bacterial sensing which is mediated by, for
example, the single Ig IL-1-related receptor, inhibiting IL-1 sig-
naling. Genetic deletion of this receptor in mice renders them
highly susceptible to pathogen colonization as a direct conse-
quence of the loss of a homeostatic commensal flora (Sham et al.
2013). In addition, TLR-MyD88 signaling in response to commen-
sal bacteria critically regulates defensin production by Paneth
cells (Menendez et al. 2013). Of high importance in orchestrating
intestinal barrier function and innate sensing are ILCs, which
are the resident immune cell regulators at epithelial surfaces
that share many of the CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell functions (Son-
nenberg and Artis 2012). Like T cells, ILCs develop from com-
mon lymphoid precursors; however, they are not selected for
antigen specificity and do not express antigen receptors. As in-
nate sensors, they respond and divide rapidly upon stimulation.
ILCs regulate barrier integrity and therefore the direct physical
border between microbiome and underlying lamina propria cells
through secretion of cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor and
interferon..

Unexpectedly, individual mice from certain strains, for ex-
ample C3HRI, DBAJR and WSB, appear to be more similar in their
microbiota than other strains such as C57BL6/J (Friswell et al.
2010; Campbell et al. 2012). This indicates that host genetic fac-
tors contribute to different levels of conformity and explains
why sufficient backcrossing of strains is crucial for the repro-
ducibility of animal experiments. Moreover, a common practice
is the use of embryonic stem cells from the 129 mouse strain to
generate genetically engineered mice in which germ transmis-
sion can be scored by a chimeric fur. This methodology requires
sufficient backcrossing in a particular mouse strain to reduce
the mixed genetic background. Unfortunately, the genetic his-
tory of mutant mice is often ambiguous when mice are shared
between institutions (Sellers et al. 2012). Although a strain is
considered stable when backcrossed for 10 generations, original
129 genes that are too close to the mutated gene to be segre-
gated by recombination will persist in the backcrossed genome
(Simpson et al. 1997; Lusis, Yu and Wang 2007) and may cause
microbial differences compared to wild-type mice. Comparative
genomic analysis of 129 and C57BL/6J mouse strains revealed
indels and single nucleotide polymorphisms resulting in alter-
native or aberrant amino acid sequences in 1084 genes in the
129-strain genome. Annotating these passenger mutations to
the reported genetically modified congenic mice that were gen-
erated using 129-strain ES cells revealed that nearly all these
mice possess multiple passenger mutations potentially influ-
encing the phenotypic outcome. A Me-PaMuFind-It web tool
has been developed to estimate the number and possible ef-
fect of passenger mutations in transgenic mice of interest (Van-
den Berghe et al. 2015). A dramatic illustration of the problem of
passenger mutations recently reemerged when Casp1-null mice
were found to carry an inactivating passenger mutation in the
neighboring Casp11 gene (Kayagaki et al. 2011). Essentially, the
strong protection observed in Casp1-null mice against a lethal
lipopolysaccharide challenge was found to be mainly due to this
inactivating passenger mutation in the Casp11 gene..

Besides strain and gender differences, investigators have
studied the effects of the allelic absence of specific genes on
the intestinal microbiota by comparing knockout with wild-type
mice. These studies have demonstrated that deletion of a single
gene can cause substantial alterations in the microbiota (Vijay-
Kumar et al. 2010; Brinkman et al. 2011; Kellermayer et al. 2011;
Lynch et al. 2012). Still, even gene deletions that cause a remark-
able phenotypic abnormality, such as the Ob/Ob mouse, have
been shown to have a much weaker effect than a change in diet
on the microbial composition (Hildebrandt et al. 2009). In addi-
tion, the question remains whether the microbiota as a whole
or a specific bacterial community is responsible for phenotypic
differences in transgenic animals. For example, the spontaneous
colitis phenotype in mice lacking T-bet depends on the presence
of only 12 species (Powell et al. 2012)..

Genotype-specific phenotypes can be microbiota dependent
and this dependence could lead to wrong conclusions when
phenotypes of different mutant lines of the same strain are
compared. For example, phenotypic differences between TLR-
deficient C57BL/6J mouse colonies mainly reflected a diver-
gence of the microbiota after extended isolated breeding of the
colonies (Ubeda et al. 2012). Thus, long-term breeding of separate
mouse lines that had been derived from the same strain appears
to result in marked changes in intestinal microbiota composi-
tion. This observation cautions for direct comparison of mutant
lines even when they are bred in the same facility. Therefore,
correct interpretation of study results requires reference litter-
mate mice that are bred from in-house heterozygous breedings.
Taken together, microbiota composition in genetically modified
mice may superimpose on the genetic effect causing a change
in host physiology..

Variation in the microbiological environment between research
institutions or commercial breeding facilities is a confounding
factor; however. the exact contribution to experimental out-
comes is poorly understood. The origin of the mice is extremely
important because laboratory mice are available as both outbred
stocks and inbred strains from various vendors. Viable counts
of the total bacterial load have revealed large differences in the
cecal microbiota among mice of the same strain from differ-
ent vendors (Hufeldt et al. 2010b). The presence of segmented
filamentous bacteria in the gut of mice of Taconic caused a
higher frequency of Th17 cells compared with mice from Jack-
son Laboratory who lacked these bacteria (Ivanov et al. 2009).
Other groups have also reported vendor-dependent differences
in disease outcome, but these studies did not focus on the mi-
crobiome. For example, variations in airway responsiveness in
C57BL6 mice obtained from five different vendors were reported
(Chang, Mitzner and Watson 2012). This type of variation is not
restricted to commercially available strains but also plays a role
when comparing studies performed in different animal labora-.

Cage effects in conventionally housed mice are dramatic. Iso-
genic mice from different litters that were cohoused at weaning
showed little variation in microbiota (Deloris et al. 2006). Con-
versely, if the litters were split among different cages at wean-
ing, a high divergence in microbiota profiles was observed after 3
weeks. The most convincing difference between cages is driven
by Helicobacter spp., a fast spreading species found in animal fa-
cilities (Taylor et al. 2007; Hildebrand et al. 2013)..

Diet-induced changes in bile acid composition can also be
an important cause of modifications to the gut bacterial com-
munity. For example, a diet high in saturated fats increased
the abundance of the sulfite-reducing bacterium deltaproteobac-
terium (Devkota et al. 2012). This effect was achieved by promot-
ing taurine conjugation of bile acids, hence increasing the avail-
ability of organic sulfur and providing more favorable conditions
for sulfite-reducing microorganisms. Vice versa, the conversion
from primary to secondary bile acids by bacteria defines the
composition of the gut microbiome (Cowles et al. 2002); however,
it is difficult to establish which is cause or consequence.