10_PARAGRAPHS

First we explored in detail the in vitro inhibitory effects of a selection of LGC strains against growth and 
pathogenic properties (adhesion to vaginal cells and hyphae formation) of Candida albicans. It is increasingly 
appreciated that a combination of targeting both the inhibition of pathogenic growth and virulence factor expres-
sion has superior efficacy in eliminating pathogens15. One of the simplest, yet very effective ways that lactobacilli 
inhibit the growth of competing bacteria is through the production of lactic acid. It is likely various C. albicans 
strains exhibit various levels of acid resistance but lactic acid has been shown to inhibit Candida albicans16. As 
lactobacilli exhibit various levels of lactic acid production17, we rationalized here that the selected lactobacilli 
should have a strong intrinsic capacity to produce lactic acid, at least in the optimal growth conditions. Because of 
the indication that endogenous vagina-specific lactobacilli do not always sufficiently protect against Candida, we 
focused on the selection of habitat-flexible lactobacilli, mainly from the L. plantarum and L. casei group. Although 
most LGC species of the strains tested here have “qualified presumption of safety”18 status when applied orally 
in food and feed, such guidelines do not yet exist for vaginal topical applications of lactobacilli. To reduce safety 
risks also other important factors were taken into account, such as genome availability19–21, previous knowledge 
of their human host interaction capacity (primarily in the gut)22,23, their robustness and growth capacity19,21,23, 
and previous reports on their safety in humans after oral24–26, nasal27 and vaginal28 high-dose application. We 
selected three strains and formulated them into an innovative silicon-based gel, which was designed specifically 
for application in the vagina and maintained a high viability of the lactobacilli. This gel was supplied to patients 
with acute VVC for 10 days. We examined the vaginal microbiome over four weeks: before, during, and after the 
use of the probiotic gel and compared the group requiring rescue medication (RM; 3 × 200 mg fluconazole) with 
the group not requesting this antifungal treatment..

Concentrations of produced lactic acid  to 20.22 g/L (L. 
pentosus KCA1). L. rhamnosus GG produced the highest amount of L-lactic acid and L. plantarum 
WCFS1 produced the highest amount of D-lactic acid  The latter also performed the best in the C. albi-
cans growth inhibition assays. In the spot assay, it yielded the largest inhibition zones and its cell 
free supernatant reduced the optical density at stationary planktonic growth of C. albicans by 43.5% and delayed 
the lag phase by approximately 5 hours (Supplementary Fig. S1)..

The lactobacilli with the strongest antimicrobial effects showed adhesive capacities of 11.3% (L. plantarum 
WCFS1), 11.8% (L. rhamnosus GG) and 34.7% (L. pentosus KCA1)  to vaginal keratinocyte cell line 
(VK2/E6E7), used as model for the vaginal epithelium. Co-incubation of these bacteria and keratinocytes did not 
provoke an elevation of interleukin 8 expression, neither did two other L. plantarum strains, but L. reuteri RC-14 
did cause some upregulation of interleukin 8 . When applying the strains simultaneously with C. albi-
cans, the strains were able to reduce adhesion of C. albicans, e.g. L. pentosus KCA1 by 78.0% . Finally, we 
compared the capacity of the lactobacilli to inhibit the formation of hyphae, a key virulence factor of C. albicans 
that enables invasion of host tissue. L. pentosus KCA1, L. plantarum WCFS1 and L. rhamnosus GG all showed 
strong inhibitory effects. The latter exhibited the strongest effect (reducing hyphal formation by 51.3%; Fig. 1e)..

formulation of lactobacilli in silicone gel to preserve viability and promote topical applica-
tions.  Based on the above screening, three LGC strains were selected i.e. L. plantarum WCFS1, L. pentosus 
KCA1 and L. rhamnosus GG. These strains were formulated in an innovative silicone gel at a dose of 109–1010 
CFU/g gel, in a 1:1:1 weight ratio, as described in materials and methods. The vaginal gel was developed to ensure 
maximal exposition of living bacteria to the vaginal wall through spreading after intravaginal application and 
maintain a high viability. Plate count viability assays confirmed that the lactobacilli remained viable over multiple 
months of storage at 5 °C and 25 °C (Supplementary Fig. S2). For storage at 5 °C, no reduction could be observed 
in viability over the two-year period. The concentration of viable lactobacilli did decline during storage at 25 °C, 
showing roughly a ten-fold reduction after 6 months of storage..

proof-of-concept study in patients with VVc.  Subsequently, we evaluated whether L. plantarum 
WCFS1, L. pentosus KCA1 and L. rhamnosus GG formulated in the gel were able to modulate the vaginal micro-
biome over a four-week period in 20 patients suffering from acute VVC . The participants were asked to 
administer 2.5 ml of gel by use of an applicator in recumbent position at bedtime. This corresponded to 2.5.109–
1010 CFU of bacteria per application or 2.5-250 times the amount of bacteria in 1 ml of vaginal discharge29. 
Because of the acute phase of the disease, patients had access to RM  as requested 
by the ethical committee in this phase of the study. Because fluconazole is available as standard care, this study 
design with a rescue arm was preferred over a placebo-controlled trial. No safety issues of the vaginal LGC gel 
were reported. Of the twenty women included in the study, nine women did not need the RM. Eleven 
women used RM .

www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/Figure 1.  Anti-Candida activity of LGC strains (a) Production of D- and L-lactic acid as important 
antimicrobial compound secreted by the tested LGC strains (b) Width of halo of inhibition zone (radius of spot 
subtracted from radius of inhibition zone) around LGC strains in competition with C. albicans in the spot assay. 
Halos around the LGC colonies indicate inhibition by the strain against C. albicans. (c) Adhesion percentage of 
LGC strains to VK2/E6E7 cells, a cell line of vaginal keratinocytes. (d) Fold increase in interleukin-8 expression 
by co-incubation of the LGC strains with VK2/E6E7 cells. The regular growth medium without 
any added microorganisms was used as a negative control. (e) Adhesion of C. albicans to VK2/E6E7 cells either 
alone or in co-incubation with lactobacilli as percentage of adherent cells to total applied cells. (f) Formation of 
hyphae by C. albicans as ratio of number of yeast cells showing hyphae to total cells, normalized to the negative 
control (=1). LA: lactic acid, N: negative control, P: positive control, CA: Candida albicans, LB: Lactobacillus 
bulgaricus, LC: L. casei, LGG: L. rhamnosus GG, LH: L. helveticus, LPb, L. parabuchneri, LPl: L. plantarum, LPn: 
L. pentosus, LR: L. reuteri, LS: L. sakei..

Analysis of LGc community in VVc.  We also investigated the bacterial community present in the samples. 
LGC was the most abundant bacterial genus, both during and after resolving VVC, accounting for more than 90% 
of reads in the large majority of the samples and six of the 11 most abundant ASVs belonging to this genus (Fig. 4, 
Supplementary Fig. S5). The other ASVs belong to the genera Gardnerella, Atopobium, Prevotella, Aerococcus and 
Streptococcus. Seven of the most dominant LGC ASVs matched with the four species typically observed in the 
vaginal microbiota, more precisely L. iners (LGC 1, 4 and 8), L. crispatus (LGC 2 and 9), L. gasseri (LGC 3) and L. 
jensenii (LGC 6). Two other ASVs were classified as L. pentosus/ plantarum/paraplantarum/ fabifermentans (LGC 
5) and as L. rhamnosus (LGC 7). This first ASV likely corresponds to L. pentosus KCA1, L. plantarum WCFS1 or 
both, which were supplemented in the gel, as this ASV was only found at visit 2 (16/20 samples, during treatment 
with the gel) and visit 3  Similarly, LGC 7, found in 12 of the 20 visit 2 samples and one visit 3 
sample, likely corresponded to L. rhamnosus GG, also supplemented in the gel. This ASV showed a lower relative 
abundance than L. plantarum/pentosus (mean relative abundance at visit 2: 11.0% versus 37.9% of LGC 5). Finally, 
LGC 10 and 12 were classified as L. oris/antri/reuteri/frumenti/panis/caviae and L. coleohominis..

Specific taxa of lactobacilli could not be linked to RM use but the bacterial community of the samples from 
women who used RM did seem to show somewhat higher relative abundance of non-LGC genera as compared to 
the samples derived from women who did not use RM (p = 0.057). In most women the lactobacillus that 
dominated the bacterial community before treatment (visit 1) was also dominant at the end of the study, after the 
treatment (visit 4), indicating the applied lactobacilli had a temporary effect on the microbiome (Supplemental 
Fig. S7). We did observe shifts in relative abundances of the lactobacilli. Two women ended the study with a 
different dominant Lactobacillus as at the study onset and two women had bacterial community profiles not dom-
inated by Lactobacillus at visit 1 or 4. One visit 4 sample could not be analyzed because of insufficient sequencing 
depth..

concerning the vaginal microbiome also after clearing an episode of VVC. The decline in LGC concentrations 
should be investigated in larger cohorts that preferably also evaluate if this is linked to RM use, or possibly disease 
severity, specific symptoms or microbiota members and ultimately recurrence rates. Nonetheless, whatever the 
underlying reason may be, there might be a role for probiotics in preventing or restoring such a drop in beneficial 
lactobacilli. In addition, the data obtained here also form a starting point for future improvements of similar pro-
biotic treatments for VVC, in hope to obtain even better cure rates. First, future in vitro screening should include 
experiments predicting the in vivo survival and adaptability to the vaginal environment, given that our strong 
antimicrobial L. rhamnosus GG strain did not persist well in the vagina. For this reason, closely related strains 
that share (some) of their properties with L. rhamnosus GG, but which were isolated from the vagina might be 
interesting alternative probiotics. Secondly, based on our ASV analysis we expect that there are (at least) two 
main types of C. albicans that occur often in VVC. Isolation and characterisation of these two types of C. albicans 
should confirm their pathogenicity. If confirmed, selection of new probiotic targets active against these two path-
ogenic forms would definitely benefit the chances of success for future probiotic VVC studies..

formulation of gel containing selected lactobacilli.  L. pentosus KCA1, L. plantarum WCFS1 and L. 
rhamnosus GG, were selected for a proof-of-concept trial in patients. The lactobacilli-containing gel was devel-
oped in collaboration with the Belgian biotech company YUN nv (see ‘Competing interest’ statement). The 
selected LGC spp. were spray-dried and formulated in a silicon-based gel containing 85.5% dimethicone, 4.5% 
bis-vinyl dimethicone/dimethicone copolymer and 10% LGC powder mix (strains were blended in equal amounts 
based on weight) resulting in a colloid suspension-gel (final dosage per gram of 109−1010 CFU of lactobacilli).