40_PARAGRAPHS

Gut microbiota are composed of several species of microorganisms, including bacteria, yeast,
and viruses. Taxonomically, bacteria are classiﬁed according to phyla, classes, orders, families,
genera, and species. Only a few phyla are represented, accounting for more than 160 species 
The dominant gut microbial phyla are Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria,
Fusobacteria, and Verrucomicrobia, with the two phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes representing
90% of gut microbiota. The Firmicutes phylum is composed of more than 200 different genera such
as Lactobacillus, Bacillus, Clostridium, Enterococcus, and Ruminicoccus. Clostridium genera represent
95% of the Firmicutes phyla. Bacteroidetes consists of predominant genera such as Bacteroides and
Prevotella. The Actinobacteria phylum is proportionally less abundant and mainly represented by
the Biﬁdobacterium genus  Examples of taxonomic gut microbiota composition are illustrated in
Figure 1..

In a new-born pig model, an analysis of the gut microbiota composition of preterm and term pigs
showed that Ruminococcus spp., some Enterobacterium spp., Lachnospiraceae, Peptostreptococcaceae, and
Clostridiaceae were dominant genera in both preterm and term pigs. However, a higher Enterococcus spp.
abundance in preterm than term pigs was found .

Preterm infants show low diversity with an increased colonization of potentially pathogenic
bacteria from the Enterobacteriaceae family of the Proteobacteria phylum and reduced levels of
strict anaerobes such as Biﬁdobacterium .

With regard to vaginal delivery, newborns acquire a microbiota composition resembling their
mother’s vaginal microbiota. Indeed, an analysis of the meconium of newborn infants revealed a
strong correlation between the microbiota of the newborn digestive tract and the microbial communities
of the mother’s vagina: Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Sneathia. Biasucci et al. showed that the
microbiota of vaginally delivered infants are also characterized by predominant groups such as
Biﬁdobacterium longum and Biﬁdobacterium catenulatum. Other facultative anaerobic species such as
Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus, Bacteroides fragilis, and Streptococcus colonize the infant gut .

On the contrary, infants born by cesarean section (C-section) acquire bacteria derived from
hospital environment and mother’s skin: Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium, Propionibacterium spp. [24,
29]. Escherichia, Shigella, and Bacteroides species are underrepresented in infants born by cesarean
delivery  The intestinal microbiota of neonates delivered by cesarean delivery are less diverse in
terms of bacteria species than the microbiota of vaginally delivered infants .

Studies have demonstrated that formula-fed infants are more often colonized with Escherichia coli,
Bacteroides, and Clostridium difﬁcile compared with breastfed infants  Regarding Actinobacteria
abundance, Biﬁdobacterium spp. have been associated with breastfeeding and formula milk 
However, breastfed infants generally harbor a more complex and diverse Biﬁdobacterium microbiota
than formula-fed infants  Breastfed infants are provided with microbiota having more than a
two-fold increase in the number of Biﬁdobacterium cells compared to formula-fed infants  Breastfed
infants have more beneﬁcial gut microbiota, with a higher richness and diversity of Biﬁdobacterium spp.
and a lower number of Clostridium difﬁcile and Escherichia coli than formula-fed infants (Table 1).
Biﬁdobacterium spp. are responsible for the fermentation of galactooligosaccharide (GOS), one
of the main components of breast milk, to produce SCFAs  Indeed, Biﬁdobacterium spp. have an
enzyme named lacto-N-biosidase, which facilitates the assimilation of GOS  If Biﬁdobacterium
quantity increases, the quantity of HMOs in feces decreases causing elevated acetate and lactate
concentrations and decreasing pH  an HMO consumption by Biﬁdobacteria in the infant’s
gut may suggest a prebiotic effect of HMOs on gut infant microbiota by selectively stimulating
Biﬁdobacterium spp.  Another prebiotic effect of β-palmitate, a natural human milk fatty acid
and a component of some infant formulas, on gut infant microbiota was demonstrated by positively
inﬂuencing Biﬁdobacterium spp. (and Lactobacillus spp.) abundance .

The introduction of solid foods and the termination of milk-feeding/weaning coincide with
major gut microbiota changes. The abundance of genera Biﬁdobacterium, Clostridium coccoides, and
Bacteroides are predominant after weaning  The microbiota of breastfed children and the microbiota
of children previously fed with formula milk become closer to each other (Table 1)..

Dietary habits, infant weaning, and feeding practices become determinants and play a crucial role
in gut microbiota variations. The introduction of high-ﬁber and carbohydrate foods (traditional foods)
causes an increase in Firmicutes and Prevotella, whereas the introduction of high-ﬁber and animal
protein foods causes an increase in Bacteroidetes demonstrated
that northern European countries are associated with a higher proportion of Biﬁdobacteria in the
infant gut microbiota, whereas higher levels of Bacteroides and Lactobacilli characterize southern
European countries..

At one year old, a child’s microbiota composition has a characteristic abundance of Akkermansia.

muciniphila, Bacteroides, Veillonella, Clostridium coccoides spp., and Clostridium botulinum spp. .

With regard to older people over the age of 70, gut microbiota composition can be affected by
digestion and nutrient absorption changes and immune activity weakness. Dietary habit changes
(more monotonous) may also weaken gut microbiota diversity. A decrease in anaerobic bacteria such
as Biﬁdobacterium spp. and an increase in Clostridium and Proteobacteria have been observed 
Given the role of Biﬁdobacterium spp. in the stimulation of the immune system and metabolic processes,
a Biﬁdobacteria decrease may partially explain low systemic inﬂammatory status and malnutrition in
older adults .

Bacteroides *↓
(non-secretor
mothers).

Enterobacteriaceae *↑
Enterococcus spp.↑.

Lachnospiraceae *
Ruminococcaceae *.

Ruminococcus spp.
Lachnospiraceae *
Peptostreptococcaceae *
Clostridiaceae *.

Veillonella
C. coccoides
C. botulinum.

Gut microbiota of each individual are speciﬁcally characterized by clusters of bacteria named
enterotypes  Three enterotypes are characterized by three dominant bacteria clusters (Table 2):
Bacteroides (enterotype I), Prevotella (enterotype II), or Ruminococcus (enterotype III). Each enterotype
harbors different bacteria genera (Table 1). These three enterotypes are not only enumerations of
bacteria; they are also speciﬁcally regrouped by functions. Indeed, an enterotype is a functional
harmonious association of several bacteria species rather than a systematic addition of bacteria species.
Every enterotype is not a clear-cut identity such as blood groups; however, enterotypes characterize
individuals, remain stable from adulthood, and can be restored if they are modiﬁed. Each enterotype
with its distinctive clusters of bacteria and respective functional characteristics deﬁnes a distinctive
way of generating energy from fermentable substrates available in the colon. Indeed, bacteria clusters
of enterotype I derive energy primarily from carbohydrates using principally glycolysis and pentose
phosphate pathways, whereas bacteria clusters of enterotypes II and III are able to degrade mucin
glycoproteins of the gut mucosal layer. Enterotypes seem to be principally deﬁned according to dietary
habits. Understanding the origins and functions of enterotypes may improve the knowledge of the
relationships between gut microbiota and human health..

Bervoets et al. demonstrated that the microbiota of obese children are provided with
an elevated Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio compared to the microbiota of lean children 
low relative proportions of Biﬁdobacterium vulgatus and high concentrations of
Furthermore,
Lactobacillus spp. are observed in the obese microbiota conﬁrmed that obesity
is associated with elevated levels of Firmicutes such as Ruminococcaceae and depleted levels of
Bacteroidetes such as Bacteroidaceae and Bacteroides. SCFAs are higher in obese children suggesting
elevated substrate utilization. These ﬁndings suggest that the dysbiosis of gut microbiota may
contribute to the pathophysiology of obesity and the increased ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes is
associated with the increased production of SCFAs and energy harvest from colonic fermentation 
The underweight BMI level also revealed profound gut microbiota variations. Borgo et al. 
performed a comprehensive data analysis comparing gut microbiota and anthropometric traits of 15
anorexia nervosa (AN) women and healthy controls. Results showed that AN intestinal microbiota
showed a signiﬁcant increase in Enterobacteriaceae and Methanobrevibacter smithii compared with healthy
controls  On the contrary, the genera Roseburia, Ruminococcus, and Clostridium were depleted in
line with the observed reduction in AN of the total SCFAs .

While the microbiome of a healthy individual is relatively stable, gut microbial dynamics can
certainly be inﬂuenced by lifestyle and dietary cultural choices  A study of European children
(fed with the Western diet) and Burkina Faso children (assuming a diet rich in millet/sorghum +
local vegetables containing very few lipids and animal proteins) revealed that African children’s
microbiota have a remarkable abundance of Prevotella and Xylanibacter. Furthermore, Shigella and
Escherichia are widely under-represented. Another study compared Hadza hunter-gatherers and
Italian gut microbiota. At the phylum level, Hadza gut microbiota are largely enriched in Proteobacteria
and Spirochaetes, which are extremely rare in the Italian gut microbiota, whereas Actinobacteria,
an important subdominant component of the Italian gut microbiota, are almost absent. At the
genus level, Hadza gut microbiota are comparatively enriched in Prevotella, Eubacterium, Oscillibacter,
Butyricicoccus, Sporobacter, Succinivibrio, and Treponema and correspondingly depleted in Biﬁdobacterium,
Bacteroides, Blautia, Dorea, unclassiﬁed Lachnospiraceae, Roseburia, Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcus, and
unclassiﬁed Erysipelotrichaceae. These two studies showed that African gut microbiota have clearly
an enterotype Prevotella (enterotype II); the African diet rich in millet/sorghum + local vegetables
containing very few lipids and animal proteins allows a mucine degradation in synergy with
Desulfovibrionaceae. European gut microbiota (Western diet) have principally an enterotype Bacteroides
(enterotype I): the European diet rich in lipids and animal proteins allows energy production from
carbohydrates and proteins through fermentation compared plant-based diet
microbiome (high ﬁbers and low fats and proteins) with animal-based diet microbiome (low ﬁbers
and high fats and proteins) and respective changes in microbiome on either diet and demonstrated
that a shift toward an animal-based diet increases the abundance of bile-tolerant microorganisms
(Alistipes, Bilophila, and Bacteroides) and decreases the levels of Firmicutes that metabolize dietary plant
polysaccharides (Roseburia, Eubacterium rectale, and Ruminococcus bromii). Moreover, microbial activity
trades off between carbohydrate and protein fermentation when the type of diet respectively changes.
This change occurred only one day after the diet reached the distal gut microbiota. David et al. 
showed that diet alters human microbiota rapidly and reproducibly..

Clostridiales *
Alkaliphilus
Lactobacillus
Catenibacterium.

Ruminococcus 
Staphylococcus
Marvinbryantia
Symbiobacterium
Ruminococcaceae *
Dialister.

Roseburia spp.↓
Ruminococcus↓
Clostridium spp.↓.

Ruminococcaceae *↑
Lactobacillus↓
Lactobacillaceae *↓.

The study of fecal and colonic mucosal biopsy samples from IBS patients and healthy
controls demonstrated a signiﬁcant reduction in the concentration of aerobic bacteria such as the
Lactobacillus species in fecal samples from IBS patients compared to healthy controls. Another study 
demonstrated that the microbial communities of IBS patients are enriched in Proteobacteria and
Firmicutes but reduced in Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes compared to controls. In particular, 16S
rDNA sequences belonging to the family Lachnospiraceae within the phylum Firmicutes are in greater
abundance in the IBS clone library .

Other studies conﬁrmed and revealed some phyla and genera variations in IBS patients
compared to healthy controls: an increase in the Firmicutes-to Bacteroidetes-ratio, a decrease in some
Firmicutes families (Lactobacilli, Faecalibacterium) and the Actinobacteria population (Biﬁdobacteria,
Collinsella), and an increase in some Firmicutes families (Veillonella, Streptococci, and Ruminococcus spp.)
and in Proteobacteria (Enterobacteriaceae spp.). Therefore, these ﬁndings demonstrated a loss of
microbial richness that may be involved in amino acid synthesis, in the integrity of cellular junctions,
and in inﬂammatory response, suggesting a weakness of the epithelial barrier functions partially
explaining IBS symptoms..

The ﬁndings of Frank et al. indicated a diminution of Lachnospiraceae and Bacteroidetes
microbial populations and an increase in Proteobacteria families in IBD patients compared to control
gut microbiota..

Gut microbiota variations appear to be different between UC and CRD. Indeed, a decreased
abundance of the butyrate-producing bacteria Roseburia hominis and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii has
been observed in UC patients relative to controls  whereas the opposite has been observed in CRD
patients, who are provided with increased Faecalibacterium prausnitzii levels in addition to a reduced
overall diversity .

In the case of CRD patients, another study demonstrated a decrease in Dialister invisus,
an uncharacterized species of Clostridium spp., in Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and in Biﬁdobacterium
adolescentis and an increase in Ruminococcus gnavus..

Sokol et al. conﬁrmed the reduction of F. prausnitzii in CRD patients and also demonstrated
that an oral administration of live Faecalibacterium prausnitzii reduced the severity of colitis and tended
to correct the dysbiosis. These results suggest that counterbalancing dysbiosis using Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii as a probiotic is a promising strategy in CRD treatment .

Studies have demonstrated that Biﬁdobacterium spp., Biﬁdobacterium longum, Clostridium
histolyticum, C. lituseburense, and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii group proportions are less abundant in
untreated CD patients than in healthy controls. Indeed, patients with CD show a reduction in beneﬁcial
species (Lactobacillus and Biﬁdobacterium) and an increase in those potentially pathogenic (Bacteroides
and E. coli) as compared to healthy subjects  The mucosal layer of CD patients fails to stabilize the
gut microbiota and fails to prevent the host from the invasion of harmful antigens and pathogens 
This dysbiosis is reduced, but may still remain, after a gluten-free diet .

Colorectal cancer is the third most common cause of cancer mortality in the world 
Structural fecal bacterial segregations between CRC patients and healthy volunteers have been
demonstrated  The gut microbiota of the CRC patients were enriched in Bacteroides fragilis,
Enterococcus, Escherichia/Shigella, Klebsiella, Streptococcus, and Peptostreptococcus and were impoverished
in Roseburia and other butyrate-producing bacteria of the family Lachnospiraceae  The gut microbiota
of the healthy volunteers were enriched in Bacteroides vulgatus and Bacteroides uniformis. Therefore,
gut microbiota variations, such as a reduction of butyrate producers and an increase in opportunistic
pathogens, constitute a major structural imbalance of gut microbiota in CRC patients..

Shen et al. demonstrated a higher abundance of Proteobacteria and a lower abundance of
Bacteroidetes in CRC cases compared to controls. At the genus level, CRC cases showed an increased
abundance of Dorea spp. and Faecalibacterium spp. and lower proportions of Bacteroides spp. and
Coprococcus spp. than controls..

Genomic analysis identiﬁed an association of Fusobacterium spp. with colorectal cancer 
the microbiota of CRC patients were enriched in Fusobacterium spp., whereas the Bacteroidetes and
Firmicutes phyla were depleted. Furthermore, Fusobacterium spp. may contribute to tumorigenesis by
an inﬂammatory-mediated mechanism  but the precise role of Fusobacteria in colorectal carcinoma
pathogenesis requires further investigation..

The analysis of gut microbiota of genetically obese ob/ob mice and lean mice all fed the same
polysaccharide-rich diet revealed a lower relative abundance of Bacteroidetes in obese ob/ob
mice, whereas the Firmicutes are correspondingly higher. Indeed, higher numbers of Ruminococcaceae
and Rikenellaceae have been observed in leptin-resistant obese (leptin-promoting satiety) and diabetic
mice (db/db) compared with their lean littermates 
In addition, the higher abundance of
Ruminococcaceae and Rikenellaceae in mice fed a high-fat diet is not only dependent on the ingested
diet but is also closely linked with obesity and type 2 diabetes  Furthermore, the association
between Desulfovibrionaceae abundance and obesity and type 2 diabetes has been demonstrated 
Other studies conﬁrmed the role of Proteobacteria in obesity by producing pro-inﬂammatory
molecules such as lipopolysaccharides and helping to harvest energy and increase host fat storage 
On the contrary, researchers have recently demonstrated that Akkermansia muciniphila,
a mucin-degrading bacteria living in the mucus layer  decreases in both genetically and
diet-induced obese mice..

A metagenome-wide association study of gut microbiota of T2D Chinese sufferers 
demonstrated that patients with type 2 diabetes were characterized by a decrease in butyrate-producing
bacteria such as Roseburia spp. and an increase in various opportunistic pathogens (Clostridium spp.,
Bacteroides caccae) as well as an enrichment of other microbial functions conferring sulfate reduction
(Desulfovibrionaceae spp.)..

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic, rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated
with impaired cognition and cerebral accumulation of amyloid-beta peptides. Cattaneo et al. 
demonstrated that an increase in Escherichia/Shigella abundance and a reduction of E. rectale abundance
are possibly associated with a peripheral inﬂammatory state in patients with cognitive impairment
and brain amyloidosis. Vogt et al. compared gut microbiota composition from patients with and
without a diagnosis of AD and revealed a lower microbial diversity compositionally distinct from
control-age and sex-matched individuals, with a decrease in Firmicutes and Biﬁdobacterium abundance
and an increase in Bacteroidetes abundance in the microbiome of AD participants..

Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is a complication of cirrhosis and is deﬁned as a spectrum
of neuropsychiatric abnormalities in patients with liver dysfunctions. Bajaj et al. linked
the gut microbiota composition with cognition and inﬂammation in HE. Fecal microbiota of
cirrhotics were signiﬁcantly higher in Enterobacteriaceae, Alcaligenaceae, and Fusobacteriaceae and
lower in Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae compared with controls  moreover, altered higher
levels of Veillonellaceae were found in HE patients compared with cirrhotics without HE. In the
cirrhosis group, Alcaligenaceae and Porphyromonadaceae were positively correlated with cognitive
impairment. Fusobacteriaceae, Veillonellaceae, and Enterobacteriaceae were positively and Ruminococcaceae
was negatively related to inﬂammation. Thus, cirrhosis, especially when complicated with HE,
is associated with signiﬁcant gut microbiota alterations compared with healthy individuals. Speciﬁc
bacterial families (Alcaligenaceae, Porphyromonadaceae, and Enterobacteriaceae) are strongly associated
with cognition and inﬂammation in HE .

Williams et al. found an increase in the Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio and a signiﬁcant
increase in Sutterella compared to their abundance in controls. These ﬁndings demonstrated that
gut microbiota dysbiosis has close relationships with gastrointestinal and behavioral manifestations
of autism..

The bidirectional interactions of gut–brain mean that the brain can also alter gut microbiota
composition demonstrated that exposure
to stress results in substantial changes in gut microbiota composition: a decrease in Bacteroides spp.
abundance and an increase in Clostridium spp. abundance have been observed in stress-induced mice.

Other studies revealed that chronic psychological stress is reﬂected in the microbiota
composition. Indeed, depression due to chronic stressful life events is associated with an increase in
Enterobacteriaceae, whereas psychological stress is associated with a reduction in Lactobacilli spp. and
an increase in Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas spp.