Over the past decade, the essential role that the gut micro-
biota plays in the developmental programming of the neo-
nate, including growth trajectories, metabolism, and immune 
and cognitive development, has been demonstrated [1–3]. 
Thus, fostering the development of the microbiome in the 
first 1000 days of life is critical to supporting lifelong health. 
Due to the rapid changes in the gut microbiome in the early 
postnatal period, most pediatric microbiome research has 
focused  on  differences  between  breast-  and  formula-fed 
infants in the first year of life [4]. Few studies have evaluated 
the microbiota of toddlers and children, and the prevailing 
thought is that children attain an adult-like microbiota by 
3 years of age [5, 6]. However, recent studies suggest that 
maturation of the gut microbiota is influenced by diet, and 
differences from an adult-type microbiota persist into later 
childhood [6, 7]. Therefore, the goal herein was to review 
the current evidence for the role of dietary intake and pre- 
and probiotic interventions on the gut microbiota from birth 
through adolescence.
Among pediatric populations, gut microbiota composi-
tion of breastfed (BF) and formula-fed (FF) infants is most 
extensively studied and has been reviewed elsewhere [3, 
4]. While heterogeneity exists among demographics, infant 
age, formula type, and sampling and analytical techniques 
applied in the published literature, most studies show that 
both diversity and richness of the microbiome are lower in 
BF than FF infants [4, 7–10]. Breastfeeding, particularly 
of longer duration, is associated with a more stable bacte-
rial composition [4, 8] as well as a lower microbiota age 
[8, 11]. BF infants tend to have higher Actinobacteria [4] 
and lower Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes than FF infants [2, 
6]. Breastfeeding is strongly associated with Bifidobacte-
rium [4, 7–9, 11] and Bifidobacteriaceae abundance [10]. 
For example, in the TEDDY (The Environmental Deter-
minants of Diabetes in the Young) cohort, BF infants had 
higher relative abundance of B. breve, B. bifidum, and B. 
dentium than FF; while B. longum was the most dominant 
species in this study, it did not differ by feeding group [7]. 
Lactobacillus abundance has also been associated with 
breastfeeding [9, 11]; however, results vary considerably 
among published studies [4]. In a recent meta-analysis of 
seven studies, infants who were not exclusively BF har-
bored higher relative abundances of Bacteroides, Eubac-
terium, and Veillonella [8].
Feeding mode interacts with other perinatal factors to 
influence the infant gut microbiota. Ho and colleagues 
reported  that  non-exclusively  BF  infants  have  a  lower 
abundance of Proteobacteria, but only among those deliv-
ered via cesarean section (C-section) [8]. However, breast-
feeding  appears  to  moderate  the  detrimental  effects  of 
C-section delivery and intrapartum antibiotics on the early 
microbiota, producing a microbiota profile more similar to 
that of vaginally delivered infants or those not receiving 
antibiotics [4]. Geography and ethnicity are also important 
to take into account. Across five European countries, the 
effect of country was more pronounced than delivery or 
feeding method, with dominant bifidobacteria in north-
ern countries and greater early diversification in southern 
European countries [12]. Within the USA, Bifidobacterium 
abundance differed between white and Hispanic BF and FF 
infants, but not black infants [9].
Compared to BF infants, the functional capacity of the 
microbiome of FF infants is more similar to that of adults, 
consisting  of  genes  related  to  bile  acid  synthesis  and 
methanogenesis, but considerable variation exists among 
recent studies [4]. For example, the BF infant microbi-
ome has an increased abundance of genes associated with 
Microbiota composition increases in both diversity and rich-
ness during the transition from a milk-based to an adult-
like  diet  [4,  9].  Introduction  to  complementary  foods  is 
accompanied  by  marked  increases  in  Lachnospiraceae, 
Although studies on gut microbiota composition in children 
after 2 years of age are more limited, available evidence sug-
gest that the microbiota of young children differs from that 
Faso children
was ~ sixfold higher in Italian than Burkina 
Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio (F/B ratio) 
in children than adults
Bacteroidetes were higher 
(Ruminococcaceae), and 
Clostridium cluster IV 
Actinobacteria, Bacilli, 
microbiota than adults
Children had less diverse 
spp., and Bacteroides spp.
teriaceae, Clostridium 
and increased Enterobac-
bacterium, Lactobacillus, 
Weaning decreased Bifido-
lifestyle survey
detailed medical, diet, and 
Italian parents completed a 
rules and regulations
local state and federal 
requirements defined by 
adhering to nutritional 
Children attended daycares 
taiotaomicron
increased B. the-
degradation; 
sugar and starch 
for complex 
enriched in genes 
12-mo microbiota 
and Veillonella
Megasphaera, 
Collinsella, 
Lactobacillus, 
Bifidobacterium, 
predominate in 
and number of participants
Country of study, age range, 
Table 1  Characteristics of studies investigating dietary effects on microbiome composition in infants and children
1 3enterotype
enterotypes, but not Bifidobacterium 
with Bacteroides and Prevotella 
plasma insulin levels in children 
dietary fiber consumption and low 
sequencing
by Illumina 
sequencing 
shotgun 
Metagenomic 
Lachnospiraceae)
Bifidobacteriaceae, Ruminococcaceae, and 
BB-type cluster (defined by Bacteroidaceae, 
Ormoc samples were included in the termed 
(defined by Prevotellaceae) and 78.9% of the 
87.5% of Baybay children fell into P-type cluster 
rium and lower Dorea and Eubacterium
higher Cyanobacteria and Phascolarctobacte-
legumes, nuts and seeds) was associated with 
Roseburia
lower Bifidobacterium, Prevotella, Blautia, and 
roidetes, Bacteroides, and Ruminococcus and 
snacks and sweets) was linked to higher Bacte-
and sweetened beverages, kid’s meals and 
refined carbohydrates, vegetables, fruit, juice 
Dietary Pattern 1 (intake of fish, protein foods, 
Fruit intake negatively associated with Ruminococcus 
Soy, pulse, and nut positively associated with Bacteroides 
and number of participants
Country of study, age range, 
Butyrivibrio, and Oscillospira
Bacteroides and higher Prevotella, 
changes
is a major delineator of microbiome 
Southern Chinese or Malay children) 
diet), rather than ethnicity (i.e., 
Geographical-related factors (i.e., 
with fish and beef
bacterium spp. negatively associated 
Lactobacillus and Prevotella; Bifido-
Vegetables positively correlated with 
and number of participants
Country of study, age range, 
N = 14
10.1–15.7 y
USA (Ohio)
N = 28
13.3–14.5 y
(Giza)
In Australian 2- to 3-year-olds, both habitual diet, as meas-
ured by a Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ), and recent 
dietary intake, as measured by a 24-h recall 3 days prior to 
fecal sample collection, influenced fecal microbiota com-
position [30]. Dairy intake was negatively associated with 
species richness and diversity and Bacteroidetes abundance, 
but was positively associated with Erysipelatoclostridium 
spp. and the Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio [F/B ratio]. 
Vegetable  protein  intake  was  positively  associated  with 
abundances of the Lachnospira; soy, pulse, and nut intake 
were positively associated with Bacteroides xylanisolvens, 
and fruit intake was negatively associated with the relative 
abundance of microbes related to Ruminococcus gnavus 
[30]. Dairy and vegetable-source proteins explained 7–10% 
of the variation in microbiota composition and fruit intake 
explained 8%. Among the dairy group, yogurt explained 9% 
of the variance in microbiota [30].
Moving beyond the first 1000 days of life, Berding and cow-
orkers [31] investigated the temporal stability of the fecal 
microbiota and whether dietary patterns were associated 
with microbial taxa and composition in American 4–8-year-
olds at 3 time points over a 6-month period. Dietary intakes 
were assessed over the previous year using the Young Ado-
lescent Questionnaire, and two dietary patterns were identi-
fied by principal components analysis (PCA) and factor anal-
ysis [31]. Temporal stability of microbiota over the 6-month 
period was associated with baseline dietary patterns. Dietary 
pattern 1, defined by intake of fish, protein foods, refined 
carbohydrates, vegetables, fruit, juice and sweetened bev-
erages, kid’s meals and snacks and sweets, was linked to 
higher relative abundance of Bacteroidetes,  Bacteroides, 
and Ruminococcus and lower Bifidobacterium, Prevotella, 
Blautia, and Roseburia relative abundance. Dietary pat-
tern 2, defined by intake of grains, dairy and legumes, nuts 
and seeds, was associated with higher Cyanobacteria and 
Phascolarctobacterium abundance and lower Dorea and 
Eubacterium abundance [31]. Additionally, the intake of 
Residing in rural vs. urban environments can also affect 
food availability and choices, which has been investigated 
in a series of studies. A study of Filipino children (7 to 
9 years) living in rural (Baybay) and urban (Ormoc) com-
munities showed distinct differences in dietary habits and 
fecal microbiota composition [32]. Nearly all (94%) of urban 
children consumed fast food four times per week on average 
compared to 42% of rural children who consumed fast food 
less than once per week. Urban-dwelling children also con-
sumed a diet higher in meat, fat, and confectionaries, such 
as sweetened pastries and biscuits, and lower in complex 
carbohydrates compared to rural children. Using family-level 
bacterial composition to execute PCA and clustering analy-
sis in conjunction with a dataset from five other Asian coun-
tries, it was observed that 87.5% of rural children fell into 
the termed P-type cluster [defined by Prevotellaceae] and 
78.9% of the urban samples were included in the termed BB-
type cluster (defined by Bacteroidaceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, 
Ruminococcaceae,  and Lachnospiraceae).  Additionally, 
Prevotellaceae, including only the genus Prevotella and 
consisting of mostly Prevotella copri, were more abundant 
in the feces of rural children, making up 10% of the total 
community, whereas it represented < 1% of the fecal micro-
bial sequences in most urban children. These findings may 
reflect the higher consumption of complex carbohydrates in 
rural children. [32].
Greater Bifidobacterium abundance in 1- to 4-year-olds 
compared to adults has been reported [28], and recent stud-
ies have shown that the relative abundance of Bifidobac-
terium in older children is related to dietary intake and is 
associated  with  metabolic  phenotypes.  Studying  Dutch 
children in the KOALA Birth Cohort Study, Zhong and col-
leagues documented higher levels of Bifidobacterium at 6 
to 9 years of age compared to adults [34]. They also classi-
fied children into three enterotypes and observed that cor-
relations between dietary and metabolic phenotypes were 
dependent on fecal microbial enterotype. For example, a 
negative correlation between dietary fiber intake and plasma 
insulin was only reported in children with Bacteroides and 
Prevotella enterotypes, but not the Bifidobacterium entero-
type [34]. This latter microbiome possesses lower microbial 
gene richness, alpha diversity, and functional potential for 
butyrate and succinate production, suggesting that children 
exhibiting a Bifidobacterium enterotype have a less mature 
gut microbiome [34]. Additionally, a study of 8- to 11-year-
olds in Thailand living in two different geographical regions 
observed that frequency of vegetable intake was positively 
correlated with Lactobacillus and Prevotella, while Bifido-
bacterium spp. was negatively correlated with fish and beef 
intake [35].
Parallel to these findings, comparing Bangladeshi and 
American  children  (9–14  years),  Bangladeshi  children 
exhibited lower levels of Bacteroides and higher levels of 
Prevotella,  Butyrivibrio,  and Oscillospira,  indicative  of 
their consumption of a non-Western diet low in refined-
sugar enriched foods and meat and rich in rice, bread, and 
lentils [37]. Furthermore, the American children consuming 
Western diets had higher Bacteroides abundance than chil-
dren in Bangladesh [37]. A Bacteroides enterotype is more 
common in adults consuming a Western diet, whereas the 
Prevotella enterotype is more common in those consuming 
high amounts of fiber [39].
Lastly,  a  study  comparing  Egyptian  teenagers  (mean 
13.9 years) consuming a Mediterranean-style diet to Ameri-
can teenagers (mean 12.9 years) consuming a Western diet, 
found that Egyptian children clustered to the Prevotella ente-
rotype and American children clustered to the Bacteroides 
enterotype [38]. Furthermore, the gastrointestinal environ-
ment of Egyptian children contained higher levels of SCFAs, 
microbial polysaccharide degradation-encoding genes, and 
polysaccharide-degrading genera [38].
Taken  together,  these  findings  provide  evidence  that 
the microbiome in children and adolescents is shaped to a 
greater degree by dietary intake [32–38] than by ethnicity 
[36]. While it is has been postulated that the microbiota after 
age 3 resembles that of adults [5], emerging evidence sug-
gest that, while the microbiota of children can be assembled 
into enterotypes [34, 37, 38], differences persist between 
children  and  adults.  Additionally,  children  may  also  be 
more similar to each other than adults are. For example, 
in  pre-adolescent  children  (ages  7–12)  intragroup  simi-
larity in the fecal microbiota was greater in children than 
adults [40]. Adults also displayed greater abundances of 
Bacteroides spp., while children displayed enhanced Bifi-
dobacterium spp., Faecalibacterium spp., and members of 
Lachnospiraceae [40]. However, the current literature on 
the impact of diet in this age group has some noted limita-
tions. Nearly all studies are cross-sectional, they use differ-
ent types of questionnaires to collect dietary intake data, and 
many of the studies have compared children living in rural 
vs. urban settings. While dietary intake differs between rural 
and urban communities, many other environmental factors 
are also likely contributing, including socioeconomic status, 
exposure to agricultural species and routine medical care, 
which could also be influencing the gut microbiota.
A consistent finding of the observational studies summa-
rized above is that consumption of a Western-style diet, 
characterized by low ratio of whole grains-to-refined carbo-
hydrates, detrimentally influences microbiome composition 
and fecal SCFA concentrations in children [30–37]. Dietary 
fiber (DF) has documented health benefits for adults, includ-
ing reducing intestinal transit time, plasma cholesterol and 
postprandial glycemic response and improving resistance 
to pathogens and epithelial barrier function [41–43]. The 
underlying mechanisms of these beneficial effects are not 
fully known; however, gut microbiome modulation and for-
mation of SCFAs by bacterial fermentation are proposed 
[43]. DF is also thought to be beneficial for gut health of 
children [44], although more studies are needed. In the USA, 
the recommended dietary fiber intake is 14 g/1000 kcal or 
25 g for females and 38 g for males. Most Americans only 
consume about half of the recommended intake (13.5 and 
18 g, respectively) [41]. The fiber intake recommendations 
for children between the ages of 1 and 13 years, range from 
5 to 31 g/day, depending on the organization, however, in 
most cases children are not meeting the recommended fiber 
intakes [44]. Thus, various strategies have been developed 
for modulation of gut microbiota, including administration 
of DFs, pre- or/and probiotics.
Two HMOs, 2′-fucosyllactose (2′-FL) and lacto-N-ne-
oteraose (LNnT), are added to infant formula. Both are well 
tolerated  and  support  age-appropriate  growth  of  infants 
[49–51]. A multicenter, randomized, double-blind trial com-
pared the fecal microbiota of healthy infants fed formula 
with 2′-FL and LNnT from < 14 days to 6 months of age 
to infants consuming with control formula. Findings dem-
onstrated a fecal microbiota closer to that of BF infants in 
the infants fed formula with HMO, with higher numbers of 
Bifidobacterium and lower potential pathogens than placebo 
at 3 months of age [51].
Only a few studies have studied DFs and prebiotics on the 
gut microbiota in healthy 3–6-year-old children [52] and 
adolescents (8–15 years) [53–56] (Table 2). As prebiotic 
fibers, both GOS and inulin-type fructans have been shown 
to increase abundance of Bifidobacterium [52–54]. Several 
studies have demonstrated that the intake of DFs shape the 
gut microbes of children; however, their effects on micro-
biota  composition  depend  on  the  type  of  fiber  studied. 
For example, administration of wheat bran extract (5 g/d 
for 3 weeks) increased fecal Bifidobacterium [53], while 
consumption of soluble corn fiber (SCF; 10 or 20 g/d for 
4 weeks) modulated the overall microbiota, increased the 
alpha diversity and altered the relative abundances of some 
bacterial genera, including Parabacteroides and unclassi-
fied Lachnospiraceae [54]. This same group also showed 
that GOS [55] and SCF [56] increased calcium absorption 
in adolescent girls and boys, demonstrating a health benefit 
for this age population. The authors proposed that bacte-
rial fermentation of SCF to SCFAs reduced the luminal pH, 
which increased calcium solubility and transcellular absorp-
tion [54]. Calcium absorption was negatively correlated with 
Parabacteroides relative abundance, but positively corre-
lated with Clostridium and unclassified Clostridiaceae abun-
dance [54]. The authors speculated that the two groups of 
bacteria were cross-feeding, with the Bacteroidetes (Para-
bacteroides) fermenting SCF to acetate or lactate, and the 
Firmicutes (Clostridium) further fermenting these substrates 
to butyrate [54]. The limited studies suggest that prebiotic 
and DF doses of 5–20 g are well tolerated in children, pro-
mote the expansion of bifidobacterial populations, and may 
exert other health benefits. Further large-scale studies are 
needed with different fiber sources.
Probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered 
in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” 
[57]. The most commonly administered probiotic bacteria 
belong to the genera Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus, 
but can be provided either as single or mixtures of strains. 
The beneficial effects of probiotics in pediatric populations 
have  been  previously  reviewed  [58–61],  although  most 
studies have not been conducted in healthy children. Pro-
biotics shorten the duration of acute gastroenteritis, prevent 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea, reduce the risk of necrotiz-
ing enterocolitis in preterm infants and lower the incidence 
of eczema in high-risk children [58–61]. The mechanisms 
of action of probiotics are not fully understood; however, 
modulation of gut microbiota has been postulated as one of 
the mechanisms [62].
Two general probiotic approaches have been taken to 
influence the infant or child microbiota. The first approach 
is to administer the probiotic to the mother during pregnancy 
↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
DGGE denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, GOS galactooligosaccharides, OTU operational taxonomic unit, qPCR quantitative PCR, SCF soluble corn fiber, SCFA short-chain fatty acids, 
Fecal pH: SCF 20 g < control, SCF 
Bacteroides and Lachnospira
unclassified Lachnospiraceae, ↓ 
SCF 20 g ↑Parabacteroides and 
reclassified Ruminococcus
unclassified Lachnospiraceae, ↓ 
SCF 10 g ↑Parabacteroides and 
samples with and without SCF
Overall microbiota differed between 
V3–V5 16S 
treatment
end of each 
Baseline and the 
DGGE, qPCR
treatment
end of each 
Baseline and the 
↓ Enterococcus, Anaerofustis, Coprococcus, and other 
↔ fecal pH, each SCFA levels, percentage of moisture 
groups, and F. prausnitzii
histolyticum/C. liteseburense, R. rectale/E. rectela 
↔ numbers of total bacteria, relative abundances of C. 
Placebo (n = 109)
Prebiotic (n = 110)
controlled trial
vention
duration of inter-
age range, and 
Country of study, 
Study design and participants/groupNutrition base and fiber type and 
Table 2  Characteristics of studies investigating effects of dietary fibers and prebiotics on the fecal microbiota of healthy children and adolescents
and  then  to  either  the  mother  and/or  infant  postpartum 
[63–70] (Table 3), and the second is to administer the pro-
biotic directly to the infant or child [71–84] (Table 4). For 
the first approach, most studies gave probiotics to the moth-
ers of infants with high-risk of allergy, with the goal of 
prevention of allergic disease, such as eczema, asthma and 
allergic rhinitis [63–65, 69, 70]. The impact of maternal pro-
biotic supplementation on the abundances of bacterial taxa 
were studied [63–70]; however, the results are inconsistent, 
even when the same probiotic strain was used [63, 64, 69] 
(Table 3). For example, supplementation of pregnant and 
lactating women with L. rhamnosus GG (LGG), L. acidophi-
lus La-5 and B. animalis subsp. lactis BB-12 from 36-week 
gestation until 3 months postnatal during breastfeeding did 
not affect the proportions of bacteria classes and genera of 
the infants at 3 months and 2 years [67]. In contrast, a Finish 
study evaluated the effect of administration of L. rhamnosus 
LPR and B. longum BL999 to mothers 2 months before and 
2 months after delivery. They observed that infants whose 
mother received probiotics had lower counts of Bifidobacte-
rium and a higher percentage of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus 
than placebo at 6 months of age [68]. In addition, several 
groups investigated the diversity of infant microbiota, report-
ing that administration of probiotics during pregnancy and 
lactation, or directly to infants after delivery have no or lim-
ited effects on alpha and beta diversity of infant microbiota 
[65, 67, 70] (Table 3).
Probiotics have been administrated directly to infants and 
children [71–84] (Table 4). These studies varied in terms of 
age of the children (newborns to age 18), type of probiotic, 
dose administered, and duration of the intervention. Despite 
these differences in study design, no effects of probiotic 
administration were observed on microbiome alpha or beta 
diversity between children in probiotic and control groups, 
with the exception of one study [73]. In that study, formula 
or L. reuteri DSM 17938-supplemented formula was fed for 
6 months to newborns born by either vaginal or C-section 
delivery [73]. The L. reuteri-supplemented formula had a 
limited effect on the microbiota of vaginally born infants; 
however, the overall microbiota composition of C-section-
delivered infants consuming the probiotic-supplemented 
formula differed from that of placebo and was similar to 
vaginally delivered infants at 2 weeks of age [73].
Similar to the findings when probiotics were adminis-
tered  to  the  mother,  inconsistent  results  were  observed 
on the abundances of bacterial taxa when probiotics were 
supplemented  directly  to  the  children;  some  probiotics 
affected the proportions of individual bacterial taxa, while 
others did not (Table 4). These conflicting results may be 
related to differences in probiotic strain/strains used, the 
dose use, duration of administration, and the methods used 
for microbiota analysis. Furthermore, factors that influence 
the development of gut microbiota, such as delivery mode, 
children’s age, and diet, likely confound the effects of pro-
biotic supplementation in this population [73].
year, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
interspace profiling, mo month, qPCR quantitative PCR, T-RFLP terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism, RT-qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, VD vaginally delivered, y 
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12, CFU colony-forming unit, CS cesarean section, d day, FISH fluorescent in situ hybridization, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-pro 
9 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. animalis subsp. lactis HN019
L. rhamnosus HN001
Powder in capsules
ing); infants 5 d–2 y
6 mo postpartum if breastfeed-
Mothers at 35-wk gestation until 
↑ count of C. perfringens/histolyticum subgroup at 
↑ counts of Lactobacillus and C. perfringens/histolyticum 
↓ Colonization rate of B. longum in ST11 + BL999
↓ Colonization rate of B. infantis in LPR + BL999
Bifidobacterium in LPR + BL999 at 6 mo of age
↑ Percentage of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus and ↓count of 
L. paracasei ST11 + B. longum BL999 
L. rhamnosus LPR + B. longum BL999 or
Powder in water
(5 × 109 CFU/d)
lus La-5 (5 × 1010 CFU/d) + BB-12 
LGG (5 × 1010 CFU/d) + L. acidophi-
Fermented milk
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. breve M16V + B. longum BB536
Powder in water, milk or formula
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. bifidum W23 + B. lactis W52 + L. 
Powder in water, milk or formula
placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Placebo (n = 22)
ST11 + BL999 (n = 28)
LPR + BL999 (n = 28)
placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Control (n = 26)
Probiotic (n = 122)
Open trial
Placebo (n = 17–45)
Probiotic (n = 20–37)
placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Placebo (n = 82)
Probiotic (n = 77)
placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Placebo (n = 57)
Probiotic (n = 59)
↔ alpha and beta diversity and proportions of bacterial 
lower at 2 wk
diversity for Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria were 
↔ bacterial abundances and diversity, except Shannon 
↑ prevalence of species belonging to B. longum group at 
Table 3  Characteristics of studies investigating probiotic administration during pregnancy and after delivery on infant fecal microbiota
1 3Ion OneTouch and Ion PGM
V3 region of 16S rRNA gene by 
Before and postintervention
1 × 107 CFU/g
L. fermentum CECT5716
Formula + 0.3 g/100 ml GOS
placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
BF (n = 46)
Control (n = 61)
FOS (n = 44)
Probiotic (n = 48)
placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Control (n = 46)
Probiotic (n = 46)
placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Control (n = 129)
Probiotic (n = 135)
CLr (n = 11)
VLr (n = 9)
CCt) (n = 10)
V-Control (VCt) (n = 10)
and C. histolyticum
Enterococcus, C. perfringens, 
Enterobacteria, Bacteroides, 
↔ counts of Bifidobacterium, 
3 y of age
group and B. fragilis group at 
Bifidobacterium, C. coccoides 
↔ fecal counts of Lactobacillus, 
VLr at 2 wk
abundance: CCt < CLr, VCt, 
Bifidobacterium occurrence and 
C. butyricum
coccoides, C. lituseburense and 
Bifidobacterium, groups of C. 
Lactobacillus/Enterococcus, 
quency and counts of 
Vaginal (V) or C-section (C) 
placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
over the first y
related to B. fragilis and Blautia 
1.0 × 107 CFU/d
LGG
Formula
(2.5 × 106 CFU/strain/g)
BT1 + B. longum BGT
BR3 + B. longum subsp. infantis 
placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
EBF (n = 9)
Control (n = 11)
Probiotic (n = 11)
Table 4  Characteristics of studies investigating probiotic administration on the fecal microbiota of healthy children under 18 years of age
qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, V vaginal delivery, wk week, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
in situ hybridization, FOS fructooligosaccharides, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-Pro interspace profiling, mo month, OTU operational taxonomic unit, qPCR quantitative PCR, RT-
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12, BF breastfed, CFU colony-forming unit, C cesarean section, Ct control, d day, EBF exclusive breastfed, FF formula-fed, FISH fluorescent 
Control (n = 12)
Probiotic (n = 6)
Observational trial
6 mo of intervention
and Staphylococcus after 3 and 
of intervention
Lactobacillus after 3 and 6 mo 
↑counts of Bifidobacterium and 
↓ E. cylindroides, C. ramosum, 
aninogenica, and P. oralis
uncultured Mollicutes, P. mel-
coccus, L. gasseri, R. lactaris, 
group, but not in placebo
between 0 and 10 mo in BB536 
10 d
coccus and Garnulicatella after 
linsella, Turicibacter, Entero-
Sutterella, ↓ Allobaculum, Col-
↑ proportions of Prevotella and 
4 × 1010 CFU/d
L. casei Shirota
4 × 108 CFU/d
LGG
Oily suspension
placebo-controlled trial
Randomized, double-blind 
Control (n = 61)
Probiotic (n = 55)
5 × 109 CFU/d, 5 d/wk
B. longum BB536
Freeze-dried powder
Illumina Genome Analyzer II
V4 region of 16S rRNA gene by 
1 wk after the intervention
Before, during (1, 3, 4 wk) and 
•  The gut microbiota in infancy and childhood is more 
•  The microbiome of BF infants is nurtured by human milk 
components, including HMO, and differs from that of FF 
infants.
•  The addition of HMO and prebiotics to infant formula at 
concentrations found in human milk promotes the growth 
of bifidobacteria and narrows the differences between BF 
and FF infants.
•  Prebiotics  and  dietary  fiber  at  doses  of  5–20  g/day 
modify the gut microbiome of children, increase SCFA 
production, and may exert other health benefits, includ-
ing increasing calcium absorption.
•  Findings on probiotic administration to pregnant or 
lactating women or directly to the infant or child are 
inconsistent, likely due to the variation in the bacterial 
strains, doses, duration and methods of microbiome 
analysis.
•  Better understanding of diet–microbiome–host interac-
tions is needed, but represents an enormous opportunity 
to refine dietary interventions with the goal of supporting 
a healthy microbiome and human well-being.
Funding  This work was supported in part by NIH R01 DK107561 
[SMD].
Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.
