3_PARAGRAPHS

  number  of  pioneering  studies  have  employed  human-derived
Escherichia  coli  and  Bacteroides  spp.  as  model  organisms  to  elucidate
key  principles  of  microbe–host  interactions  in  gnotobiotic  mice.
These  bacteria  can  be  genetically  manipulated  and  allow  functional
genetic  analysis.  E.  coli,  the  workhorse  of  traditional  and  modern
microbiology  and  genetics,  is  the  most  abundant  facultative  anaer-
obic  commensal  of  the  human  gut  (Bachmann,  1996).  Over  the  last
decade,  the  groups  of  Conway  and  Cohen   studied  E.  coli  car-
bohydrate  utilization  and  competition  in  the  intestine  in  detail.  A
seminal  study  by  Hapfelmeier  and  colleagues  used  an  auxotrophic
E.  coli  mutant  strain  to  generate  a  gnotobiotic  mouse  model  for
reversible  bacterial  colonization  (Hapfelmeier  et  al.,  2010).  The
growth  of  this  mutant  strain  depends  on  exogenous  supplemen-
d-alanine  and  meso-diaminopimelic  acid,
tation  of  the  amino  acids 
which  are  not  provided  by  the  germ-free  murine  host.  Thus,  the
mutant  only  transiently  colonizes  the  gut  after  which  the  mice.

Using  Bacteroides  spp.,  several  fundamental  principles  under-
lying  host–microbe  interactions  have  been  elucidated.  Bacteroides
thetaiotaomicron  (B.  theta)  and  Bacteroides  fragilis  are  highly  abun-
dant  and  ubiquitous  obligate  anaerobic  members  of  the  human  gut
microbiota  (Moore  and  Holdeman,  1974;  Qin  et  al.,  2010).  Their
genomes  encode  a  vast  number  of  enzyme  systems  that  mediate
degradation  of  polysaccharides  derived  from  the  diet  and  mucosal
secretions  (Xu  et  al.,  2003),  which  shapes  the  mutualistic  relation-
ship  between  Bacteroides  spp.  and  their  human  host  (Comstock,
2009).  Mono-colonization  of  mice  with  B.  theta  induces  pronounced
changes  in  host  mucosal  gene  expression  (Hooper  and  Gordon,
2001).  Speciﬁcally,  B.  theta  can  modify  host  epithelial  differen-
tiation  in  a  way  that  supports  its  own   growth:  it  promotes  the
production  of  fucosylated  glycans  by  the  host  and  in  turn  uses
them  as  nutrient  sources  (Bry  et  al.,  1996).  Intriguingly,  this  pro-
cess  is  dependent  on  the  capacity  of  B.  theta  to  utilize  fucose,
reﬂecting  the  mutualistic  nature  of  commensal-host  relationships.
B.  fragilis  produces  a  polysaccharide  with  immune  modulatory
activities  (Mazmanian  et  al.,  2005)  that  prevents  gut  inﬂammation
(Mazmanian,  2008)  and  promotes  tolerogenic  immune  responses
by  signaling  on  Foxp3(+)  regulatory  T  cells  through  TLR2  (Round
et  al.,  2011)..

In  addition  to  mono-colonization  experiments,  interaction  of  B.
theta  with  other  strains  has  been  studied  in  detail  by  transcriptome
proﬁling.  B.  theta  was   shown  to  adapt  to  the  presence  of  Eubac-
terium  rectale  or  the  probiotic  strains  Biﬁdobacterium  longum  and
Lactobacillus  casei  by  expanding  the  breadth  of  its  carbohydrate
utilization  (Mahowald  et  al.,  2009;  Sonnenburg  et  al.,  2006).  Co-
colonization  with  methanogenic,  sulfate-reducing,  and  acetogenic
bacteria  also  yielded  valuable  insights  into  the  metabolism  of  these
generally  lowly  abundant  members  of  mammalian  gut  ecosys-
tems  (Rey  et  al.,  2010,  2013;  Samuel  and  Gordon,  2006).  Taken
together,  these  paradigm  studies  illustrate  how  members  of  the
microbiota  are  able  to  adapt  their  substrate  utilization  in  response
to  one  another  and  engage  in  cross-feeding,  which  are  fundamen-
tal  principles  also  operating  in  complex  ecosystems.  Besides  the
species  mentioned  above,  numerous  other  commensal  bacteria
(the  majority  of  which  is  derived  from  humans)  have  been  used
to  interrogate  microbe–host  interactions  in  gnotobiotic  models
(Table  1).  Although  models  harboring  only  few  bacteria  have  been
very  helpful,  care  must  be  taken  when  interpreting  data.  In  sim-
pliﬁed  bacterial  communities,  the  context  of  a  fully  diverse  and
competitive  bacterial  ecosystem  is  lacking.  Several  studies  have
therefore  started  using  deﬁned  bacterial  consortia  of  higher  com-
plexity  (Table  1).