18_PARAGRAPHS

Presence of haustrum and taenia coli in the colon .

Along the length of the colonic mucosa .

In  addition  to  the  macroscopic  differences,  the  microscopic
structure  of  the  intestinal  tract  of  mice  and  humans  also  differ
(Treuting and Dintzis, 2012). The mouse colon is composed of thin
muscularis mucosae (see Box 1 and Table 1) with no discernible
sub-mucosa,  whereas  the  human  colon  is  covered  by  a  thicker
mucosal wall. Another difference is the presence of transverse folds
along the length of the colonic mucosa in humans, whereas these
folds are restricted to the cecum and proximal colon in mice. These.

Fig. 1. Gross anatomy of the human and the mouse gastrointestinal
tract. (A) The human colon is divided into different sections (i.e. ascending,
transverse and descending colon) with the presence of taenia coli and
compartmentalization in haustra, which are absent in the mouse colon. The
human stomach is lined with a glandular mucosa (C) that secretes gastric
acid, whereas the mouse stomach is divided in two regions – a glandular
stomach and a non-glandular or fore-stomach (B). The mouse glandular
stomach is responsible for secreting gastric acid, whereas the non-glandular
stomach functions as a temporary site of food storage and digestion.
(E) Cross-section of a human colon, which has a thicker muscular wall and
mucosa compared with the mouse colon (D). M, mucosa; ME, muscularis
externa; TC, taenia coli. Panels B and C are reproduced from “Comparative
anatomy and histology: A mouse and human atlas” by Piper M. Treuting and
Suzy Dintzis, 2012, with permission from Elsevier. D is reproduced from the
website http://theses.ulaval.ca/archimede/fichiers/24866/ch07.html with the
author’s permission. E is re-used from www.anatomyatlases.org with the
author’s permission. .

At  the  cellular  level,  there  are  also  a  number  of  notable
differences  between  humans  and  mice.  The  first  example  is  the
distribution of mucin-producing goblet cells (Table 1). In mice, these
cells  are  abundant  along  the  surface  of  intestinal  crypts  in  the
proximal colon but, in the distal colon and rectum, their number
decreases at the base of the crypt. Conversely, in humans, goblet
cells are abundant from cecum to rectum. The second example is the
difference in distribution between mice and humans of another type
of intestinal epithelial cell – the Paneth cell (Table 1). Paneth cells
secrete  antimicrobial  compounds  into  the  lumen  of  the  small
intestine. They are rare but present in the cecum and proximal colon
of humans, whereas, in the mouse, these cells are entirely absent in
the colonic mucosa and uniquely found in the cecum. In addition to
location differences, the amount of defensins (peptides involved in
the host defense) secreted by Paneth cells, their storage and secretion
were  also  reported  to  be  different  between  mice  and  humans.

In these datasets, we found 79 genera occurring in both human
and mouse gut microbiotas. The relative abundances of most of the
dominant genera in mouse and human are quite different (Fig. 3A;
supplementary material Table S1). Genera with high abundance in
human  gut  microbiota,  as  compared  to  mouse  gut  microbiota,
include Prevotella, Faecalibacterium and Ruminococcus, whereas
Lactobacillus,  Alistipes and  Turicibacter are  more  abundant  in
mouse  gut  microbiota  (supplementary  material  Table  S1)..

Clostridium, Bacteroides and Blautia, on the contrary, have a similar
relative  abundance  in  both  organisms.  However,  none  of  the
differences  found  between  human  and  mouse  gut  microbiota
survives multiple testing corrections due to the limited size of the
dataset,  so  these  results  should  be  considered  as  exploratory.
Although it is important to keep in mind the major inter-organism
variations, as well as technical discrepancies in the gut microbiota
studies  compared  above  (such  as  different  human  populations,
mouse  houses,  mouse  strains,  sample  handling,  processing
techniques and method of analysis), the results nonetheless mostly
agree with current knowledge. For instance, Prevotella abundance
is  known  to  be  low  in  mouse  gut  microbiota  (Hildebrand  et  al.,
2013) and Faecalibacterium is reported to be one of the dominant
members  in  healthy  gut  microbiota  in  humans,  as  it  has  been
suggested to be the marker for anti-inflammatory gut microbiota in
IBD patients in remission (Sokol et al., 2008; Sokol et al., 2009)..

Recently, a study by Krych et al. identified about 80 genera that
are shared between mice and humans (with abundance threshold set
to  0.19%  to  filter  out  variations  due  to  sequencing  method  or
sequencing depth) (Krych et al., 2013), a number that is very similar
to  the  79  found  in  our  meta-analysis.  The  authors  proposed  that
multiple genera are present exclusively in the human gut microbiota:
Faecalibacterium,  Mitsuokellla,  Megasphera,  Dialister,
Asteroleplasma,  Succinivibio,  Sutterella,  Paraprevotella and
Phascolarctobacterium, with Mucispirillum being the only genus
exclusive to mice (Krych et al., 2013). However, as a case in point,
Faecalibacterium was found in the mouse gut microbiota datasets
from Ward (Ward et al., 2012), Riboulet-Bisson (Riboulet-Bisson et.

of  human  gut  microbiota  is  still  a  matter  of  debate  (Ding  and
Schloss, 2014; Koren et al., 2013), a consensus on their usefulness
as  a  stratification  tool  is  growing  (Moeller  and  Ochman,  2014).
Enterotypes  were  also  identified  in  the  laboratory  mouse  gut
microbiota  (Hildebrand  et  al.,  2013),  being  dominated  by
Lachnospiraceae  and  Ruminococcaceae  or  Bacteroidaceae  and
Enterobacteriaceae, respectively. Although the cause of stratification
of human and mouse individuals into enterotypes is still unknown,
there is a noticeable parallel between dominant bacterial families of
the mouse and human enterotypes. Namely, one mouse enterotype
is dominated by Lachnospiraceae/Ruminococcaceae, similarly to the
human Ruminococcaceae enterotype (also known as enterotype 3).
In  addition, 
the  second  mouse  enterotype,  dominated  by
Bacteroidaceae/Enterobacteriaceae,  is  similar  to  the  human
Bacteroides enterotype  (enterotype  1)  (Arumugam  et  al.,  2011).
Interestingly,  two  enterotypes  were  also  identified  in  wild  mice,
dominated by Bacteroides and Robinsoniella, respectively (Wang et
al., 2014). Moreover, the laboratory mouse enterotypes were found
to correlate with species-richness and inflammation: mice belonging
(Bacteroidaceae/
species-richness  enterotype 
to 
Enterobacteriaceae) had higher levels of calprotectin, a marker of
inflammation. This result is consistent with what has been recently
found  in  studies  of  human  obesity  (Cotillard  et  al.,  2013;  Le
Chatelier et al., 2013), in which low species-richness individuals
were  found  to  have  more  pronounced  inflammation,  and  to  be
dominated by Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria, the same bacterial
groups that dominated the ‘inflamed’ mouse enterotype..

Obesity
The influence of diet on the gut microbiota has received increasing
research attention over recent years. With the rising incidence of
metabolic  disturbances,  such  as  obesity  and  diabetes  in  Western
countries,  the  impact  of  the  ‘Western’  diet  (high  in  simple
carbohydrates and animal fats) on the gut microbiota and our health
is a key question in this field. Many studies have been conducted on
mice or humanized mouse models (i.e. germ-free mice administered
human gut microbiota), which have been fed diets that are high in
fat  or  saturated/unsaturated  fat  to  investigate  changes  in  the  gut
microbiota  (Ley  et  al.,  2006;  Liu  et  al.,  2012;  Turnbaugh  et  al.,
2009b; Wu et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2012). Some common trends
have emerged from this research. For instance, mice fed on a high
animal-fat diet show a decreased Bacteroidetes:Firmicutes ratio in
their gut microbiota (Murphy et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2012). This
shift  is  driven  by  more  complex  alterations  at  lower  taxonomic
levels  within  the  phylum  Bacteroidetes:  most  genera,  including
Prevotella and Roseburia, decreased in abundance (Neyrinck et al.,
2011), whereas other genera of this phylum, such as Barnesiella,
Bacteroides and  Alistipes,  significantly  increased  (Zhang  et  al.,
2012). Interestingly, the overall trend observed in mouse studies
agrees with that found in human studies. Human dietary studies have
revealed that the Bacteroides enterotype in humans is associated
with people whose diet contains more animal fats over long periods
of time, whereas the Prevotella enterotype is found to predominate
in people consuming more carbohydrates (Wu et al., 2011). A study
comparing European and rural African children also confirmed this
link between microbiota and diet (De Filippo et al., 2010). African
children, who eat fiber-rich diets, had a higher abundance of specific
Bacteroidetes (Prevotella and Xylanibacter), a reduced amount of
Firmicutes  and  decreased  amounts  of  Proteobacteria  (Shigella,
Escherichia),  compared  with  European  children.  The  study
suggested  that  European  children  with  a  high-fat  diet  harbor  the
Bacteroides enterotype,  which  might  predispose  them  to  many
metabolic  diseases  (Le  Chatelier  et  al.,  2013).  Overall,  this
highlights  that  the  use  of  diet  intervention  in  murine  models,
including the use of humanized gnotobiotic mice, can mimic the
changes in gut microbiota that occur in relation to human diet..

Bacteroides enterotype, which is associated with animal protein, and
Prevotella enterotype, which links to diets with more carbohydrates
and simple sugars. The authors therefore suggested that a long-term
dietary  intervention  might  be  needed  to  modify  an  individual’s
enterotype (Wu et al., 2011). On the other hand, a study on wild
mice by Wang et al. showed that feeding wild mice with chow diet
can change mice enterotypes as quickly as within 1 week, from the
Bacteroides enterotype (associated with protein metabolism) to the
Robinsoniella enterotype (associated with carbohydrate metabolism)
(Wang et al., 2014). The discrepancies in these results suggest that
humans need more time for the diet interventions to change their
enterotypes given the more drastic changes in diet in the wild mouse
study.  The  discrepancies  might  otherwise  illustrate  the  intrinsic
differences,  e.g.  the  effect  of  genetic  background  on  enterotype
identities,  as  well  as  external  confounding 
factors,  e.g.
environmental influences, which affect the two organisms..

of which can also be at different stages (for example, active or in
remission). This said, some prominent changes in the gut microbiota
have been concomitantly observed in independent IBD studies using
a  variety  of  techniques  on  different  cohorts,  such  as  reduced
bacterial  diversity  in  both  Crohn’s  disease  and  ulcerative  colitis
patients (Andoh et al., 2012; Nemoto et al., 2012; Sokol et al., 2006;
Walker  et  al.,  2011),  a  reduction  in  the  levels  of  the  anti-
inflammatory  bacterium  Faecalibacterium (Andoh  et  al.,  2012;
Joossens et al., 2011; Sokol et al., 2009; Willing et al., 2009), as well
as  of  Clostridium  coccoides and  Bifidobacterium (Sokol  et  al.,
2009), and an increase in abundance of Enterobacteriaceae (such as
E. coli) (Duboc et al., 2013; Joossens et al., 2011; Willing et al.,
2009; Willing et al., 2010)..

Increasing numbers of mouse models have been created and used
in  IBD  research,  with  the  aim  of  mimicking  the  disease’s
pathophysiology in humans. In general, these models were created
by  introducing  genetic  modifications  in  mice  that  resemble  the
genetic  defects  of  IBD  patients,  or  by  relying  on  external
disturbances to induce disease. The latter include biological agents,
such as infective pathogens (for example, Helicobacter hepaticus
and Citrobacter rodentium), or chemicals, such as dextran sulfate
sodium  (DSS)  and  2,4,6-trinitrobenzene  sulfonic  acid  (TNBS),
which  cause  the  initial  damage  that  leads  to  chronic  intestinal
inflammation  (Peloquin  and  Nguyen,  2013;  Wirtz  et  al.,  2007).
However, most mouse models of colitis do not fully recapitulate the
pathophysiology of human IBD and generally only cause colonic
inflammation , which is more similar to ulcerative colitis
(reviewed in Wirtz and Neurath, 2007 and discussed further below).
Despite this, the major gut microbiota shifts that have been observed
in  different  colitis  mouse  models  are  similar  to  those  found  in
human  IBD  studies.  In  these  models,  gut  bacterial  diversity  was
found to be reduced, with certain shifts in gut microbiota profiles
in  Enterobacteriaceae
being  observed,  such  as .

(Escherichia), Bacteroidaceae (Bacteroides) and Ruminococcaceae
(Berry et al., 2012; Lupp et al., 2007; Wohlgemuth et al., 2009).
However,  the  reduction  in  the  anti-inflammatory  bacterium
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, which is observed to occur in many
human IBD studies, was not observed in murine colitis models. In
addition, Akkermansia was found to be reduced in abundance in a
human  ulcerative  colitis  study  (Vigsnæs  et  al.,  2012),  but  was
increased in the DSS-induced mouse model (Berry et al., 2012).
Mouse studies have also detected changes in abundance of bacterial
phylotypes that solely happen in mice, such as of Tenericutes and
Deferribacteriaceae (Nagalingam et al., 2011). Conversely, changes
in the diversity of TM7 phylotypes (Kuehbacher et al., 2008) or in
the abundance of Roseburia (Willing et al., 2010) were found only
in human Crohn’s disease studies. Vereecke et al. recently developed
a mouse model prone to spontaneous colitis (Vereecke et al., 2014),
while  studying  A20  –  an  inhibitor  of  both  NF-κB  and  apoptotic
signaling that has previously been associated with susceptibility to
IBD  in  humans  (Catrysse  et  al.,  2014;  Ma  and  Malynn,  2012).
Deleting  A20  in  intestinal  epithelial  and  myeloid  cells  in  mice
(A20IEC/myel-KO) induced intestinal epithelial apoptosis, Paneth and
goblet  cell  loss,  and  gut  microbiota  dysbiosis.  The  latter  was
characterized  by  a  reduced  bacterial  diversity  and  altered
composition as compared with wild type. Furthermore, the mouse-
specific  genus  Mucispirillum was  significantly  increased  in
A20IEC/myel-KO mice  and  was  thus  suggested  as  a  biomarker  for
spontaneous colitis in this model. Interestingly, mucosal expression
levels  of  A20  in  humans  have  been  put  forward  as  a  prognosis
marker  for  response  to  anti-TNF  treatment  in  IBD  patients
(Vereecke et al., 2014)..

Furthermore, dietary variations between humans represent a large
potential source of gut microbiota inter-individual variation, which
would not be detected in lab mice under uniform chow diet. For
instance, the Prevotella enterotype is known to be sensitive to diet
changes and is linked to a high carbohydrate/fiber diet in humans
(De Filippo et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2012; Willing et al., 2010; Wu et
al.,  2011).  In  both  mouse  (Neyrinck  et  al.,  2011)  and  human
(Fernandez-Raudales et al., 2012; Wu et al., 2011) gut microbiota
studies,  the  abundance  of  Prevotella was  found  to  change  upon
dietary  intervention.  Furthermore,  Wang  et  al.  have  shown  that
hosting wild mice in a laboratory environment on chow diet causes
a shift in enterotypes, from the original Bacteroides-dominated (with
microbial metabolism more dedicated to protein degradation) to the
Robinsoneilla-dominated 
to  carbohydrate
degradation) enterotype (Wang et al., 2014)..

by  bacteria  on  hosts  with  different  genetic  backgrounds.  For
example, Wos-Oxley et al. found that Clostridiales bacteria colonize
the gut of humanized rats more efficiently than that of humanized
mice (Wos-Oxley et al., 2012)..

most of the models show inflammation/lesions in the large, instead of
the small, intestine, which more closely resembles ulcerative colitis
symptoms (Peloquin and Nguyen, 2013). Moreover, the development
of  colitis  in  mouse  models  has  been  shown  to  be  affected  by  the
genetic  background  of  the  used  strain  [i.e.  some  strains  are
intrinsically more susceptible to developing colitis (Büchler et al.,
2012)] and the interactions with the gut microbiota [e.g. some models
do not develop colitis in germ-free conditions (Hudcovic et al., 2001)].
The  concern  is  not  only  that  symptoms  are  not  concordant  with
human IBD, but that the underlying mechanism, such as the cross-talk
between the immune system and the gut microbiota, might not be the
same in the mouse model being used..

al., 2012). Specifically, humanized rat models have a more similar
Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes ratio to human donors and could represent
the human donor better than could germ-free mouse models. This
difference  is  thought  to  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  rat  has  a
microbiota  that  is  more  similar  to  humans  than  mice  do,  thus
facilitating the establishment of the inoculated microbiota (Wos-
Oxley  et  al.,  2012).  Furthermore,  it  was  hypothesized  that  the
differences  between  mice  and  rats  in  recapitulating  the  human
donors’  microbiota  is  due  to  the  intrinsic  differences  in  genetic
backgrounds of the recipient models, which might control for the
establishment of the transferred microbiota (Wos-Oxley et al., 2012).
Another non-murine rodent model that has been employed in gut
microbiota  research  is  the  guinea  pig.  Given  the  homology  that
exists between human and guinea pig E-cadherin, a transmembrane
adhesion protein that locates to the intestinal surface, this animal has
become an important model for studying infection by the human
pathogen Listeria monocytogenes. Because a healthy commensal
intestinal microbiota affects the potential for infection by a pathogen
(pathogen exclusion), the gut microbiota of guinea pigs has been
investigated in several studies (Hildebrand et al., 2012; Yanabe et
al., 2001). For example, in the study by Yanabe et al., germ-free
guinea  pigs  were  inoculated  with  combinations  of  cecal  content
from conventional guinea pigs to determine efficient cocktails to
establish a healthy SPF colony (Yanabe et al., 2001). The authors
found  that  the  transferred  microbiota  became  similar  to  the  gut
microbiota of conventional guinea pigs and stayed stable over a long
period.  More  recently,  another  study  employed  metagenomic
approaches to compare the gut microbiota composition of humans
and guinea pigs (Hildebrand et al., 2012). The study revealed that
humans  and  guinea  pigs  share  dominant  bacterial  phyla,  but  the
abundance  of  these  common  phyla   is
significantly  higher  in  guinea  pigs  as  compared  to  humans.  In
addition, significant differences in abundance were found across 320
out of 376 genera. Functional categories, such as metabolism or cell
membrane  biogenesis,  also  differ  significantly  in  abundance
between the human and guinea pig gut microbiome (Hildebrand et
al., 2012).