12_PARAGRAPHS

Lactobacillus crispatus  CTV-05  (Lactin-V,  Osel) 
is  a  live  biotherapeutic  product  that  contains  a 
naturally occurring vaginal strain of L. crispatus. 
It  is  composed  of  a  powder  containing  2×109 
colony-forming units (CFU) of L. crispatus CTV-05 
preserved  with  inactive  ingredients  and  is  ad-
ministered  with  the  use  of  a  prefilled  vaginal 
applicator.  Lactin-V  is  designed  to  promote  a 
community  state  type  (i.e.,  microbial  composi-
tion) with a predominance of  L. crispatus11 after 
treatment with vaginal 0.75% metronidazole gel. 
In previous clinical trials, no serious or grade 3 
adverse events that were considered to be related 
to the use of Lactin-V were reported.13-18 On the 
basis of the results from a phase 2a clinical trial 
of Lactin-V,16 the current phase 2b trial was de-
signed to assess whether treatment with Lactin-V 
after  a  5-day  course  of  metronidazole  to  treat 
bacterial vaginosis would result in a significantly 
lower  incidence  of  recurrence  of  bacterial  vagi-
nosis than placebo..

regimen for reevaluation of their eligibility. After 
providing written informed consent to partici-
pate in the trial, eligible women were randomly 
assigned,  in  a  2:1  ratio,  to  receive  Lactin-V  at 
2×109  CFU  per  dose  or  matching  placebo  and 
subsequently  received  a  carton  containing  25 
vaginal applicators. The placebo formulation con-
tained the same inactive ingredients as Lactin-V, 
without L. crispatus CTV-05..

Clinic follow-up visits were scheduled 4, 8, 12, 
and  24  weeks  after  enrollment.  At  each  time 
point,  vaginal  swabs  were  obtained  for  assess-
ment  of  Amsel  criteria,  determination  of  the 
Nugent  score,  and  detection  of  L. crispatus  (all 
strains  and  the  CTV-05  strain  specifically)  by 
means of quantitative polymerase-chain-reaction 
(PCR) assays; the swabs were also used for re-
peat STI testing if clinically indicated. A positive 
L. crispatus result was defined as a level above the 
lower limit of detection for both the assay for all 
strains and the assay for the CTV-05 strain (see 
the Supplementary Appendix, available at NEJM 
.org,  for  details  of  the  PCR  methods).  Vaginal 
applicators  that  were  returned  at  the  follow-up 
visits  were  stained  with  0.5%  trypan  blue  as  a 
proxy for adherence to the assigned treatment.20 
Further details of the trial, including trial proce-
dures and the complete list of eligibility criteria, 
are provided in the Supplementary Appendix..

Efficacy Outcomes
The primary efficacy outcome was the percent-
age of participants who had recurrent bacterial 
vaginosis  (defined  by  the  presence  of  at  least 
three Amsel criteria and a Nugent score of 4 to 
10) at any follow-up visit up to and including the 
week  12  visit.  Prespecified  secondary  efficacy 
outcomes  included  the  percentage  of  partici-
pants who had recurrent bacterial vaginosis at 
any follow-up visit up to and including the week 
24  visit,  after  completion  of  the  12-week  post-
treatment  phase  of  the  trial;  the  percentage  of 
participants in the Lactin-V group who had de-
tectable L. crispatus CTV-05 at 12 weeks and at 24 
weeks,  overall  and  stratified  according  to  the 
occurrence of menses and of sexual intercourse; 
and the acceptability of Lactin-V, as assessed by 
the percentage of participants in each treatment 
group who were adherent to the assigned treat-
ment and by responses on questionnaires. (The 
data from the questionnaire are not reported here.).

The percentage of participants in each group 
who had detectable L. crispatus species (any strain) 
and L. crispatus CTV-05 at any time after baseline 
through week 24 were calculated, along with risk 
ratios  for  these  outcomes.  For  the  intention-to-
treat  and  modified  intention-to-treat  analyses, 
missing  data  regarding  the  concentrations  of 
L.  crispatus  species  and  L. crispatus  CTV-05  were 
not  imputed.  In  addition,  the  associations  of 
adherence  to  the  assigned  treatment  (≥75%  of 
doses administered vs. <75% of doses adminis-
tered), reported occurrence of menses since the 
last  visit  (menses  vs.  no  menses),  and  reported 
occurrence of sexual activity (sex without the use 
of a condom vs. abstinence or sex with the use of 
a condom) with the presence of L. crispatus spe-
cies and L. crispatus CTV-05 were assessed as ex-
ploratory analyses, as specified in the statistical 
analysis plan..

In the Lactin-V group, L. crispatus CTV-05 was 
detected in 79% (at week 12) to 84% of partici-
pants during weeks 4, 8, and 12 and in 48% of 
participants at week 24 . In contrast, in 
the  placebo  group,  L. crispatus  CTV-05  was  de-
tected in 2 to 6% of participants during weeks 4, 
8, and 12 and in 2% of participants at week 24. 
The  results  were  materially  unchanged  across 
the  analysis  populations.  Among  the  partici-
pants  with  detectable  L.  crispatus  CTV-05,  the 
median  concentration  in  the  Lactin-V  group 
ranged from 1.7×106 to 6.2×106 CFU per millili-
ter during the treatment phase through week 12 .

Figure 2. Median Concentration and Incidence of Detectable Lactobacillus 
crispatus CTV-05 in the Lactin-V Group, According to Trial Visit.
I bars indicate maximum and minimum values, the horizontal lines inside the 
blue bars indicate median values, and the diamonds indicate mean values. 
(The circles below the blue bar at week 4 represent outliers.) The size of each 
blue bar represents the interquartile range. CFU denotes colony-forming 
units..

There were no apparent associations between 
the detection of L. crispatus CTV-05 at week 12 or 
week  24  and  adherence  to  the  assigned  treat-.

Participants with detectable
L. crispatus CTV-05 .

L. crispatus CTV-05 concentration.

The use of Lactin-V after treatment with vaginal 
metronidazole for bacterial vaginosis resulted in 
a significantly lower incidence of recurrence of 
bacterial  vaginosis  at  12  weeks  than  placebo, 
and  the  benefit  appeared  to  persist  through 
week  24.  Overall,  adherence  to  the  assigned 
treatment  was  high.  In  the  Lactin-V  group, 
L. crispatus CTV-05 was detected in almost 80% 
of  the  participants  at  the  week  12  visit  and  in 
almost  50%  of  the  participants  at  the  week  24 
visit after completion of the 12-week post-treat-
ment phase of the trial..

The  results  of  our  phase  2a  trial  raised  the 
possibility  that  exposure  to  semen  during  sex 
without  the  use  of  a  condom,  the  presence  of 
menstrual blood, and the reestablishment of bac-
teria  associated  with  bacterial  vaginosis  soon 
after completion of antibiotic treatment may re-
duce the colonization of L. crispatus after admin-
istration of Lactin-V.16,31 In the current trial, the 
initial dose of Lactin-V or placebo was adminis-
tered  within  48  hours  after  the  last  dose  of 
vaginal metronidazole gel, and the frequency of 
dosing after the first week was increased from 
once  weekly  to  twice  weekly  through  week  11. 
We did not find that the occurrence of menses 
since the last visit or the occurrence of sex with-
out the use of a condom affected the detection 
of L. crispatus CTV-05.