21_PARAGRAPHS

Female infants are generally born smaller than male infants; however, in response to maternal asthma, the
Caucasian male fetus is more likely to have a lower birthweight and show growth retardation when
delivered at term than the female fetus recently reported less colonisation of stool
with Lactobacillus species at birth and during the first month of life among full-term male infants in
comparison to female infants. Postnatally, depending on the Lactobacillus species, since weight promotion
is species-specific, the dominance of lactobacilli in the infant gut will determine the extent of weight gain
and subsequent atopic disease  Altogether, evidence is mounting for a programming role of
prenatal asthma that might affect the infant gut microbiome. These observations led us to study the
influence of maternal asthma status during pregnancy on infant intestinal microbiota in the Canadian
Healthy Infant Longitudinal Development (CHILD) general population birth cohort. Specifically, we
determined whether the genus Lactobacillus was reduced in the gut of infants born to an asthmatic
mother, especially in the gut of male infants. Second, we sought evidence for a fetal programming role of
maternal asthma that was independent of birth mode and related events, and was enhanced by maternal
comorbid conditions, such as overweight and atopic disease..

The abundance of Lactobacillus was significantly lower among infants born to women with non-Caucasian
ethnicity and to women with asthma during pregnancy (table 1). Based on the ART test, the p-value for
the interaction term between prenatal asthma and Caucasian ethnicity was 0.002. In Caucasian infants,
prenatal maternal asthma was significantly associated with a lower relative abundance of the genus
Lactobacillus (median 0.001% versus 0.002%, p=0.01; table 2). This genus was not differentially abundant
by maternal asthma status in non-Caucasian infants (data not shown). Stratification by infant sex yielded
statistical significance for a reduction in gut Lactobacillus species among Caucasian male infants (median
0.002% versus 0.0005%, p=0.02), but not female infants born to women with asthma. No differences in gut.

TABLE 1 Distribution of maternal prenatal asthma status and infant faecal Lactobacillus abundance according to study
covariates.

Data are presented as n (%),unless otherwise stated. IQR: interquartile range. p-values <0.05 are indicated in bold. #: percentage of asthma and
highest Lactobacillus abundance within category; ¶: comparison of proportions was performed using Fisher’s exact test for 2×2 and 2×3
contingency tables; +: medians were compared with the Wilcoxon rank sum test or Kruskal–Wallis test for >2 group comparisons; §: variables
with missing information for some infants..

Lactobacillus abundance were found between non-Caucasian males born to mothers with (median
0.0005%, n=5) and without (median 0.0007%, n=112) prenatal asthma..

To reduce bias from perinatal exposures, comparisons were conducted only within vaginally delivered,
breastfed infants, who were not exposed to maternal antibiotics during birth. The restricted analyses
revealed similar trends for the genus Lactobacillus in the gut microbiota of male, Caucasian infants
( p=0.06) born to an asthmatic mother (table 3, supplementary table S2). Other sex-specific differences
were uncovered. Following prenatal asthma, the gut of female, Caucasian infants, born vaginally and
breastfed, without exposure to maternal intrapartum antibiotics, was more abundant in members of the.

Data are presented as median (interquartile range), unless otherwise stated. Comparisons were performed
using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. The false discovery rate (FDR) was used to adjust p-values for multiple
testing and crude p-values <FDR p-values are indicated by “#”. The p-values <0.1 are reported and
p-values <0.05 are indicated in bold. ¶: comparison of Lactobacillus was the primary hypothesis..

Bacteroidetes phylum ( p=0.02, table 3) and less abundant in Enterobacteriaceae ( p=0.03). Differences were
also evident at the Bacteroidaceae family level ( p=0.02, supplementary table S2) in all female breastfed
infants born vaginally without
the
Firmicutes phylum ( p<0.05)..

Lactobacilli were less abundant in male infants born to women with asthma and concomitant food or
environmental allergies, or asthma and pre-pregnancy overweight; statistical significance was not observed in
the absence of either comorbidity (table 4). Based on the ART test, the p-value for the interaction term
between prenatal asthma and infant sex on Lactobacillus abundance was 0.003 for maternal atopy
comorbidity and 0.06 for overweight comorbidity. Following the same maternal asthma comorbidity during
pregnancy, the abundance of Bacteroidaceae was substantially and significantly higher in female infants. The
p-value for this sex interaction term was 0.001 for maternal atopy comorbidity and 0.002 for overweight
(ART test). Firmicutes were much less abundant in females born to overweight mothers with asthma. Within
the Firmicutes phylum, the genus Megasphaera was less abundant in the infant gut following maternal
asthma comorbid with overweight or atopy, and this difference was statistically significant in females of
mothers with atopic asthma (table 4). The p-value for the sex interaction term for differences in Megasphera
abundance related to maternal atopic asthma was 0.14 (ART test). Following atopic asthma during
pregnancy, Enterobacteriaceae were less common in the gut microbiota of offspring, more so in males than
females; only Bacteroidaceae enrichment survived correction for multiple testing. With one exception (when
the crude p-value was 0.06 with reduced sample size following restriction, as presented in table 3), reductions
in Lactobacillus abundance were also statistically significant after the FDR correction..

Data are presented as median (interquartile range), unless otherwise stated. Comparisons were performed using the Wilcoxon rank sum test.
The false discovery rate (FDR) was used to adjust p-values for multiple testing and crude p-values <FDR p-values are indicated by “#”. The
p-values <0.1 are reported and p-values <0.05 are indicated in bold. ¶: restricted to Caucasian, vaginally delivered, breastfed infants not
exposed to maternal antibiotics during birth; +: comparison of Lactobacillus was the primary hypothesis..

Adjustment for covariates in multi-variable regression showed the association between prenatal maternal
asthma and gut lactobacilli in offspring to be quite robust (table 5). Independent of maternal atopy status
and pre-pregnancy weight, birth mode, intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis, breastfeeding status and sex,
infants exposed to maternal asthma during pregnancy were one-third as likely to have Lactobacillus
abundance in the highest tertile at 3–4 months of age. Statistical significance was confirmed in male (aOR,
0.26, 95% CI 0.07–0.89), but not female infants (aOR, 0.48, 95% CI 0.17–1.32). Regression models to
predict
tertile Lactobacillus abundance in infants as the outcome, showed no statistical
associations with prenatal asthma status (data not shown). Only 2% of Caucasian infants received
probiotic products; their exclusion from analyses did not change any of the findings..

the species level (figure 1), an unclassified
Finally, using the LEfSe method to test differences at
Lactobacillus species was found to be less abundant in male Caucasian infants born to mothers with atopic
asthma (LDA score 2.93, p<0.05). Unclassified Megasphera species (LDA score 3.34, p=0.003) were
comparatively less abundant and Bacteroides fragilis (LDA 3.29, p=0.02) were more abundant in female
Caucasian infants born to mothers with atopic asthma..

Data are presented as median (interquartile range), unless otherwise stated. Comparisons were performed using the Wilcoxon rank sum test.
The false discovery rate (FDR) was used to adjust p-values for multiple testing and crude p-values <FDR p-values are indicated with “#”. The
p-values <0.1 are reported and p-values <0.05 are indicated in bold. ¶: restricted to Caucasian infants; +: comparison of Lactobacillus was the
primary hypothesis..

TABLE 5 Likelihood of highest tertile Lactobacillus abundance in the infant gut at 3–4 months of age according to maternal
prenatal asthma, all children and sex-specific#.

they were male and of Caucasian ethnicity ( p=0.02). Moreover, the reduction in Lactobacillus species
abundance was most apparent if Caucasian mothers with asthma had pre-pregnancy overweight or a
history of food or environmental allergies. While no prior evidence exists for maternal prenatal asthma,
these findings are compatible with the reduced Lactobacillales abundance observed in the meconium of
newborns of mothers with eczema, and lower faecal colonisation with Lactobacillus species in infants of
atopic parents  In our study, male infants born to mothers with prenatal asthma were one-third
(aOR 0.26, 95% CI: 0.07–0.89) as likely to be colonised with high levels of lactobacilli, independent of
maternal overweight or atopy status, birth mode or infant diet. These associations were not present in
female offspring..

but not
suggests differential sensitivity of male gut microbiota to environmental
perturbations found that the response of the
male placenta to maternal asthma exacerbations was minimal compared to that of the female placenta,
with few changes to pro-inflammatory gene expression and 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity in
the placenta. This reduced response of the placenta heightened the risk for intrauterine growth restriction
in male newborns. Noteworthy in our study is that no other significant changes to gut microbial
composition were found for male infants born to asthmatic mothers, and Lactobacillus differences survived
multiple correction. In alignment with evidence for prenatal asthma programming effects on infant
growth, and the link between infant growth and gut microbial composition and atopic dermatitis 
our results hint at possible sexually dimorphic effects of prenatal asthma on infant gut microbiota..

lactate-producing
in early infancy 
As persistent residents of
lactobacilli are less abundant in the gut of
infants who develop atopic disease by age 5 
Lactobacillus species are documented to elevate growth and immune factors in breast milk and
anti-inflammatory cytokine levels in cord blood, when administered prenatally to the mother  and
postnatally, lactobacilli probiotics promote weight gain in infants 
less than 2500 g to be more common following a mid-pregnancy vaginal
observed birthweights of
found in
microbiota dominated by non-lactobacilli versus lactobacilli microbes. Further,
amniotic fluid are capable of modulating expression of toll-like receptor genes in the fetal gut  In our
study, the reduction in Lactobacillus abundance was most apparent among infants whose mothers had
asthma and overweight or a history of allergies. Indeed, risk for atopic sensitisation at age 5 is reportedly
elevated, with lower Lactobacillus colonisation by the age of 2 months in infants born to atopic parents 
Other high-risk cohort studies have found discordant faecal microbial biomarkers for atopic disease, such as.

lower abundance of Bacteroidetes or Ruminococcaceae, or higher abundance of the Clostridium cluster, but
these observations were evident either at a much younger or older infant age; furthermore, sex-specific
findings were not reported in these studies .

Maternal overweight during pregnancy has been linked to a higher risk of asthma and other atopic
diseases in offspring  In our study infants, maternal asthma comorbidity with this added risk for
offspring also yielded a reduction in the abundance of faecal Megasphaera in female infants and an
elevation in the abundance of Bacteroidaceae. The latter remained statistically significant after adjustment
for the FDR; both species were identified as statistically more abundant by the LEfSe method. Both
Megasphaera and Bacteroidaceae microbes produce propionate, but under opposing conditions. The
Megasphaera species utilise lactate as a substrate to produce propionate  whereas Bacteroides species
produce propionate when lactate levels are low  Propionate is absorbed by the host for liver
gluconeogenesis, possesses anti-inflammatory and satiety properties  and protects against the
development of allergic asthma in a murine model .

Lactobacillus bacteria are available to the newborn during vaginal delivery and breastfeeding, and are
sensitive to antibiotic treatment  Caesarean delivery and formula feeding have the potential to
diminish maternal transfer of lactobacilli and other microbes to the infant  Yet, the reduction in
Lactobacillus abundance was also evident in male infants who were breastfed following vaginal delivery
without maternal antibiotics, although statistical significance was lost after the reduction in sample size.
Under the same circumstances, an enrichment of Bacteroidaceae and depletion of Enterobactericeae was
detected in female microbiota following maternal prenatal asthma. Of interest, in the same cohort of
infants, we found that a lower ratio of the faecal abundance of Enterobactericeae to Bacteroidaceae
protected against food sensitisation  Hence, our findings suggest a programming role for maternal
asthma in shaping early gut colonisation, which cannot be attributed to caesarean delivery, antibiotic use
or formula feeding, and which differs by sex and might confer less immediate risk for allergy in female
infants .

CHILD Study Investigators: SS Anand, McMaster University; MB Azad, University of Manitoba; AB Becker, University
of Manitoba; AD Befus, University of Alberta; M Brauer, University of British Columbia; JR Brook, University of
Toronto; E Chen, Northwestern University, Chicago; MM Cyr, McMaster University; D Daley, University of British
Columbia; SD Dell, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto; JA Denburg, McMaster University;
QL Duan, Queen’s University; T Eiwegger, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto; H Grasemann,
The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto; K HayGlass, University of Manitoba; RG Hegele, The
Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto; DL Holness, University of Toronto; P Hystad, Oregon State
University; M Kobor, University of British Columbia; TR Kollmann, University of British Columbia; AL Kozyrskyj,
University of Alberta; C Laprise, Université du Québec à Chicoutimi; WYW Lou, University of Toronto; J Macri,
McMaster University; PJ Mandhane, University of Alberta; G Miller, Northwestern University, Chicago; TJ Moraes, The
Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto; P Paré, University of British Columbia; C Ramsey, University of