24_PARAGRAPHS

In studies on urinary microbiomes, the degree of concentration 
of  bacteria  habiting  in  urinary  systems  may  vary  according  to 
the sex, the method of urine collection, and the technique used 
to  study  UM.  In  general,  Lactobacillus  and  Streptococcus  are 
the  most  frequently  observed  species  and  many  studies  have 
been performed on them. Both microorganisms are lactic acid 
bacteria and have protective roles against pathogens colonized 
in the urogenital region.Other less frequently found bacterial 
strains are Alloscardovia, Burkholderia, Jonquetella, Klebsiella, 
Saccharofermentans,  Rhodanobacter  and  Veillonella.  It  has 
been reported that the urine collection method (midstream urine 
specimen,  first  voided  urine  specimen,  suprapubic  aspiration, 
transurethral  catheterization)  and  the  technique  to  identify  the 
UM  are  the  factors  that  could  lead  to  formation  of  different 
UM profiles. UM reported in healthy women is summarized in 
Table 1..

Lactobacillus, Gardnerella, 
Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, 
Enterococcus, Bifidobacterium, 
Atopobium, Enterobacteriaceae.

Lactobacillus, Gardnerella, 
Corynebacterium, 
Enterobacteriaceae, Anaerococcus, 
Bifidobacterium, Streptococcus, 
Staphylococcus, Sneathia, 
Peptoniphilus, Atopobium, 
Rhodanobacter, Trueperella, 
Alloscardovia, Veillonella.

Lactobacillus, Prevotella, 
Gardnerella, Peptoniphilus, 
Dialister, Finegoldia, 
Anaerococcus, Allisonella, 
Streptococcus, Staphylococcus.

When vaginal flora is examined, it is known that microorgan-
isms of Lactobacillus spp. are dominant bacteria and form UM 
which demonstrates antimicrobial activity. Inadequate treatment 
of  genitourinary  infections  and  recurrence  lead  to  the  shift  of 
Lactobacillus  dominancy  in  the  normal  flora  to  the  coliform 
uropathogens..

Since  the  vaginal  microflora  is  intended  to  be  corrected,  pro-
biotics  that  prevent  and  treat  genitourinary  infections  should 
contain Lactobacillus species. The mechanism of action of pro-
biotics may involve acidification of the mucosal surface, inhibi-
tion of adhesion of pathogens, production of substances such as 
vitamins and immunomodulators, and synergistic activity with 
the host’s immune system..

Some  Lactobacillus  species  produce  hydrogen  peroxide  and 
biosurfactants that acidify the vaginal mucosa. These properties 
as  well  as  their  microbiomimetic  regulatory  effects  have  been 
demonstrated. All  these  properties  make  Lactobacillus  the 
preferred  probiotic  agent  for  the  prophylaxis  and  treatment  of 
urogynecologic infections..

Lactobacilli  can  prevent  the  adherence,  growth  and  coloniza-
tion of uropathogenic bacteria.It has been shown that healthy 
microbial  populations  of  Lactobacillus  species  have  a  strong 
inhibitory effect on E. coliInfections treated using antibiotics 
reduce drug abuse, leading to drug resistance and render the nat-
ural barrier of the urinary system vulnerable to infections..

Stewardson et al.compared ciprofloxacin and nitrofurantoin 
treatments in their study and found that the ciprofloxacin group 
had a significant effect on intestinal microbiome which mostly 
contain  healthy  Lactobacillus  spp.  In  the  group  of  nitrofuran-
toin, microbiota structure demonstrated relatively lower degree 
of variations..

In their study, Zucotti et al.stated that probiotics could be a 
good alternative to antibiotic therapy because of their ability to 
bind  to  uroepithelial  cells  and  inhibit  pathogenic  growth,  and 
biosurfactant  secretion.  The  same  investigators  have  empha-
sized that oral Lactobacillus therapy can colonize these bacteria 
in the urinary tract following intestinal colonization. .

The  idea  of  oral  probiotic  application  is  based  on  the  knowl-
edge  that  pathogens  that  cause  most  of  the  urogenital  infec-
tions progress from the rectum to the perineal region and then 
to  the  vagina  and  the  mesentery.  If  pathogenic  bacteria  can 
achieve this, then why Lactobacillus, an important component 
of  vaginal  colonization,  can  not  do  it?  Clinical  studies  have 
demonstrated  that  oral  administration  of  Lactobacillus  can 
demonstrate  its  effects  after  reaching  the  vagina. In  these 
studies, probiotic capsules containing L. rhamnosus and L. fer-
mentes were administered orally at a dose of 109 CFU once or 
twice daily. In these studies the authors reported that probiotic 
capsules administered orally may regulate the vaginal flora and 
may be effective on recurrent UTIs. It has also been emphasized 
that oral probiotics may be more comfortable for patients than 
for  vaginal  administration,  and  that  patient  compliance  with 
treatment may be better..

Prevention of UTIs in women
A  meta-analysis  on  the  application  of  Lactobacillus  was  pub-
lished.A  total  of  294  patients  from  5  published  studies  were 
evaluated  and  as  a  result  vaginally  administered  Lactobacillus .

probiotic chain was shown to be safe and effective in preventing 
recurrent UTIs in adult women (Table 3). In the analysis, it was 
stated that the ovules containing combinations of L.crispatus CTV-
05 or  L. rhamnosus GR-1 and  L.fermentum B-54  were the most 
effective methods and that higher number of randomized clinical 
trials were needed for the evaluation of oral probiotic treatments..

Side  effects  due  to  Lactobacillus  prophylaxis  were  investi-
gated  in  7  of  the  studied  studies,  and  any  side  effects  were 
not observed in 4 of them and in the remaining 3 studies mild 
headache,  and  increased  appetite  or  fever  was  observed.  In 
conclusion, they found evidence that Lactobacillus species (par-
ticularly L. rhamnosus GR-1 and L. reuteri) may be useful in the 
prevention and treatment of recurrent UTIs. It is also stated that 
additional studies are needed to clearly define the optimal dose 
and duration of application..

Recently,  two  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,  randomized 
clinical  trials  investigating  the  effects  of  probiotics  in  inhibit-
ing  recurrent  UTIs  have  been  published. In  a  double-blind 
study, Beerepoot et al.demonstrated that supplementation with 
480  mg  L.  rhamnosus  GR-1  and  L.  reuteri  RC-14  significantly 
though incompletely decreased the mean number of recurrences 
in  patients  with  uncomplicated  UTI  relative  to  the  control.  In 
addition,  antibiotic  resistance  was  significantly  reduced  in  the 
probiotic  group  compared  to  the  control  group.  In  a  recent 
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2 study, Stapleton et al.
investigated 100 premenopausal women who had undergone cys-
titis at least once within the last 12 months . These patients were 
divided into two groups and for 10 weeks following an episode 
of cystitis placebo treatment was given to 48 patients, and other 
48  patients  received  intravaginal  probiotics  (Lactin-V)  contain-
ing  Lactobacillus  crispatus    The  results  of  this 
study showed that the incidence of recurrent UTIs in patients who 
received  intravaginal  Lactobacillus  treatment  decreased  signifi-
cantly compared to the placebo group. .

Recurrence rate: 29% in UTI 
patients receiving antimicrobial 
treatment 
Recurrence rate was observed 
to be 21% in patients who 
received vaginal ovules 
containing Lactobacillus 
spp. following antimicrobial 
treatment.

Recurrence rate was 73% in 
25 patients who received once 
weekly doses of vaginal ovules 
containing L. rhamnosus 
GR-1 ve L.reuteri B-54; 
79% decrease was observed 
in recurrence rates in 30 
patients who received once 
weekly doses of intravaginal 
lactobacillus growth factor .

Vaginal, >1.6x109 
CFU/L. rhamnosus 
GR-1 and 
L.fermentum B-54.

Lactobacillus 
rhamnosus GR-1 
ve Lactobacillus 
reuteri B-54.

Vajinal, 1x109 
CFU/L. rhamnosus 
GR-1 ve 
L.fermentum B-54.

Lactobacillus 
drink, and fruit 
juice.

Vaginal, 108 CFUs/
mL L. crispatus .

Though  sufficient  number  of  studies  on  the  efficacy  of  probiotic 
applications containing especially Lactobacillus spp. in UTIs devel-
oped as a result of changes in the balance of vaginal flora in sexu-
ally active women have been reported in the literature, studies with 
postmenopausal women have not seem to be at an adequate level..

In  UTI  use  of  mono-,  and  combination  treatments  with  probiot-
ics  has  been  published  (Table  3).  These  combinations  have  been 
applied with different microorganism strains and different routes of 
administration (vaginal, oral) and effective results have been report-
ed.administered 
a combination of 120 mg cranberry, 109/CFU L. rhamnosus SGL 06 
and 75 mg vitamin C for 3 months in female patients with recurrent 
UTI. In the 3rd and 6th month controls, the response rates to treat-
ment were 72.2% and 61.1%, respectively. Researchers noted that 
the combination was well tolerated and effective. 