It is worth noting that the terms microbiota and micro-
biome are frequently used interchangeably and this also 
applies  here.  Strictly  speaking,  however,  microbiota  is 
defined as the microbial taxa associated with complex organ-
isms such as humans, whereas microbiome is the catalogue 
of these microbes and their genes [5]. The totality of data 
suggests great promise for use of pre- and probiotics in pro-
moting general health and treating human diseases.
Dietary prebiotics have been defined as “a selectively fer-
mented ingredient that results in specific changes in the 
composition and/or activity of the gastrointestinal micro-
biota, thus conferring benefit(s) upon host health” [6]. This 
definition has been subjected to debate as it focuses largely 
around the need for selective metabolism. An alternative 
definition which includes the mechanism of action has been 
established recently in a consensus statement [7]. The expert 
panel revised the definition of a prebiotic as “a substrate 
that is selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring 
Several studies have demonstrated modulation of colonic 
microbiota by prebiotic inulin or inulin-type fructans. Real-
time  polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR)  identification  of 
selected bacterial species in the feces of human volunteers 
after inulin ingestion showed that the prevalence of Fae-
calibacterium prausnitzii and two Bifidobacterium species, 
B. adolescentis and B. bifidum, increased significantly [13]. 
In a placebo-controlled study, dietary inulin-type fructans 
increased the relative abundance of Bifidobacterium spp. and 
F. prausnitzii in obese women [14]. In healthy adults with 
mild constipation, inulin-type fructans increased the relative 
abundance of Anaerostipes, Bilophila and Bifidobacterium 
in feces, and reduced the abundance of Bilophila [15]. Dif-
ferences in selectivity for the fermentation of several car-
bohydrate substrates (lactulose, galacto-oligosaccharides, 
sugar beet pectin and apple fiber) were found between the 
Fig. 1   Fermentation and gut 
microbiota. The figure shows 
the principle sources of nutri-
tion entering the human colon 
at the top and the principle 
metabolic outputs at the bottom. 
Arrows indicate known cross-
feeding relationships between 
the principle microbial groups 
present. Metabolites in green 
boxes are believed to be health-
positive while those in red 
boxes are potentially harmful. 
Gaseous products are in orange 
boxes and the most signifi-
cant intermediate products of 
metabolism are in blue
1 3European Journal of Nutrition (2018) 57 (Suppl 1):S1–S14 
Figure 2 summarizes the effects of prebiotics on human 
health. Several studies have examined the effect of prebiot-
ics on allergic reactions and infections in infancy. A pla-
cebo-controlled randomized trial of infants with a parental 
history of atopy showed that formula milk supplemented 
with a prebiotic mixture of galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS) 
and long chain inulin significantly reduced the incidence 
of atopic dermatitis. Prebiotic supplements were associated 
with a significantly increased number of fecal bifidobacteria, 
but with no significant change in lactobacilli numbers [17]. 
In this same cohort of infants, the prebiotic supplemented 
milk significantly reduced the incidence of infectious epi-
sodes  during  the  first  6  months  of  life  [18].  In  a  2-year 
follow-up study of this cohort, infants receiving prebiotic 
supplementation  had  a  significantly  lower  incidence  of 
allergic manifestations [19]. At 5-year follow-up, infants 
in the prebiotic supplementation group had a significantly 
lower incidence of any allergic manifestation and atopic 
dermatitis compared to the placebo group [20]. The pro-
posed mechanism for this long-lasting effect of prebiotics is 
immune modulation mediated through changes in the intes-
tinal microbiota [19]. In a three-group randomized interven-
tion study, infants fed prebiotic GOS+inulin supplemented 
milk had comparable numbers of fecal bifidobacteria and 
lactobacilli to infants who were breast fed, whereas infants 
A  meta-analysis  of  26  randomized  controlled  trials 
(RCTs) involving 831 healthy adults showed that dietary 
prebiotic  supplementation  significantly  increased  self-
reported feelings of satiety compared with placebo [22]. 
Healthy adults fed an oligofructose-enriched inulin diet 
experienced lowered hunger and increased satiety rates com-
pared with the placebo, maltodextrin. The increased feeling 
of satiety was accompanied by an increase in plasma gut 
peptide concentrations of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) 
and peptide YY in prebiotic supplemented subjects, which 
may have contributed to the change in appetite [23], suggest-
ing a potential for use in treating obesity. Similarly, in obese 
or overweight children, an oligofructose-enriched inulin diet 
significantly increased satiety compared with maltodextrin. 
Prebiotic supplementation led to a significant reduction in 
energy intake in older (aged 11–12 years), but not younger 
(aged 7–10 years) children [24] suggesting that prebiotic 
supplementation can potentially help to regulate energy 
intake in obese children.
Prebiotics  have  been  used  in  several  studies  to  treat 
constipation. A meta-analysis of RCTs involving 252 sub-
jects (experimental group: n = 144, control group: n = 108) 
Fig. 2   Effect of prebiotics 
on gut function and health. 
The figure indicates likely 
mechanism of prebiotic action 
in the gut. In many cases the 
suggested mechanisms are 
speculative at the present time. 
Physiological functions are in 
purple and health outcomes 
are in green. Abbreviations: 
FFAR2/GPR43, free fatty acid 
receptor 2; FFAR3/GPR41 free 
fatty acid receptor 3; GLP-1, 
glucagon-like peptide 1; GLP-2, 
glucagon-like peptide 2; IFN-γ, 
interferon gamma; IL-1β, inter-
leukin 1 beta; IL-6, interleukin 
6; IL-10, interleukin 10; LPS, 
lipopolysaccharide; NK, natural 
killer cells; PYY, peptide YY; 
Th, T helper cells; TGF-β, 
transforming growth factor beta; 
Tr, T regulatory cells; ZO-1 
zona occuldens protein 1
Additional described effects of prebiotics include reduc-
ing  toxins  produced  from  protein  metabolism  in  urine 
(p-cresol and ammonia) [28] and serum (p-cresyl sulphate) 
[29], and increasing calcium absorption in adolescents [30, 
31]. Prebiotics may also exert beneficial effects on host 
physiology which are independent of the microbiota as dem-
onstrated by in vitro experiments for GOS. These included 
modulation  of  goblet  cells  to  enhance  mucosal  barrier 
function [32], a direct protective effect on intestinal barrier 
function [33], and inhibiting adherence of enteropathogenic 
Escherichia coli to Caco-2 enterocyte and Hep-2 epithelial 
cells [34].
The systemic effect of microbiota is mediated by micro-
bial metabolites such as short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), 
and the gases hydrogen sulfide, ammonia, hydrogen, meth-
ane, carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide [37, 38]. SCFAs, 
which comprise mainly acetate, propionate and butyrate, 
are produced under anaerobic conditions in the large intes-
tine by fermentation of dietary fibers [37]. SCFAs activate 
The effects of butyrate on the human colonic mucosa 
were examined following administration of butyrate enemas 
at physiologically relevant concentrations in healthy volun-
teers. Transcription analysis of microbiome revealed that 
butyrate induced differential expression of multiple genes 
involved in fatty acid oxidation, electron transport chain and 
oxidative stress pathways [43]. In addition, butyrate led to 
dose-dependent decreases in visceral sensitivity [44]. How-
ever, butyrate enemas administered to patients with UC in 
clinical remission had relatively minor effects on inflamma-
tory and oxidative stress parameters, although the selection 
of patients with chronically mild levels of inflammation and 
oxidative stress may have limited the scope of this study 
[45].
Protection against microbial invasion is provided by the 
intestinal barrier [46]. The intestinal barrier has multiple 
lines of defense including commensal bacteria, which com-
petitively inhibit the colonization of pathogenic bacteria and 
the production of metabolically protective compounds such 
as butyrate [46]. Impaired intestinal barrier function may 
result in a local or systemic immune response, mast cell 
degranulation, neuroinflammation and afferent vagus nerve 
activation [46]. In addition, commensal bacterial species 
such as Lactobacillus plantarum regulate intestinal epithelial 
integrity by stimulation of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) in the 
gut epithelium [47]. In one study, extensive transcriptome 
analysis following consumption of three probiotic strains, 
Lactobacillus acidophilus, L. casei, and L. rhamnosus, by 
healthy volunteers showed that each species induced differ-
ential gene expression in networks involved in regulation of 
major basal pathways in the small intestinal mucosa, which 
resembled those induced by specific bioactive molecules and 
drugs [48]. The potential of probiotic bacteria to improve 
intestinal barrier function is discussed extensively in a recent 
review [49].
Investigation of intestinal barrier function and intesti-
nal permeability can be done by using a so-called Ussing 
chamber, an ex vivo method that uses intestinal specimens. 
The multi-sugar test is a non-invasive method that meas-
ures urinary excretion of ingested sugars as a measure of 
gut permeability [50,  51]. Indicators for gastroduodenal 
and small intestinal permeability are sucrose excretion and 
1 3European Journal of Nutrition (2018) 57 (Suppl 1):S1–S14 
Patients with post-infectious IBS have reduced mucosal 
and fecal microbial diversity compared with healthy con-
trols. In addition, the intestinal microbiota of post-infectious 
IBS patients was shown to be different from that of general 
IBS patients [52]. Differences between post-infectious IBS 
patients and healthy controls were also found with respect 
to release of immunoregulatory cytokines (IL-13, IL-10 
and IL-1β) following ex vivo stimulation of colonic biop-
sies with selected species of anaerobic commensal bacteria. 
These results are consistent with an altered immune response 
against  commensal  gut  microbes  in  post-infectious  IBS 
patients [53].
Therapeutic alteration of intestinal microbiota in condi-
tions such as IBS may be achieved by ingestion of probiotics 
and prebiotics to increase the number of commensal bac-
teria within the gut, antibiotics which deplete pathogenic 
bacteria, and fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) which 
introduces a healthy, diverse microbiota into the gut [35]. A 
meta-analysis of FMT reported that the method was highly 
effective for treating recurrent Clostridium difficile infec-
tion [54] and an expert consensus panel has recommended 
indications, technical procedures and clinical trial details 
of FMT for treating various conditions [55]. The panel also 
considered that, at the present time, FMT should be per-
formed only in research settings for treatment of IBD, IBS 
and metabolic syndrome [55]. Further research is needed to 
establish the role of FMT for treating these disorders.
LifeLines is a large prospective cohort study in The Neth-
erlands that includes more than 165,000 individuals, rep-
resenting three generations, with a proposed duration of 
30 years. The study collects extensive data on participants 
including demographic, biological and phenotypic infor-
mation  including  genetic,  epigenetic  and  ‘omics’  data 
(metabolomics, transcriptomics, proteomics), with a wide 
range of biomaterials stored in a biobank. Subjects are 
required to complete a questionnaire each year, and several 
biomarkers are measured every 5 years [56]. LifeLines 
Deep is a cohort of 1500 individuals within LifeLines for 
whom multiple layers of omics information have been gen-
erated including both 16S and whole genome metagen-
omic sequence data [57]. At the time of the symposium, 
full metagenomic sequence data was available from ~ 1600 
population-based  individuals  including  approximately 
1100 of the LifeLines DEEP population [57] and ~ 500 
from the Functional Genomics Project [58, 59]. In addi-
tion, two disease focused cohorts are also available includ-
ing 380 patients with IBD and 400 patients suffering from 
IBS [57, 60–63].
Genetic analysis of the human gut microbiota is com-
monly performed by high-throughput metagenomic sequenc-
ing  and  taxonomic  profiling  following  analysis  of  16S 
ribosomal RNA gene sequences [64]. Full metagenomic 
sequencing of isolates enables not only taxonomic profil-
ing, but also can gain insight at the strain level, and into 
functional parameters such as metabolic pathways and other 
biological processes, virulence factors, and antibiotic resist-
ance. However, there is still a limited understanding of indi-
vidual factors that shape the microbiota on individual level.
It is known that the overall diversity of the human gut 
microbiota changes throughout life, increasing steadily from 
birth until around 12 years of age, remaining relatively stable 
throughout adulthood, and then declining in later years [65]. 
In adults, 60–70% of the gut microbiome is stable, with the 
degree of stability varying between phyla [66]. Infections, 
lifestyle and dietary changes cause microbiome instability, 
producing major perturbations of the gut microbiome as 
nicely shown in a high-resolution longitudinal study in two 
individuals [67]. To study the role of the gut microbiome in 
health and disease, the scientific world first must address the 
question: what is a “healthy” microbiome and which factors 
influence the gut microbiome composition. For addressing 
this question and defining the intrinsic and extrinsic factors 
that influence the gut microbiome, Zhernakova et al analyzed 
the LifeLines Deep cohort utilizing metagenomic shotgun 
sequencing of the gut microbiome of 1135 participants and 
more than 200 phenotypic features. This study highlighted a 
relationship between the microbiome and multiple extrinsic 
and host factors, comprising 60 dietary factors, 31 intrinsic 
factors, 19 drug categories, 12 diseases, and 4 smoking cat-
egories. Together, these factors accounted for 18.7% of the 
observed inter-individual variation in the gut microbiome 
with diet being a major modulator of gut microbiome vari-
ation [63].
Multiple  intrinsic  factors  that  were  associated  with 
inter-individual variation in the gut microbiome included 
chromogranin A, a member of the granin family of neu-
roendocrine secretory proteins, stool frequency and Bristol 
classification of stool type but interestingly also triglycer-
ide concentrations. Age and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) 
concentration were positively correlated with gut microbi-
ome inter-individual variation [63]. In another study, our 
group showed by performing a Mendelian Randomization 
study that the human gut microbiota is an independent fac-
tor for variation of blood lipid levels, accounting for 6% of 
triglyceride, and 4% of HDL variance. In addition, we could 
Analysis of the gut microbiome revealed that the use of 
proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) was associated with a signifi-
cant decrease in gut microbiota diversity and with signifi-
cant changes of around 20% of bacterial taxa. This adverse 
effect of PPIs on bacterial diversity was greater than for any 
other drug class, including antibiotics. PPIs depleted ben-
eficial bacteria such as the Ruminococcaceae family and 
Bifidobacterium, and increased potentially harmful bacte-
ria including Enterococcus, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus 
genera and Escherichia coli. Results suggested that PPIs 
diminished the gastric acid barrier, as species found in the 
oral microbiome of PPI users were more abundant in the gut 
than in non-users [61]. It is increasingly observed that the 
use of PPIs is associated with an increase in the incidence of 
enteric infections like Clostridium difficile and Campylobac-
ter. Given the profound effect of PPIs on the gut microbiome 
and the fact that over 11% of population in The Netherlands 
and other European countries are using PPIs on prescription 
(not including over the counter use of PPIs) implies a major 
PPI-dependent influence on the gut microbiome taxonomy 
and function on a populational scale.
The human gut microbiota contains bacteria that are ben-
eficial to the host, and bacteria with pathogenic potential, 
termed ‘pathobionts’ [69]. An important role of beneficial 
bacteria is the metabolic production of SCFAs by cross-feed-
ing (Fig. 1). Fiber-degrading bacteria include Ruminococcus 
callidus, Ruminococcus albus, Blautia obeum and Prevo-
tella spp. which produce solubilized oligosaccharides and 
polysaccharides that act as substrates for butyrate-producing 
species such as Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Eubacterium 
rectale, Roseburia spp, Eubacterium hallii and Anaerostipes 
spp [37]. Butyrate has multiple effects on the host including 
maintenance of gut barrier function by stimulating the pro-
duction of mucin, antimicrobial peptides, and tight-junction 
Gut microbiota imbalance, or dysbiosis, is considered to 
play a significant role in the pathogenesis of intestinal disor-
ders such as IBD and IBS, and of extra-intestinal disorders 
including allergies, asthma, type 1 diabetes, cardiovascular 
disease, metabolic syndrome, and obesity [72]. Chemother-
apy-induced mucositis which occurs in the mouth and gut 
results from damage to the mucosal barrier and can result 
in bacteremia, which is the abnormal presence of bacterial 
in blood. It has been suggested that commensal intestinal 
bacteria may play a key role in amelioration of inflamma-
tion and bacteremia [51]. In a rat model of chemotherapy-
induced mucositis, the number and diversity of the fecal 
microbiota was substantially decreased, including anaerobes 
and Streptococci, although there was a relative increase of 
Bacteroides [73]. Supporting the beneficial anaerobic micro-
biota during chemotherapy may, therefore, improve treat-
ment and quality of life for cancer patients.
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is a Gram-negative obligate 
anaerobe which is difficult to culture, and taxonomically is in 
the Clostridia order of Firmicutes (Fig. 3). It is present in the 
gut of all healthy humans and may act as a biomarker of a 
healthy gut [74]. Dysbiosis associated with CD is character-
ized by reduced abundance of F. prausnitzii [75], with dysbi-
otic ileal CD patients having a significantly lower abundance 
of F. prausnitzii and a concomitantly increased abundance of 
E. coli [76]. Mechanistically, animal experiments provide an 
explanation for the increased abundance of E. coli in IBD as 
Fig. 3   A  picture  of  the  Gram-stained  cells  of  Faecalibacterium 
prausnitzii  growing  in  a  colony  inside  agar  seen  as  a  big  ball  at  the 
left lower corner, chains of cells grow away from this colony [80]. A 
typical single cell has the size of 3–5 µm in length and 1 µm in diam-
eter. The bar represents 10 µm (Photo, M. Sadaghian Sadabad)
1 3European Journal of Nutrition (2018) 57 (Suppl 1):S1–S14 
nitrate, which was generated as a byproduct of the inflamma-
tory host response, selectively enhanced growth of E. coli in 
the large intestine of mice [77]. Moreover, F. prausnitzii pro-
duces a 15 kDa anti-inflammatory protein that inhibits the 
NF-κB pathway in intestinal epithelial cells and was shown 
to prevent colitis in a mouse model [78].
F. prausnitzii uses riboflavin (vitamin B2) as a media-
tor for extracellular electron transfer, as demonstrated in a 
microbial fuel cell system [79]. A Human oxygen-Bacteria 
anaerobic (HoxBan) co-culture system has been developed 
in which F. prausnitzii was cultured with adherent Caco-2 
cells. Caco-2 cells promoted the growth and metabolism of 
the anaerobic F. prausnitzii, while genes involved in inflam-
mation and oxidative stress in Caco-2 cells were suppressed 
by F. prausnitzii [80].
Anti-oxidants  including  riboflavin  and  vitamin  C  are 
being investigated as new targets for intervention for the 
treatment of dysbiosis. A first pilot open-label study with 
100 mg/day riboflavin showed indeed an increase in fae-
calibacteria and a reduction in E. coli in most participants 
[81]. The double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled 
Ribogut  trial  is  currently  examining  the  effect  of  50  or 
100 mg/day riboflavin administered to healthy volunteers 
for 14 days on the gut microbiota composition with results 
to be expected in 2018.
The development of the perinatal gut microbiota is influ-
enced by multiple factors including gestational age, mode 
of delivery, maternal microbiota, infant feeding method, 
genetics, and environmental factors such as the choice of 
food.  Microbial  diversity  increases  dramatically  during 
first months of infancy (Fig. 4). At birth, the microbiota is 
aerobic, with low numbers and low diversity, with the most 
common bacteria facultative anaerobes and members of the 
Enterobacteriaceae phylum [82]. Within a few days, the gut 
environment becomes anaerobic resulting in growth of bac-
teria such as Bifidobacterium [82], which is the dominant 
bacterium genus in the infant gut in the first months of life. 
With the introduction of solid food, a more adult-like micro-
biome starts to develop as of 6 months of life, dominated by 
Firmicutes and Bacteriodetes [82].
Factors  promoting  a  healthy  microbiota  in  neonates 
include a vaginal delivery, delivery at term, breast feeding, 
and exposure to a variety of microorganisms. In contrast, a 
Caesarean section, premature delivery, formula milk, and 
exposure to antibiotics have a negative impact on the diver-
sity and composition of microbiota in infants [25, 83–85].
Preterm infants show delayed colonization of the gut 
microbiota with Bifidobacterium, and have a high preva-
lence of Enterobacteriaceae, Staphylococcus, and Enterococ-
caceae [25]. Vaginally delivered neonates have an increased 
prevalence of maternal microbiota derived from the vagina 
and intestine (e.g. Lactobacillus, Prevotella and Sneathia) 
compared with neonates delivered by Caesarean section. 
Caesarean section delivered infants have a relatively high 
prevalence of skin bacteria such as Staphylococcus, Propi-
onibacterium and Corynebacterium compared to the ones 
that are vaginally delivered [25,  84]. Maternal antibiotic 
treatment that results in reduced utilization of human milk 
and prolonged hospitalization normally causes an increased 
prevalence of Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Enterobacteriaceae 
(E. coli and Klebsiella spp.), Staphylococcus, Propionibac-
terium and Corynebacterium [25]. Feeding formula milk 
is associated with increased bacterial diversity, increased 
prevalence of Bacteroides fragilis, Clostridium difficile, and 
E. coli, and a decreased prevalence of bifidobacteria [84].
Fig. 4   Development  of  the  gut  microbiome  during  infancy.  The 
development  of  the  infant  microbiome  is  dependent  on  various  fac-
tors,  such  as  infant  feeding  method,  diet  and  the  environment.  Also, 
the  mode  of  delivery  (either  vaginal  or  by  cesarean  section)  affects 
As previously mentioned, dysbiosis in infancy is asso-
ciated with an increased risk for immunological diseases 
such as asthma, allergic rhinitis, type 1 diabetes and celiac 
disease in addition to metabolic diseases, e.g. obesity and 
type 2 diabetes [84, 85].
Pregnancy is shown to alter the maternal gut micro-
biota. In humans, dramatic changes in the gut microbiota 
during pregnancy were described from the first to third tri-
mesters with an overall increase in the relative abundance 
of Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria, and with a reduced 
richness with a decreased abundance of Firmicutes and 
Bacteroidetes [86]. In C57BL/6 mice, pregnancy produced 
significant increases in the relative abundance of genera 
including  Akkermansia,  Bacteroides,  Bifidobacterium, 
and Clostridium, in comparison to non-pregnant females. 
Changes in the microbiota began at the onset of pregnancy 
[87]. Pregnant Balb/c mice showed significant increases 
in the relative abundance of Actinobacteria and Proteo-
bacteria  compared  with  non-pregnant  littermates.  The 
relative changes in gut microbiota of non-pregnant and 
pregnant mice were strain-specific suggesting that genetic 
background is an important determinant of the microbi-
ome. The physiological changes that occur in pregnancy 
produces  significant  changes  in  maternal  metabolism 
necessary for supporting a healthy pregnancy [86]. The 
mechanisms resulting in alteration of the microbiota dur-
ing pregnancy are largely unknown, but it seems likely that 
microbiome alterations during pregnancy are also impor-
tant to support changes in maternal immune status and/or 
hormonal changes [86, 88].
It has also been suggested that changes in the maternal 
microbiota during pregnancy are important for fetal health, 
since it has been shown that maternal microbiota can be 
transferred to the fetus [89]. The transfer of microbiota from 
the mother to the fetus can be observed in the meconium, 
which in contrast to the earlier beliefs is not sterile [89]. The 
microbiota of meconium has low diversity represented by 
the Firmicutes (Staphylococcus, Enterococcus, and Bacilli), 
Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria phyla, and low bacterial 
cell numbers [90]. Variation in the microbiota of meconium 
is affected by maternal diabetes status [91] and maternal 
gestational diet, with a high-fat diet producing pronounced 
changes in neonatal meconium which persisted in infant 
faces for up to 6 weeks of age [92].
Direct evidence of transfer of maternal bacteria is derived 
from experiments in mice, in which oral administration of a 
genetically-labelled Enterococcus fecium strain to pregnant 
mice, resulted in a subsequent detection in meconium [89]. 
Furthermore, experiments of microbial colonization of preg-
nant germfree mice demonstrated that maternal microbiota 
affects neonatal immune responses. Gestational coloniza-
tion had effects on the innate intestinal immune response of 
the offspring, with increased numbers of intestinal innate 
lymphoid cells (ILC3), macrophages and dendritic cells, in 
addition to an effect on intestinal gene expression including 
genes involved in pathways for sugar metabolism, epithelial 
cell division and proliferation, and mononuclear cell func-
tion [95].
It has become clear that the fetus and placenta are not 
sterile and the transfer of bacteria occurs from mother to the 
fetus during pregnancy. Therefore, the maternal microbiome 
also seems to be important for the development of the neo-
natal microbiome. This implies that pre- or probiotics use 
may open a possibility to modulate the maternal microbi-
ome during pregnancy, to optimize the development of the 
fetal microbiome. Further studies on the role of the maternal 
microbiome in development of the neonatal microbiome are 
necessary.
Preclinical studies have shown effects of the gut micro-
biota on nociceptive reflexes [99], feeding, emotional and 
social behavior [99], the stress response [99], and brain neu-
rochemistry [100, 101]. The gut microbiota is essential for 
normal social development in the mouse and is implicated 
in neurodevelopmental disorders including autism spectrum 
disorder [102–104]. Germfree mice have an exaggerated 
stress response compared with control animals. These mice 
also exhibit increased motor activity and lower anxiety-like 
behavior compared with control mice [105]. Administra-
tion of the probiotic L. rhamnosus (JB-1) to mice reduced 
1 3European Journal of Nutrition (2018) 57 (Suppl 1):S1–S14 
stress-induced  corticosterone  levels  and  anxiety-related 
behavior [101]. These data strongly highlight the importance 
of the microbiome-gut-brain axis for normal neurological 
development and function.
A  growing  number  of  placebo-controlled  RCTs  have 
investigated the effect of probiotics on mood, cognition 
and brain function in humans. In healthy women, inges-
tion of a fermented milk product supplemented with pro-
biotics containing Bifidobacterium animalis, subsp. lactis, 
Streptococcus thermophiles, and two Lactobacillus spp. 
produced significant changes in brain activity assessed by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), in response 
to an emotional faces attention task. Reduced fMRI reactiv-
ity was found in interceptive and somatosensory regions of 
the brain which control central processing of emotion and 
sensation [108]. Probiotics containing Lactobacillus helveti-
cus and Bifidobacterium longum showed beneficial psycho-
logical effects in healthy human volunteers, with significant 
improvements in several global tests including the reduction 
of global psychological symptoms, depression and anxiety 
[109]. A probiotic milk drink containing Lactobacillus casei 
Shirota ingested by healthy volunteers had no effect on the 
mood of the group overall, but improved mood in subjects 
with low baseline mood, although an unexpected finding 
was somewhat impaired performance on two memory recall 
tests [110]. Consumption of a multispecies probiotic con-
taining two Bifidobacterium spp and five Lactobacillus spp. 
A link between the gut and brain function is supported by 
additional human studies involving diseased or normal sub-
jects. Many alcohol-dependent subjects have alterations in 
their intestinal permeability and gut microbiome. Increased 
intestinal permeability in these subjects was significantly 
associated with higher scores of depression, anxiety, and 
alcohol craving following 3 weeks of abstinence [112]. A 
placebo-controlled RCT of patients with major depressive 
disorder showed that a probiotic containing two Lactobacil-
lus spp. plus Bifidobacterium bifidum produced a significant 
decrease in Beck Depression Inventory total scores, sig-
nificant decreases in serum insulin levels and serum high-
sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) concentrations in 
addition to a significant increase in plasma total glutathione 
concentrations [113]. A RCT of patients with Alzheimer’s 
disease found that ingestion of a probiotic containing three 
Lactobacillus spp. plus Bifidobacterium bifidum signifi-
cantly improved the mini-mental state examination scores, 
and produced significant changes in a range of metabolic 
parameters including plasma malondialdehyde, serum hs-
CRP and serum triglycerides [114]. Consumption of the 
prebiotic B-GOS, but not the prebiotic FOS, by healthy vol-
unteers significantly reduced the salivary cortisol awakening 
response when compared to placebo [115].
It is clear that the gut microbiota is active, not passive, in 
its relationship with its host. Microbial metabolites (such as 
SCFAs) affect gut-brain signaling. The gut microbiota has a 
regulatory role on anxiety, mood, cognition and pain which 
is exerted via the gut-brain axis. In pregnancy dramatical 
Acknowledgements  RKW is supported by a VIDI grant (016.136.308) 
from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO).
Author contributions  MHM wrote this manuscript. Individual sections 
were corrected and complemented by RJMB, RAR, RKW, HJMH, 
MF. All co-authors reviewed and approved the manuscript before 
submission.
Conflict of interest  MHM and ME are employees of DSM Nutritional 
Products,  Kaiseraugst,  Switzerland  and  as  such  no  external  funding 
was provided. HJMH received a research grand of DSM. RJMB, RAR, 
RKW, MF declare no conflict of interest.
Open Access  This article is distributed under the terms of the Crea-
tive Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (  iveco 
mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
