Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Figure 1 Numerous research ﬁelds are integrated and contribute
to our overall understanding and study of personalized health and
nutrition.
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
1AdaBoost, adaptive boosting; ADD, average Danish diet; AIC, Akaike information criterion; ANOSIM, analysis of similarities; BIC, Bayesian information criterion; Bif, Bifidobacteria;
BN, Bayesian network; CAP, canonical analysis of principal coordinates; CASINO, community and systems-level interactive optimization; DBA, decisive bacterial abundance; DGGE,
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis; FISH, ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization; HCA, hierarchical clustering analysis; HITChip, human intestinal tract chip; iAUC, incremental AUC;
JSD, Jensen-Shannon divergence; LASSO, least absolute shrinkage and selection operator; LDA, linear discriminant analysis; LEfSe, linear discriminant analysis eﬀect size; LMM,
linear mixed models; MG-RAST, metagenomic rapid annotations using subsystems technology; MRBP, blocked multi-response permutation procedure; MRPP, multi-response
permutation procedure; NMS, nonmetric multidimensional scaling ordination; NND, new Nordic diet; OPLS-DA, orthogonal projections to latent structures discriminant analysis;
P/B ratio, Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio; PAM, partitioning around medoids; PCA, principal components analysis; PCoA, principal coordinates analysis; PDP, partial dependence plot;
PERMANOVA, permutational analysis of variance; PICRUSt, phylogenetic investigation of communities by reconstruction of unobserved states; PLSDA, partial least squares
discriminant analysis; RDA, redundancy analysis; ROC, receiver operating characteristic; T-RFLP, terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism.
Microbiota composition and function (16S, qPCR,
metagenomics, RNA-Seq) of stool as well as
lumen and mucosa samples
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Comparing 2 groups in association studies.
The t-test compares the mean responses of 2 groups to
determine whether they are significantly different. This
would be appropriate when comparing the abundance of
a single taxa between 2 groups at 1 time point. The t-test
may be conducted on paired data (e.g. comparing means
within the same individuals at different time points as in a
cross-over design) or unpaired data (e.g. comparing means
between unrelated individuals as in a parallel design). This
approach assumes that the data are normally distributed
(parametric) or the sample size is “large.” The t-test does
not account for potential confounding factors. The Mann–
Whitney U (also called the Wilcoxon rank-sum) test is
a nonparametric (does not assume the data are normally
distributed) alternative to the t-test. When the spread
and shape of the 2 distributions are the same, the Mann–
Whitney U test compares the median of 2 unpaired samples
(e.g. between groups). The Wilcoxon signed-rank test is used
to determine if the median of the differences between paired
responses is different from zero (e.g. within individuals). For
example, comparing the abundance of a single taxa within
1 individual before and after a dietary intervention. When
the dependent variable is categorical (e.g. abundance above
or below the median), a G-test or chi-square (or Fisher’s
exact test) test may be used when the data are unpaired or
a McNemar’s test may be used if the data are paired. Both
Arumugam et al. (95) first introduced the concept of
“enterotypes”, clustering individuals into 3 groups according
to their dominant genera: Bacteroides, Prevotella, and Ru-
minococcus. Although enterotypes have since been shown
to exist more on a continuous scale (96), the Bacteroides
and Prevotella enterotypes have been consistently replicated
across cohorts (97). The identification of the Ruminococcus
enterotype is more dependent on clustering and modeling
approaches (97). Studies, such as Hjorth et al. (18, 45), Roager
et al. (19), Kovatcheva-Datchary et al. (21), Gu et al. (72),
and Chen et al. (9), highlight measures such as enterotype or
the Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio. Diversity and richness are
also common measures used to highlight differences between
groups (12, 13, 21–24, 39, 40, 42, 44, 48, 62, 64, 65).
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
time points or when the number of groups exceeds 2, as
in Bouhnik et al. (28), which tested 7 different types of
nondigestible carbohydrates to determine their effect on
the gut microbiota. Kruskal–Wallis is the nonparametric
equivalent of the 1-way ANOVA and has been used to
develop tools such as linear discriminant analysis effect size
(LEfSe) (99). PERMANOVA is a nonparametric alternative
to multivariate ANOVA (MANOVA) (100, 101). ANOSIM is
also used to compare multiple independent variables with a
multivariate dependent variable (101). It differs from PER-
MANOVA in that, instead of using the raw data, ANOSIM
ranks values based on their similarity/dissimilarity. This
minimizes the effects of outliers in the data, making it useful
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
Both animal and in vitro models have limitations when
it comes to drawing conclusions about human health and
nutrition as they lack the specific interactions present in
the human supraorganism. For further information, readers
are directed to additional reviews of animal (136, 137) and
in vitro (138–140) models for human nutrition research.
However, these techniques used in combination with human
clinical trials will be crucial in the development of precision
nutrition research and our understanding of the interaction
between the host and the gut microbiota.
Downloaded from   by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019
10. Sonnenburg ED, Zheng H, Joglekar P, Higginbottom SK, Firbank
SJ, Bolam DN, Sonnenburg JL. Specificity of polysaccharide use
in intestinal Bacteroides species determines diet-induced microbiota
alterations. Cell 2010;141(7):1241–52.
11. Possemiers S, Rabot S, Espín JC, Bruneau A, Philippe C,
González-Sarrías A, Heyerick A, Tomás-Barberán FA, De
Keukeleire D, Verstraete W. Eubacterium limosum activates
isoxanthohumol from hops (Humulus lupulus L.) into the potent
phytoestrogen 8-prenylnaringenin in vitro and in rat intestine. J Nutr
2008;138(7):1310–6.