The composition of the gut microbiota of an adult human
is relatively stable (Shreiner et al., 2015), but several factors can
inﬂuence it, including antibiotic treatment, long-term change
in diet, microbial infections, and lifestyle (Willing et al., 2011;
Conlon and Bird, 2015; Mathew et al., 2019; Zmora et al., 2019).
Several health conditions are linked to changes in a stable and
established gut microbiota such as Crohn’s disease (Manichanh
et al., 2006), psoriatic arthritis (Scher et al., 2015), type 1 diabetes
(de Goﬀau et al., 2013), atopic eczema (Wang et al., 2008), celiac
disease (Schippa et al., 2010), obesity (Castaner et al., 2018),
type 2 diabetes (Qin et al., 2012), and arterial stiﬀness (Menni
et al., 2018). However, further research is required to establish
direct links between these conditions and the composition of
microbial communities in the gut. Interventions, such as oral
administration of probiotics/prebiotics and fecal transplants,
have shown eﬃcacy on reducing the severity of some conditions,
such as diarrhea, acute upper respiratory tract infections, eczema,
Crohn’s disease, and ulcerative colitis (Anderson et al., 2012;
Mansﬁeld et al., 2014; Hao et al., 2015; Saez-Lara et al., 2015;
Goldenberg et al., 2017; Delzenne et al., 2019). See Figure 2 for
illustration of factors aﬀecting the gut microbiota.
FIGURE 1 | The vision for the next nutrition revolution involves microbiome-aware dietary planning and manufacturing. First, DGMH data is collected, homogenized,
and stored, with any new user data integrated as part of a cohesive compendium. Then, DGMH data are analyzed (data analytics) to identify the functional
characteristics and target microbiota, personalized to the individual and the desired phenotype. This includes data processing followed by supervised and
unsupervised learning using a user proﬁle compendium. Bioinformatic tools are used during data processing to extract meaningful information from raw
high-throughput data such as metagenomic sequence reads. Then, the recommendation system provides dietary recommendations to help achieve target
microbiota. This includes the integration of user proﬁles in a compendium along with nutrition DB proceeded by data processing then content-based and
collaborative ﬁltering. Finally, diet engineering is performed to create dietary products for the user. This includes the design of prebiotics, probiotics, synbiotics,
manufactured food, and detailed dietary planning. In practice, taste and ﬂavor of dietary products is very important to help users commit to any given diet, therefore
sensory analysis should inform all dietary engineering efforts.
TABLE 1 | Publicly available data from gut microbiota studies.
Example: Metagenomic analysis of feces samples tells us that Person A has 5 reads mapped to
bacterium Escherichia coli, while person B has 10. Can we conclude that this bacterium is more
populated in the gut of person B compared to person A? Answer: No, read counts cannot be
compared across samples.
Solutions: (I) Convert read counts to relative abundances before comparison. (II) If an optimization
problem is deﬁned using read counts, add constraint for total counts per sample.
Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) can be used (Hotelling,
to investigate the correlation between two groups
1992)
of variables
(e.g., abundances of microbiome OTUs and
metabolites). CCA ﬁnds linear transformation pairs that are
maximally correlated when applied to data while ensuring
orthogonality for diﬀerent transformation pairs. The original
CCA, however, fails for high dimensional microbiome data when
the number of variables exceeds the number of samples. This
can be addressed using regularization, giving rise to sparse CCA
methods (Witten et al., 2009). For example, a sparse CCA is
applied to investigate correlations between the gut microbiome
and metabolome features in type 1 diabetes (Kostic et al., 2015).
of features in derived PCs (Abdi et al., 2013). In one study
(Robertson et al., 2018), MFA is used for simultaneous 2D
visualization of host and microbiome features (see Morgan et al.,
2012; Raymond et al., 2016 for other examples). Exploratory
factor analysis (EFA) is used to identify unobserved latent
features called factors to explain the correlations among observed
features (Yong and Pearce, 2013). Factors that are identiﬁed
by EFA are uncorrelated to each other similar to PCs in
PCA; however, PCs are used to explain overall variance instead
of correlations. EFA has been used in a recent study to
extract four factors explaining the correlations among 25 top
taxa for studying the association of microbiome with early
childhood neurodevelopmental outcomes in 309 infants (Sordillo
et al., 2019). Conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) and structural
equation modeling (SEM) can be used to examine the extent
to which a hypothesized model of latent features and their
relationships with observed variables are supported by the
data (Schreiber et al., 2006). In a recent study, a theoretical
framework is proposed and examined using CFA to model the
inﬂuence of maternal and infant factors on the milk microbiota
(Moossavi et al., 2019). The R packages lavaan (Rosseel, 2012) and
FactoMineR (Lê et al., 2008), as well as the IBM SPSS software
(IBM Corp, 2013), are widely used for factor analysis.
Knowledge-Based Recommendation Systems
An ideal knowledge-based RS would be based on in silico
models that can correctly simulate an individual’s gut. It
requires proper characterization of the gut microbiome, human
intestinal cells, intestinal and dietary metabolite concentrations,
their interactions through metabolic pathways, and realistic
objective functions for modeling such complex dynamics. Such
a knowledge-based RS was devised in a recent study involving
28 patients with Crohn’s disease and 26 healthy individuals
(Bauer and Thiele, 2018). Researchers integrated genome-scale
metabolomic reconstructions (GENREs) of 818 microbes from
  (Noronha et al., 2018) with the individual’s
microbiome abundances after metagenomic data processing in
the R package BacArena (Bauer et al., 2017). Their in silico
simulations provide personalized metabolic supplements for
improving patient’s SCFA levels. Earlier studies have created
a metabolic model of the gut microbiome on a smaller scale
(Shoaie et al., 2015). See Magnúsdóttir and Thiele (2018) for a
comprehensive review. Despite their promise, there are several
challenges for the application of such knowledge-based RSs.
The ﬁrst challenge is the limited availability and accuracy of
GENREs for gut microbes. A recent study has identiﬁed 1,520