9_PARAGRAPHS

rates of cell turnover in germ-free animals compared with wild-type animals13. Gut bacteria
have been shown to direct the glycosylation of lumenally-exposed surface proteins of the
epithelium14. IECs have many immunological functions (Table 1): they can secrete and
respond to various cytokines and express molecules (such as major histocompatibility
molecules) that directly interact with lymphocytes. Expression and localization of pattern-
recognition receptors (e.g., Toll-like receptors; TLRs) by the epithelium is influenced by
bacterial colonization of the gut, and expression of defensins and other antimicrobial
proteins are deficient in germ-free animals (Table 1). Consistent with this notion, the Gram-
negative commensal organism Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, but not the Gram-positive
microbe, Bifidobacterium longum, induces the expression of the antimicrobial peptide,
RegIIIγ, by specialized IECs known as Paneth cells15, 16. Intriguingly, the specificity of
RegIIIγ is directed toward specific Gram-positive bacteria. It is therefore tempting to
speculate that symbiotic bacteria direct innate immune responses of the gut in an effort to
protect their environment. Collectively, these observations of developmental defects in
germ-free mice at the tissue, cellular and molecular levels suggest that ‘normal’ immune
function may be impaired in the absence of the microbiota..

Germ-free animals are more susceptible to infection by certain bacterial, viral and parasitic
pathogens. When challenged with the Gram-negative enteric pathogen Shigella flexneri,
germ-free animals showed decreased immune resistance to infection and increased mortality
compared with conventionally colonized animals17. Prior colonization with specific
commensal bacteria antagonized S. flexneri infections, whereas colonization with control
species such as E.coli did not, implying that some members of the microbiota provide
protection against intestinal bacterial pathogens18. Infection by the Gram-positive
intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes results in decreased bacterial clearance in
germ-free compared with colonized animals19.The mechanism for this increased
susceptibility has been attributed to a T cell trafficking defect in germ-free animals to the
site of Listeria infection. L-selectin and CD44 are known to be involved in homing of
lymphocytes to sites of inflammation. Listeria infected germ-free mice have decreased
accumulation of CD44+L-selectin+ T cells resulting in increased bacterial burden compared
to SPF animals20. Salmonella typhimurium is known to cause a more severe acute
gastroenteritis in germ-free animals21, however the reasons for this remain unclear.
Establishing an infection requires the initial task of colonizing the host. For intestinal
pathogens this can pose a difficult problem as all mammals are stably colonized by a
consortium of bacteria that can act as a barrier to infection (“colonization resistance”).
Recent studies suggest that inflammation induced in response to S. typhimurium changes the
composition of the microbiota and suppresses its regrowth. Moreover, S. typhimurium
exploits this deficiency in “colonization resistance” to establish infection and cause
disease22. While important for maintaining a barrier to the colonization of potentially
pathogenic organisms, it appears that the microbiota may also provide the host immune
benefits. Supporting this, germ-free animals show reduced antigen-specific systemic
immune responses to S. typhimuirum23. These studies support the idea that enteric pathogens
such as S. typhimurium may have developed strategies to counter both the immune system
and the microbiota during the infectious process..

IBD involves a shift from a regulated intestinal immune responses to one that is driven by
unrestrained immune-cell activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine production474849. The
cause of this increase in immune stimulation is of great interest, and several lines of
evidence indicate a significant role for commensal bacteria in the progression of disease 50.
Patients with IBD respond favorably to antibiotic treatment and fecal diversion, and have
greater antibody titers against indigenous bacteria than unaffected individuals51,52,53. In
addition, inflammatory lesions are more pronounced in areas of the intestine that contain the
greatest number of bacteria. The data in animal models provide further evidence for the
involvement of gut bacteria in IBD. Pre-treatment with antibiotics has been shown to
alleviate intestinal inflammation in several animal models54,55. HLA-B27-transgenic rats,
interleukin-10 (IL-10)-and IL-2-deficient mice spontaneously develop chronic colitis,
whereas germ-free animals of all backgrounds fail to develop intestinal inflammation56,57,58.
In a model of disease induced by the adoptive transfer of pathogenic T cells into
immunodeficient (Scid−/− or Rag−/−) recipient mice, colonization of animals with intestinal
pathogens such as Helicobacter hepaticus was found to exacerbate inflammation59.
Moreover, pathogenic T cells can be transmitted to healthy animals through the adoptive
transfer of T cells that are reactive against specific commensal organisms50,60. The only
organism reported to be strongly associated with Crohn's disease is adherent-invasive E.coli
(AIEC)61. However, it appears that inflammatory responses during human and experimental
IBD are directed towards certain subsets of commensal organisms with pathogenic potential
such as Helicobacter, Clostridium and Enterococcus species. Curiously, these organisms are
abundant commensals, and not typically infectious pathogenic agents. As the microbiota of
all mammals contains these potentially harmful species, known as pathobionts (commensals
with pathogenic potential), the reason why inflammation ensues only in subjects affected by
IBD is not entirely known. Genetic factors play an important role in the pathogenesis of
IBD. This is demonstrated by familial aggregation of IBD and increased concordance for
IBD in monozygotic twins. Genome wide association studies have identified genetic defects
which are highly linked to disease. Mutations in bacterial sensing (NOD2/Card15)62 and T
cell immunity (IL-23R)30 have highlighted the connection between microbes and
inflammation in IBD. Additionally, experimental systems have demonstrated the importance
of host genetics during induction of IBD. Indeed, microorganisms such as E.coli and E.
faecalis, that do not initiate disease in an immunologically competent host, do so when
introduced into genetically pre-disposed strains 63. Some have predicted that IBD, at least in
part, results from an imbalance in the normal microbiota (termed dysbiosis) without
acquisition of an infectious agent64. It remains unclear whether dysbiosis directly causes
disease or is a result of the altered intestinal environment. Future studies using animal
models whereby the microbiota can be selectively manipulated during the course of
experimental disease may begin to address this important issue..

In the early 1900s, Ilya Mechnikov was the first to propose the use of live microorganisms
to maintain bowel health and prolong life. Now, the term ‘probiotic’ is used to describe
dietary microbes that are able to confer a health benefit on the host76. As shown in Table 2,
many individual or combinations of bacterial species have been shown to ameliorate the
symptoms of IBD in humans and mouse models. Although many of these probiotic strains
decrease toxic microbial metabolic activities, more recent evidence demonstrates the
capacity of these organisms to modulate intestinal immune responses. The common feature
of almost all bacterial species used as probiotics is the ability of these organisms to control
inflammation. Bacterial species can act on several cell types (epithelial cells, dendritic cells
(DCs) and T cells), but recent evidence suggests that induction of regulatory T cells by these
organisms is crucial to limiting inflammation and disease. Treatment of colitic mice with the
probiotic cocktail, VSL#3, increased the production of IL-10 and the percentage of TGFβ-
expressing T cells77. More importantly, transfer of lamina propria mononuclear cells from
VSL#3-treated mice was able to prevent colitis in recipient mice, indicating the ability of the
VSL#3 cocktail to initiate the generation of a protective population of cells. Depletion of
TGFβ-bearing CD4+ T cells from probiotic treated mice before the transfer of lamina
propria cells abolished the protective capacity of these cells77. More recently, in a model of
pathogen-induced inflammation, treatment of mice with Bifidobacteria infantis led to a
downregulation of intestinal inflammation and increases in the number of CD4+CD25+ TReg
cells78. Adoptive transfer of the CD4+CD25+ TReg-cell population from mice fed with B.
infantis inhibited inflammation-induced activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) in recipient
mice..

The first demonstration that a single molecule made by a commensal microorganism could
shape beneficial immune responses was provided by the identification of polysaccharide A
(PSA) produced by the human symbiont Bacteroides fragilis (Figure 1). Colonization of
germ-free mice with B. fragilis or treatment with purified PSA directs the cellular and.

physical development of the immune system, including expansion and differentiation of
splenic CD4+ T cells81. The novel immunomodulatory activities of PSA during B. fragilis
colonization of germ-free mice include correcting systemic T-cell deficiencies, T-helper cell
imbalances and directing lymphoid organogenesis. The importance of B. fragilis in
maintenance of a healthy immune response was recently illustrated by the finding that
colonization by B. fragilis or treatment with purified PSA can protect from the induction of
experimental IBD66. Moreover, mice that are colonized by a mutant form of this
microorganism that lacks expression of PSA (B. fragilis ΔPSA) are no longer protected from
disease. Oral treatment of mice with purified PSA protects recipients from weight loss,
decreases levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNFα, IL-17 and IL-23, and inhibits
epithelial hyperplasia and neutrophil infiltration to the gut associated with disease induction
in these models66. To provide insight into the mechanistic basis for PSA-mediated
protection, it was shown that increases in local induction of IL-10 were required for the anti-
inflammatory properties of PSA. PSA is unable to protect from induction of colitis in IL-10-
deficient mice, demonstrating that PSA functions by inducing the production of IL-10..
Based on this observation, we tested the ability of PSA to induce IL-10 in CD4+ T cells.
Indeed, CD4+ T cells purified from MLNs during PSA-mediated protection of colitis
showed increased levels of IL-10 compared with PBS treated control mice. Finally, transfer
of IL-10-deficient CD4+ T cells into Rag−/− recipient mice abolished the ability of PSA to
protect from experimental colitis66. These data have identified a single molecule made by a
symbiotic microorganism that stimulates CD4+ T cells to make IL-10, required for the
suppression of the inflammatory process during colitis, and suggest that other beneficial
bacteria may produce factors that can positively shape the host immune response during
IBD..

Does harboring certain strains of bacteria predispose an individual to disease or protect from
it? B. fragilis has been shown to protect its host from inflammatory disease caused by H.
hepaticus in an animal model of experimental colitis66. As symbiotic bacteria seem to have
evolved mechanisms to promote protection from pathobionts found in the same microbiota,
does disease result from the absence of specific organisms and their beneficial molecules? In.

If improvements in hygiene and health care have altered the process by which a healthy
microbiota is assembled and maintained, then patients with these diseases in developed
countries should display signs of dysbiosis. This indeed appears to be the case, at least
according to a growing number of studies which are now linking ‘Western’ diseases to
alterations in the microbiota. The intestinal bacterial composition of IBD patients differs
greatly from that of healthy controls74. However, over many years, research to identify the
pathogenic organism(s) that elicit inflammation has repeatedly identified reactions only to
intestinal bacteria shared by all humans—healthy and ill. No infectious organisms have ever
been conclusively demonstrated to be involved in IBD, though various studies are still
ongoing. So, perhaps the targets of inflammation in IBD are not pathogens, but pathobionts
that are overrepresented during dysbiosis (Figure 2). When intestinal bacterial species were
analyzed as a factor in asthma development, reports concluded that allergic children from
both an industrialized nation (Sweden) and a developing country (Estonia) had lower levels
of colonization by Bacteroides spp. and higher levels of colonization by aerobic
microorganisms than did non-allergic children from either region85. Epidemiological studies
have linked an altered intestinal microbiota to other allergic disorders, such as atopic eczema
and rheumatoid arthritis86-88. Though cause or effect relationships still remain unresolved, it
seems that deviations in the composition of the gut microbiota may be an influencing
environmental factor underlying the development of disease in genetically predisposed
individuals..

From the Greek, pathos, meaning ‘suffering’. An opportunistic
organism that rarely comes in contact with the host, but causes acute
or chronic disease upon infection.