23_PARAGRAPHS

The possibility of early modulation of the offspring gut microbiota by acting on specific
maternal factors and/or characteristics is of potential great interest. Nevertheless, only few
data are available about the associations between maternal characteristics and newborn micro-
biota pattern. Maternal fasting glucose concentrations were correlated positively with the rela-
tive abundance of phylum Actinobacteria and genus Acinetobacter, and negatively with the
phylum Bacteroidetes and the genus Prevotella  We hypothesized that maternal dietary
habits and metabolic characteristics may impact on the offspring gut microbiota..

Blautia, Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium were extracted and entropy analysis and oligotyping
were carried out since these were the only OTUs showing higher level of entropy able to
obtain sub-OTUs. After the first round of oligotyping, high entropy positions were chosen (-C
option): 8, 12, 113, 223, 224, 247, 432, 433 for Blautia; position 8, 12, 40, 74, 75, 116, 117, 124,
129, 130, 390, 397, 452 and 453 were chosen for Bacteroides; while position 8, 12, 14, 81, 114,
115, 158, 159, 160, 328, 329, 389, 437, 438, 439, 440, 441, 442, 443 and 444 were chosen for Bifi-
dobacterium. In order to reduce the noise, each oligotype should appear in at least 10 samples,
occur in more than 1.0% of the reads for at least ten samples, represent a minimum of 750
reads in all samples combined, and have a most abundant unique sequence with a minimum
abundance of 50. A cladogram of representative sequences was generated using the ANVIOs
software .

Hierarchical clustering analysis at genus level (S1 Fig) showed a separation between the
infant microbiota and the mother microbiota (anosim P<0.01). Infants displayed a higher
abundance of Bifidobacterium, Streptococcus, Escherichia, Staphylococcus and Enterococcaceae
while mothers had a more complex microbiota composition (S1 Fig)..

while saturated fatty acids (SFA) derived mainly from meat and cheese. In a multiple regres-
sion model, after adjusting for weight change, breastfeeding and Cesarean section, associations
between infant Ruminococcus with maternal oligosaccharide (positive association) and with
maternal intake of SFA (inverse association) were found, even if not reaching the defined
cutoff of p-values. The inverse relationship between Rikenellaceae and maternal SFA intake
remained statistically significant (Table 1). In the multivariate model, no significant associa-
tion between infant gut microbiota and maternal dietary habits at the study-end was found.
The direct association between maternal fasting glucose at enrolment and Enterococcus
(Rho = 0.49) was no longer confirmed in the multivariate model, while the inverse association
between Clostridiales and maternal changes across pregnancy (delta) in glycated hemoglobin
(HbA1c) levels was statistically significant (Table 1). No significant association between mater-
nal anthropometric or metabolic variables and the gestational changes in these variables and
infant gut microbiota composition was found. Two out of 29 women were treated with insulin;
none received metformin. After adjusting for insulin treatment, the results of the multiple
regression analyses did not change..

At phylum level, we observed that breastfed infants showed a higher abundance of Actino-
bacteria and Proteobacteria, while in formula-fed infants we observed a higher proportion of
Firmicutes phyla (Fig 5A). At genus level, breastfed infants displayed an increased abundance
of Escherichia and Bifidobacterium, while formula-fed infants had a varied microbiota mainly
composed of Bacteroides, Clostridium, Enterococcaceae, Escherichia, Faecalibacterium, Staphy-
lococcus and Streptococcus (Fig 5B). In multiple regression analyses, a significant association
between breastfeeding and the relative abundance of Bifidobacterium in the infant gut micro-
biota was found (β = 22.9; 95%CI = 10.1–35.7; P = 0.0017)..

In order to explore the possible mother-to-infant gut microbiota transmission at sub-OTUs
level, we carried out oligotyping on sequences of Blautia, Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium
since these were the only genera showing a Shannon entropy index sufficient to identify all.

abundance of the Blautia oligotypes increased during the pregnancy and were lower in the
infants (S4A Fig). A high degree of mother-offspring concordance was found for B11
(P = 0.008) and B42 (P<0.001); both were identified as Blautia wexlerae by best BLASTn
match. A reduction in the relative abundance of Bacteroides oligotypes was observed across
pregnancy while few oligotypes were observed to be dominant in the offspring samples
(S4B Fig)..

The gut microbiota of our offspring was compared with those of 19 breastfed infants from
healthy normoglycemic women. A higher α-diversity was evident in the latter (for the Chao-1
diversity index, P = 0.001). However, when comparing to those infants the 10 breastfed infants
from GDM women, no significant difference in α-diversity was found. At phylum level, we
observed higher abundance of Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes in the offspring from GDM
women (S5A Fig) (P<0.001). At genus level, higher abundance of Staphylococcus, Ralstonia,
Lactobacillus and some members of Enterobacteriaceae were observed in the offspring from
healthy women (S5B Fig)..

In the comparison between the two groups of breastfed infants, the offspring of GDM
women showed a significantly higher relative abundance of Escherichia and Parabacteroides
(P<0.001)..

The microbiota of infants from GDM women showed a low complexity, a high inter-individ-
ual variability, and was influenced by early maternal nutrition and breastfeeding. Intriguingly,
in comparison with the offspring of healthy women, our infants showed a higher relative abun-
dance of pro-inflammatory taxa, in particular Escherichia and Parabacteroides. A few mother-
to-child oligotype transmissions were found..

The offspring gut microbiota composition substantially differs from the microbiota compo-
sition of their GDM mothers, being the former characterized by limited species-level complex-
ity (i.e. a lower α-diversity) and a greater inter-individual variability of genus abundance (i.e. a
higher β-diversity), as already reported  The microbiota complexity indeed pro-
gressively increases with the infant growth, with the gradual development of a microbial com-
munity resembling the adult microbiota at the age of 3 years with a lower inter-individual
variability  Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria dominated the gut microbiota of our
infants from GDM women, similarly to the infants of healthy mothers and in accordance with
previous reports  The relative abundance of these phyla has been reported to be
higher in the meconium of GDM newborns compared to offspring from healthy controls 
Bifidobacterium, Streptococcus, Escherichia, Staphylococcus and members of the Enterococca-
ceae family displayed a higher relative abundance in the feces of our GDM infants. Accord-
ingly, these bacteria have been detected in the feces or meconium of full-term newborns in
several studies .

A distinct microbial composition was found in our breastfed GDM offspring when compar-
ing them with breastfed neonates from healthy controls, consistent with literature 
In particular, a significantly higher relative abundance of Escherichia and Parabacteroides was
found in our GDM infants. These taxa can be considered as pro-inflammatory and have been
found to be higher in the meconium of babies from T2DM mothers  Furthermore, Para-
bacteroides have been reported to be enriched in GDM patients when compared to healthy
subjects  we have observed an increased, though not.

statistically significant, relative abundance of Parabacteroides across pregnancy from enrol-
ment to study end. Similarly, Escherichia is more abundant in pregnant overweight women,
particularly in GDM patients Diabetes has been considered as an inflammatory dis-
ease and, not surprisingly, the offspring microbiota may be influenced by this pregnancy path-
ological condition; a direct transmission from mother to child of some pro-inflammatory taxa
like Parabacteroides or Escherichia might be hypothesized, even if the contribution of not ana-
lyzed environmental conditions could not be ruled out..

ing factors to the 2- to 8-fold increased future risk of dysmetabolic diseases of those offspring
when compared to offspring of healthy women  We observed that the infant gut micro-
biota composition is influenced by nutritional maternal habits. The offspring relative abun-
dance of Ruminococcus was directly associated with the maternal intake of oligosaccharides
and inversely with the maternal intake of SFA, as previously reported in infants from healthy
women  The Ruminococcus genus produces both butyrate and a bacteriocin, ruminococ-
cin A, able to inhibit the growth of the potentially harmful Clostridium species, therefore
potentially playing a beneficial role for the newborns  Furthermore, maternal SFA intake
was inversely associated with the relative abundance of Rikenellaceae, a butyrate-producers
family 
These associations are remarkable and could explain the previously reported adverse impact of
SFA on maternal even if did not reach the established signifi-
cance threshold, after multiple adjustments..

We found an inverse association between Clostridiales and HbA1c changes across preg-.

nancy. The Clostridiales order includes several genera and in particular Roseburia and.

Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, both butyrate-producing bacteria with beneficial functions,
which have been found to be reduced in GDM women .

A clear separation of infant microbiota according to the type of feeding (breast milk vs for-
mula) was evident, as previously reported  In particular, our formula-fed infants showed
increased microbial complexity and levels of strict anaerobes and facultative anaerobes, and
higher abundance of Firmicutes, such as Clostridium, Streptococcus and Staphylococcus, in line
with literature  On the other hand, our breastfed infants showed a less complex
microbiota with higher abundance of Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria, being the latter
mainly derived from the Bifidobacterium genus that resulted to be strongly associated with
breastfeeding, accordingly with most studies  The higher abundance of Bifidobacter-
ium in breast-fed infants can be explained by the presence of human milk oligosaccharides
(HMOs), sugar polymers with prebiotic effects that promote the growth of specific microbial
communities, including Bifidobacterium spp. with beneficial protective effects on the infant
health  A higher, though not significantly different abundance of Proteobacteria was
evident in our breast-fed infants when compared to formula-fed infants. Literature is discor-
dant on this topic, since either a higher abundance of Proteobacteria, in particular of Entero-
bacteriaceae, has been reported in formula-fed infants or the opposite was observed, in
particular a decrease in the relative abundance of Proteobacteria in non-breast-fed vs breast-
fed infants  Differences in breastmilk microbiota and HMOs content, maternal diet and
type of formula milk used across populations might be responsible for these heterogeneous
results..

A possible vertical mother-to-child transmission of maternal gut bacteria has already
been reported, even if, to date, certainty about the way of intrauterine microbial acquisition
is lacking  Besides breastfeeding and vaginal microbiota, also placenta and amni-
otic fluid have been reported to be a vehicle for this transmission  By using the oligo-
type pipeline, the transmission of different sub-OTUs from our mothers to their infants was
observed in line with data of a recent metagenomic study confirming that mother’s domi-
nant strains were transmitted to their children  In particular, we have found a few
Bacteroides and Blautia oligotypes significantly shared by the GDM mothers and their off-
spring, suggesting a maternal microbial imprinting. On the other hand, the infant Bifidobac-
terium oligotypes of the newborns were not present in the feces of the GDM women, and
this directs towards a post-natal acquisition. Indeed, the infant Bifidobacteria mostly derive
from breast-feeding, being either isolated from human milk and vertically transmitted [86–
87] or induced by the milk prebiotic HMO  The Bifidobacterium oligotypes were highly
different among infants but only one third of them was breastfed and the human milk has a
heterogeneous composition and contains variable amounts of glycans and bifidogenic oligo-
saccharides .

S3 Fig. Distribution of representative Bifidobacterium oligotypes in the offspring samples.
Inner black bars indicate the presence of an oligotype in a given sample.
(TIF).

S4 Fig. Distribution in representative Blautia (plot A) and Bacteroides (plot B) oligotypes.
Plot showing the sequence distribution in GDM patients at enrolment (red bars), study end
(green bars) and their offspring (blue bars). Inner bars indicate the presence of an oligotype
in a given sample. Outer circle, if colored, denotes oligotype abundance with high degree of
mother-offspring concordance.
(TIF).

Amenta, Clara Monzeglio, Roberto Gambino, Simona Bo..

Investigation: Valentina Ponzo, Ilario Ferrocino, Adriana Zarovska, Maria Bernadette
Amenta, Filomena Leone, Clara Monzeglio, Marianna Pellegrini, Roberto Gambino,
Simona Bo.