The microbiological diagnosis of a ‘normal’ or dis-
turbed vaginal microbiota has historically been based on
the Nugent score, the current gold standard diagnostic
method that relies on Gram stain of vaginal smears [21].
The ‘normal’ vaginal microbiota in non-pregnant repro-
ductive aged women is understood to be dominated by
Lactobacillus species, while an abnormal microbiota
(defined as bacterial vaginosis) is characterized by low
abundance of lactobacilli and an overgrowth of anaer-
obic bacteria, such as Gardnerella vaginalis, Prevotella
spp., Bacteroides spp., Mobiluncus spp. and Mycoplasma
hominis [22]. In low-risk pregnant women, it has been
shown that the vaginal microbiota has reduced richness
lactobacilli
and diversity and increased abundance of
compared to those of non-pregnant women [23–27]. An
abnormal microbiota has been previously associated
with preterm birth [28], but only a few in depth
culture-independent studies of the vaginal microbiota of
women who had preterm birth have been published,
with inconsistent conclusions [29–32].
The objective of this study was to assess whether there
are differences in the vaginal microbiota composition,
early in gestation, of women who had spontaneous pre-
term birth (sPTB) and term delivery that could be fur-
ther investigated as diagnostic indicators of preterm
birth risk. Microbiome profiling was based on sequen-
cing of the cpn60 universal target, which provides higher
resolution than 16S rRNA variable regions [33] and al-
lows the resolution of Gardnerella vaginalis subgroups,
a hallmark bacteria in the disturbed microbiota [34].
Methods
Study population and sampling
This retrospective cohort study analysed the vaginal
microbiota of women who experienced spontaneous pre-
term birth (sPTB) and compared the resulting microbial
profiles to those of pregnant women who delivered at
term. The bacterial profiles of pregnant Canadian women
at low risk of sPTB who had term deliveries (n = 170) were
previously generated by our research group [24]. The vagi-
nal microbial profiles of Canadian women who had pre-
term birth originated from samples of this previous study
(n = 7) [24] and from the Ontario Birth Study (n = 39),
resulting in 46 samples. The Ontario Birth Study
(ontariobirthstudy.com) is an open longitudinal pregnancy
cohort at Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada. It is a
platform for studies of both pregnancy complications as
Conventional PCR
Some Mollicutes (Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma) species
lack a cpn60 gene [38]. Thus, we performed a family-
specific semi-nested PCR targeting the 16S rRNA gene
to detect Mollicutes [39], and a PCR targeting the
multiple-banded antigen gene to detect Ureaplasma spp.
PCR products from U. parvum and U. urealyticum can
be differentiated by size [40].
The OTU reference set was generated originally by de
novo assembly of cpn60 sequence reads from 546 vaginal
microbiomes using the microbial Profiling Using Meta-
genomic Assembly pipeline (mPUMA,  
sourceforge.net) [44] with Trinity as the assembly tool
[45] (Additional file 1). OTU were labeled according to
Results
Description of the study population and pregnancy outcomes
Socio-demographic characteristics of women who had
spontaneous preterm birth (n = 46) and women who had
term deliveries (n = 170) are summarized in Table 1.
There were no significant differences in maternal age,
BMI, ethnicity, smoking status, consumption of alcohol
or use of probiotics between term and preterm groups
(all p > 0.05). Average maternal
age was 33 for
Table 1 Socio-demographic and microbiological characteristics of subjects
Shannon diversity (mean ± SD, range)1
Chao1 richness (mean ± SD, range)1
1t test; 2chi-square; 3MD = missing data
a significant difference between term and preterm groups
regarding birth weight and number of infants admitted to
level 3 neonatal
intensive care unit (NICU) (Table 2).
Apgar score at 1 (term 8.75 ± 0.6; preterm 8.38 ± 1.1) and
5 min (term 8.97 ± 0.17; preterm 8.76 ± 0.7) between
groups also differed (t test, all p < 0.001). One preterm
infant (1/46) died shortly after birth (20 weeks of gesta-
tional age).
Microbiota profiles
Microbiota profiles were created by PCR amplification
and pyrosequencing of the cpn60 universal target region.
Hierarchical clustering of vaginal microbiota profiles
resulted in seven community state types
I
(CST):
(Lactobacillus crispatus dominated),
(Lactobacillus
gasseri dominated), III (Lactobacillus iners dominated),
IVA (Gardnerella vaginalis subgroup B or mix of differ-
ent species), IVC (G. vaginalis subgroup A dominated),
IVD (G. vaginalis
subgroup C dominated) and V
(Lactobacillus jensenii dominated) (Fig. 1). Each CST is
defined by the dominance of one species of Lactobacillus (I,
II, III, V), Gardnerella vaginalis (IVC, IVD) or a mixture of
bacteria species (IVA), as previously described [52, 53].
Overall microbiota profiles did not cluster together
based on gestational age at delivery (Figs. 1 and 2). Most
microbial profiles from the preterm group (80.5%) were
assigned to Latobacillus-dominated CST: CST I (37% of
profiles), CST III (17.4%), CST V (15.2%) and CST II
(10.9%). The remaining profiles (19.5%) were assigned to
CST IVA, IVC or IVD (Table 1). The CST IVA was the
most heterogeneous group, represented by the domin-
ance of Lactobacillus delbrueckii, Bifidobacterium den-
tium, Bifidobacterium infantis, Atopobium vaginae,
Bifidobacterium breve or a mixture of different bacteria
species. The CST IVC was dominated by G. vaginalis
subgroup A and Megasphaera spp., and CST IVD was
dominated by G. vaginalis subgroup C (Fig. 1).
Ecological analysis and total bacterial load
Assessment of alpha diversity revealed that microbiomes
of women who delivered preterm were richer (Chao1
richness 46.3 ± 24.1) and more diverse (Shannon diver-
sity index 1.8 ± 1.1) when compared to those of women
in the term group (36.2 ± 14.8; 1.2 ± 0.8) (t test, p < 0.01)
(Table 1). Total bacterial load was estimated based on
qPCR targeting the 16S rRNA gene, and it was expressed
as log 16S rRNA gene copy number per swab. Higher
bacterial
loads were detected in samples from the
preterm group (7.7 ± 0.9) compared to term group
(8.0 ± 0.7) (t test, p = 0.049) (Table 1).
assessed the relative abundance of each taxa (at the
OTU and species level) in term and preterm groups.
Eight OTU/species were more abundant in the term
group in comparison with preterm, all of which were
considered rare members of the bacterial community
(Fig. 3). L. acidophilus represented 1% of the total reads
in the dataset and had a low relative abundance average
of 1.98% (range 0–69%) and 0.18% (range 0–0.87%) in
samples from term and preterm groups respectively. All
the other seven bacteria together represented only 0.4%
of the total reads in the dataset.
also
assessed (only species with at least 10 total reads were
included). A total of 60 taxa had significant differences
in prevalence between term and preterm groups; 11 spe-
cies had greater prevalence in the term cohort and 49
in the preterm cohort
species were more prevalent
(Table 3). Bifidobacterium infantis, for example, was two
times more prevalent in the term group in comparison
with preterm, and Prevotella timonensis was 1.58 times
more prevalent in the preterm group (Table 3). Several
Prevotella spp. were associated with both term and pre-
term. Prevotella amnii and P.
tannerae had greater
prevalence in the term cohort, whereas P. timonensis, P.
bivia, P. corporis and P. bucalis were more prevalent in
the preterm group (Table 3). It is important to note that
read depth distribution did not differ between term and
preterm cohorts (t test, p > 0.05); therefore, the differ-
ences observed here in bacteria prevalence were unlikely
to be driven by cohort sequencing bias.
(See figure on previous page.)
Fig. 1 Vaginal microbiota profiles of women who had sPTB and term deliveries. a Hierarchical clustering of Jensen–Shannon distance matrices
with Ward linkage on the relative proportions of reads for each OTU within individual vaginal samples. b Community state type (CST). c Gestational
age at delivery. d Heatmap of relative abundances of bacterial species within each vaginal microbiota. Each column represents a woman’s vaginal
microbiota profile, and each row represents a bacteria species. Only species that are at least 1% abundant in at least one sample are shown.
e Shannon diversity indices calculated for each sample
CST and microbiota richness, and CST and microbiota
diversity (ANOVA, p < 0.001). There was no significant
association between CST and the remaining following
metadata: microbiota richness and diversity (continuous
variable), presence of Mollicutes and Ureaplasma (yes/
log 16S rRNA gene copies (continuous variable),
no),
variable; 18–25, 26–35,
maternal
36–45), BMI category (underweight, normal, overweight,
obese; < 25, ≥ 25), ethnicity (White, East Asian, South
Asian, Black, Hispanic, Other), natural conception (yes/no),
parity (0, > 1), gestational age (continuous variable), mode
of delivery (vaginal, C-section), pre-existing condition
(yes/no), folic acid intake before or during pregnancy
(yes/no), drinking alcohol (yes/no), neonate in high
level care (yes/no), birth weight (continuous variable)
and Apgar score at 1 and 5 min (1–9).
although we cannot address this question, it is possible
that sPTB driven by an ascending infection would be
more evident in a high-risk cohort or extreme preterm
cases. A recent study of a high-risk pregnant cohort has
reported that L. iners was strongly associated with short
cervix and preterm birth, as L. crispatus was associated
with term deliveries [57]. Those differences in study out-
comes indicate that the pathogenesis of sPTB in low-
and high-risk groups might be different. Identifying dif-
ferences in the causes of early and late sPTB and the
role of the vaginal microbiota in those processes will re-
quire further study.
identified. The ALDEx2 analysis indicated that eight rare
taxa were more abundant in the term group, which does
not necessarily mean they are associated with a ‘health-
ier’ state or implicated in preventing sPTB. Since these
bacteria are detected at very low abundance within the
microbiota profiles, their biological significance in the
vaginal microbiome is questionable. Differences in the
prevalence of several other taxa between groups were
also observed. For example, more women in the term
group had Prevotella amnii and P. tannerae detected in
their vaginal samples, whereas P. timonensis, P. bivia, P.
corporis and P. bucalis were more frequently detected in
samples from women in the preterm group (Table 3).
Prevotella spp. have been previously associated with bac-
terial vaginosis and preterm labour [22, 66, 67], and our
results indicate that different Prevotella species might
have different roles in sPTB. Several of the taxa that
were significantly different in their prevalence among
women in the two groups also had low sequence read
counts (Table 3). Further investigation would be re-
quired to determine if these rare members of the micro-
bial community play a yet unknown role in sPTB.
Our results also confirmed previous reports of an as-
sociation between Mycoplasma and preterm birth [68].
Mollicutes were detected significantly more often in
women in the preterm group compared to women in the
term group, but no differences were observed in
Ureaplasma prevalence between groups indicating that
the difference in Mollicutes prevalence is primarily
driven by the presence of Mycoplasma spp. Although in-
dividual Mycoplasma species could not be discerned
based on assay used in our study, both Mycoplasma
genitalium [69–71] and Mycoplasma hominis [72–75]
have been previously associated with negative reproduct-
ive outcomes including PTB.
compare different study designs (based on different co-
horts and barcode gene) that addressed the same re-
search question. Hyman and colleagues [30] described
the vaginal microbiota of 83 pregnant women (term n =
66, preterm n = 17) based on Sanger sequencing of
cloned 16S rRNA genes. Samples were collected at each
trimester and preterm was defined as delivery before
37 weeks of gestation. There was no correlation between
preterm and absence/low abundance of Lactobacillus in
the microbiota; in other words, preterm outcome could
not be predicted based on CST. Similar to our results,
they found an association between increased microbiota
diversity and preterm delivery among women of white
ethnicity (n = 40) (data from women of others ethnicities
was not included in the analysis because of small sample
sizes). Although there was no association between CST
and ethnicity, it is important to note that most women
enrolled in this study described themselves as being
white, and it is possible that an increased sample size of
participants of other ethnicities could result in a differ-
ent conclusion.
Romero and colleagues [29] also investigated the vaginal
microbiota of pregnant women who experienced preterm,
defined as delivery before 34 weeks of gestation (term
n = 72, preterm n = 18). The profiles were created by
16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, and samples were col-
lected every 4 weeks until 24 weeks of gestation and then
every 2 weeks. They found no differences in the frequency
of different CST between women who had term and pre-
term deliveries. Likewise, no differences in bacteria rela-
tive abundance were observed between the two cohorts,
although only bacteria that were present in at least 25% of
samples were included in the analysis. These results are
consistent with our findings of bacterial abundance based
on the ALDEx analysis since we only found significant dif-
ferences in relative abundance for eight rare bacteria. Un-
like Hyman et al. [30] and our results, Romero et al. [29]
did not find differences in microbiota diversity between
women who delivered preterm and at term. One possible
explanation for this contradictory result might be related
to differences in participant ethnicity among these studies.
While most women in our study and the Hyman et al.
study described themselves as white, the majority of par-
ticipants in the Romero et al. study described themselves
as African American. It has been reported that the com-
position of the vaginal microbiota is strongly associated
with a woman’s ethnicity [52, 76]. Other studies have also
demonstrated that black ethnicity is associated with an in-
creased microbiota diversity in comparison with white
ethnicity [77], which could have masked differences in
bacterial diversity between term and preterm cohorts in
the Romero study.
non-Lactobacillus-dominated CST IV and preterm birth
in a case–control study based on the 16S rRNA ampli-
con sequencing. Pregnant women (preterm n = 34, term
n = 15), mostly of white ethnicity, were sampled weekly
throughout gestation. Interestingly, the authors pointed
out that if samples had been collected less frequently,
short-term ‘excursions’ to CST IV would have been
missed and probably the association between CST IV
and preterm birth would have been less obvious. The de-
tection of a temporary microbiota disturbance repre-
sented by a change from a Lactobacillus-dominated CST
to CST IV may have been missed in our study since
samples were not collected longitudinally. Moreover, a
recent study has demonstrated that PTB–microbiota as-
sociations
lower
population-dependent
Lactobacillus and higher Gardnerella abundances were
associated with PTB in a low-risk predominantly
Caucasian cohort, but not in a high-risk predominantly
African American cohort. These population-dependent
associations might contribute to explain contradictory
conclusions among different studies and emphasize the
importance of investigating the vaginal microbiota of dif-
ferent populations with varying ethnic backgrounds and
from different geographical locations.