3_PARAGRAPHS

Estrogen receptor-beta has been detected in the oral mucosa
and salivary glands (Valimaa et al., 2004), and some evidence
shows age-related hormonal changes in the exfoliated normal
buccal mucosa of women (Donald et al., 2013). Moreover, the
vaginal and buccal epithelia share some microscopic similarities.
As observed by Thompson et al.  the patterns of surface
keratinization and the distribution and appearance of
the
lipid lamellae in the intercellular spaces were similar between
vaginal and buccal epithelial samples of postmenopausal women.
Therefore, given that many menopausal women also suﬀer from
oral discomforts in addition to climacteric symptoms (Meurman
et al., 2009), an understanding of the impact of female sex.

Periodontitis is a chronic inﬂammatory process that occurs
in response to an increase in Gram-negative bacteria in the
bioﬁlm (Ruby and Barbeau, 2002), aﬀecting the tissues that
surround and support the teeth. Speciﬁc bacterial species, such
as Porphyromonas gingivalis and Tannerella forsythensis, were
found to be important
in the etiology of periodontitis in
postmenopausal women (Brennan et al., 2007). In addition,
changes in periodontal status were found to be associated
with variations in sex hormone levels (Mascarenhas et al.,
2003), and the occurrence of periodontitis was reported to be
greater in postmenopausal women who did not receive hormone
replacement than in premenopausal women (Haas et al., 2009).
Therefore, from a clinical point of view, the roles of sex hormones
and hormone therapy in the prevalence of subgingival bacterial
infection in peri- and postmenopausal women are of great
interest..

Another link between the gut microbiome and menopausal
health is related to bone. Interesting, the gut microbiota has
also been found to inﬂuence bone homeostasis. Approximately
one in two women over age 50 will break a bone because of
osteoporosis. A study that involved twenty postmenopausal
women with a mean age of 65 years showed that the group
that consumed Lactobacillus helveticus-fermented milk had
increased serum calcium levels and reduced bone reabsorption
compared with those of the control milk consumption group
(Narva et al., 2004). Experimental studies have also demonstrated
similar results. For instance, L. reuteri treatment signiﬁcantly
protected ovariectomized mice from bone loss and increases
in bone marrow CD4+ T-lymphocytes, which promote
osteoclastogenesis (Britton et al., 2014). Another study that
investigated probiotic treatment for cortical bone loss found
two inﬂammatory cytokines, TNF-α
reduced expression of
and IL-1β, and increased expression of osteoprotegerin, a
potent inhibitor of osteoclastogenesis, in the cortical bone of
ovariectomized mice (Ohlsson et al., 2014). Additionally, sex
steroid deprivation has been reported to promote intestinal
permeability (Figure 1), and the oral administration of
L. rhamnosus GG (LGG) or VSL#3 (a combination of tree
probiotics) to estrogen-deﬁcient mice signiﬁcantly reinforced
intestinal barrier integrity and completely protected the mice
against sex steroid depletion-induced bone loss (Li et al., 2016).
Importantly, to conﬁrm the role of the gut microbiota in bone
health, another experiment also showed that germ-free mice are
protected against the bone loss induced by the absence of sex
steroids (Li et al., 2016).