19_PARAGRAPHS

the commonality that relates both BV and vaginal pH to HPV
infection (independent of HIV) is the RA of certain Lactobacil-
lus species, most notably L. crispatus. Consistent with this, a
high RA of L. crispatus has been associated with reduced risks
of BV and STIs in several studies  However, data
regarding the cervicovaginal microbiota and its speciﬁc relation
with HPV infection are limited. In particular, there is a paucity
of longitudinal studies of the cervicovaginal microbiota and
HPV  and even among cross-sectional studies few have
involved HIV-infected women. Last, despite considerable spec-
ulation that cervicovaginal pH may mediate the effects of the
microbiota on HPV infection, no studies have, to our knowl-
edge, assessed whether statistical control for pH weakens the
HPV-microbiota association, which would be expected if pH
was part of the causal pathway..

Select characteristics of the cohort at the index visit are shown in
Table 1. The average age of participants was 32.1 years, and by
design all subjects were African American and premenopausal
(see “Methods” section). Women with rapidly progression of
HIV-associated immunosuppression had a lower CD4+ T-cell
count than HIV-infected women with stable immune status
and HIV-uninfected women (P < .001). A majority of the
women in all 3 groups had a lifetime number of male sex part-
ners of >10, were current or former smokers, and had not used
oral contraceptives in the past 6 months. HIV-uninfected
women were less likely than HIV-infected women to use con-
doms in the past 6 months (P = .001). Self-report of Trichomo-
nas vaginalis infection, BV, candidiasis, or STIs within the past.

Table 2 shows Spearman correlations between Lactobacillus
species RA and pH. The RA of each Lactobacillus species was
inversely associated with pH. The correlation coefﬁcients for
any individual species of Lactobacillus was greatest for L. crisp-
atus (r = −0.48), although the highest correlation we observed
was for Lactobacillus species (ie, at the genus level; r = −0.67).
Hierarchical clustering found 6 CSTs, with 5 dominated by
an individual Lactobacillus species, whereas CST IV-B com-
prised a variety of genera (eg, Prevotella, Atopobium, Mega-
sphaera, and Sneathia) with a low RA of Lactobacillus species.
Figure 2 displays a heat map of the RA data for the 25 most
abundant genera or species and how they cluster within each
CST. L. crispatus dominated CST I, CST II was dominated by
Lactobacillus gasseri, both CST III and IV-A were dominated
by Lactobacillus iners, and CST V was dominated by Lactobacil-
lus jensenii. Figure 2 additionally shows the SDI for each study
visit, and as expected CSTs I through IV-A and V (each dom-
inated by a single Lactobacillus species) had a low SDI, com-
pared with CST IV-B. The ﬁgure also presents the proportion
of oncogenic HPV–positive women-visits for each CST..

Table 3 shows multivariate GEE logistic regression models of
the associations between CSTs and the prevalent detection of
HPV. These models adjusted for HIV study group, time-updat-
ed covariates, and intra-individual correlations between repeat-
ed cross-sectional measures of association with prevalent HPV
(see “Methods” section). While CST I (L. crispatus dominated)
had an inverse association with detection of any HPV and espe-
cially with any oncogenic HPV, the relationship was of border-
line statistical signiﬁcance (eg, odds ratio [OR] for oncogenic
HPV was 0.30 [95% conﬁdence interval {CI},
.08–1.11];
P = .07). In contrast, when we assessed the RA of individual Lac-
tobacillus species, characterized in an ordinal fashion (Table 4),
we observed stronger, statistically signiﬁcant associations with
detection of HPV. Brieﬂy, high (vs low) RA of L. crispatus
was signiﬁcantly associated with a lower relative odds of any.

HPV (OR, 0.48; 95% CI, .24–.96; Ptrend = .03) or any oncogenic
HPV (OR, 0.14; 95% CI, .01–1.59; Ptrend = .03). However, no as-
sociations were found between any HPV or oncogenic HPV de-
tection and the RA of L. iners, L. gasseri, or L. jensenii (data not
shown). In addition, no association between pH and HPV de-
tection was observed in any of the above multivariate models,
regardless of how pH was parameterized, including as a contin-
uous or as an ordinal based on Amsel criteria. Nor did exclusion
of pH from the above models discernibly alter any ﬁndings
(data not shown). When we assessed SDI tertile instead of
CST or Lactobacillus species in multivariate GEE logistic regres-
sion models, we found signiﬁcantly higher oncogenic HPV de-
tection in women in the highest SDI tertile (OR, 2.04; 95% CI,
1.18–3.52; Ptrend = .01), relative to those in the lowest SDI tertile.
Last, in an exploratory analysis, we used continuous-time
multistate Markov models ﬁt using maximum likelihood meth-
ods to assess whether transition to a CST dominated by L. crisp-
atus was associated with a change in the risk of incident
detection of HPV (ie, HPV type[s] not found in any earlier
CVLs from the same woman). The transition rate ratio
(TRR), a value that can be thought of as similar to a hazard
ratio  was 0.17 after adjustment
for study group, and this effect estimate was little changed
(TRR, 0.20; 95% CI, .03–1.14; P = .07) by adjustment for addi-
tional covariates, indicating that the most appropriate model
was the parsimonious model adjusted only for study group..

In the current study, high L. crispatus RA was associated with
decreased prevalence of oncogenic HPV in HIV-infected and
HIV-uninfected women across multiple serial annual visits,
even after statistical adjustment for multiple cofactors, includ-
ing host immune status (as deﬁned by HIV study group) and
vaginal pH. We predicted these results, because earlier (largely
cross-sectional) studies had found inverse associations between
L. crispatus abundance and the risks of several STIs 
Further, the one previous longitudinal study of cervicovaginal
microbiota and HPV, as well as cross-sectional studies in Rwan-
da and South Africa, each reported inverse associations of HPV
prevalence with CSTs dominated by L. crispatus or with L. crisp-
atus RA  To our knowledge, the current study is the ﬁrst
investigation involving serially repeated molecular characteriza-
tion of the vaginal microbiome and its relation with oncogenic
HPV in HIV-infected women. This allowed us to conduct an
exploratory analysis in which we prospectively assessed transi-
tions between CSTs over time and found that transition to an
L. crispatus–dominated CST was associated with a statistically
signiﬁcant reduction in the risk of a new ( previously undetect-
ed) HPV type. If correct, these data could reﬂect either a reduc-
tion in the rate of newly acquired (incident) HPV infection or
reduced recurrence/reactivation of previously acquired HPV..

These ﬁndings have potential clinical implications, since they
raise the possibility that promoting high cervicovaginal levels of
L. crispatus (eg, via a vaginal suppository) may help reduce the
burden of oncogenic HPV in women. The implications may be
especially important for HIV-infected women, since the inverse
L. crispatus–oncogenic HPV associations we observed were
independent of HIV and host immune status and therefore
indicate similar potential beneﬁt among those with a low
CD4+ T-cell count..

IV-B, lowa Lactobacillus
I, L. crispatus.

IV-B, lowa Lactobacillus
I, L. crispatus.

Lactobacillus species against STIs, most of that research
preceded widespread use of methods for comprehensively
assessing the cervicovaginal microbiome  The growing ev-
idence of species-speciﬁc (eg, L. crispatus–related) relationships
between the cervicovaginal microbiome and HPV infection ar-
gues against a signiﬁcant role of pH, since production of lactic
acid is a common attribute of lactobacilli as a group, and our
data showed that the greatest association with pH was with
the RA of Lactobacillus species, not for L. crispatus RA or
CSTs dominated by L. crispatus. Thus, biologic mechanisms
other than pH are likely involved in the anti-HPV activity of
L. crispatus..

For example, recent data suggest that the 2 isoforms of lactic
acid, D-lactic acid and L-lactic acid, might differ in their micro-
bial effects. D-lactic acid (but not L-lactic acid) levels have been
inversely associated with the ability of HIV to transverse cervi-
covaginal mucous  An antiviral effect of D-lactic acid would
be consistent with our results for oncogenic HPV, since L. crisp-
atus produces D and L isoforms of lactic acid, whereas L. iners.

produces only L-lactic acid  L. gasseri and L jensenii also
produce D-lactic acid, and their RAs were nonsigniﬁcantly in-
versely associated with HPV detection in the current study.
Thus, high D-lactic acid levels but not acidity per se could be
associated with reduced infection and/or transmission of
certain viruses, including HPV..

While production of H2O2 has been observed in the major-
ity of L. crispatus isolates, prior data from our group suggest
that the levels of H2O2 produced are likely too limited to great-
ly affect the risk of STIs  especially HPV infection, since
HPV is a nonenveloped virus and, therefore, likely to be resis-
tant to H2O2. On the other hand, bacteriocins produced by
L. crispatus may have antiviral effects. Bacteriocins are riboso-
mally synthesized antimicrobial peptides and proteins 
Relatively little has been written regarding the bacteriocins
produced by cervicovaginal Lactobacillus species, with most
of the bacteriocin literature to date focused on Lactobacillus
species inhabiting the gut. L. crispatus has additionally been
noted to have potential immunomodulatory activity. For.

Table 4. Relation of Lactobacillus crispatus Relative Abundance to Detection of Human Papillomavirus (HPV).

L. crispatus relative abundance.

L. crispatus relative abundance.

example, Candida albicans growth in vitro was inhibited via
modulation of Toll-like receptors 2/4 by L. crispatus in epithe-
lial cell culture .

While the current study contributes data suggesting a possi-
ble protective effect of L. crispatus against cervicovaginal HPV
infection in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected women (inde-
pendent of pH), several limitations need to be considered.
These include the relatively small number of HIV-infected
and HIV-uninfected subjects, even though longitudinal testing
of nearly 400 CVLs was performed. This was addressed in part
by the use of efﬁcient analytic methods able to incorporate all
available serial HPV and microbiome data. However, larger pro-
spective studies will be needed to more comprehensively study
the relation of the cervicovaginal microbiome to the full natural
history of HPV, including the presence and development of
cervical disease. These clinical/pathologic end points were too
infrequent in the current data set to adequately study. Nor
did we have sufﬁcient data to assess statistical interaction (eg,
by immune strata), and it may require subanalyses among sex-
ually inactive women to help differentiate reactivation of previ-
ously acquired from newly acquired (incident) HPV. The study
also focused on only premenopausal African American women,
which was done to reduce the number of factors being studied..

In summary, our results suggest a beneﬁcial effect of L. crisp-
atus on the burden of HPV in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected
women that is unrelated to pH. Further research to better un-
derstand these relationships is strongly warranted, including
large prospective cohort studies and laboratory research to un-
derstand the mechanisms that underlie the relation of the cer-
vicovaginal microbiota with HPV infection. However, if the
current data are conﬁrmed in large prospective cohort studies,
randomized clinical trials of L. crispatus (eg, as a probiotic
vaginal suppository) to reduce HPV and cervical disease
might be appropriate, even if the mechanisms remain uncertain.
The clinical implications could be especially important for
HIV-infected women, as the oncogenic HPV–L. crispatus rela-
tionship appeared to be independent of host immune status.