relationships
between internal microorganisms and I. scapularis have
focused on commonly studied human pathogens. For
example, infection of blacklegged ticks by A. phagocy-
tophilum (the causative agent of granulocytic anaplas-
mosis in humans) has been shown to induce protein
expression that increases cold tolerance and, depend-
ing on weather patterns, may aid in tick survival
(Neelakanta et al. 2010). Furthermore,
infection with
B. burgdorferi has been shown to affect questing beha-
viour and movement of
this tick, possibly affecting
survival and/or pathogen transmission (Lefcort &
Durden 1996). However, little is known regarding the
range of microbes the tick comes in contact with or
maintains throughout
its entire life cycle. This tick
experiences a 2-year life cycle, feeding once per life
stage (larva, nymph, and adult) on vertebrate blood.
These bloodmeals are necessary for
the immature
stages (larva, nymph) to moult to the next stage and
for adult females to lay eggs (Needham & Teel 1991;
there are numerous opportunities
Fish 1993). Thus,
for this tick to acquire microbes either during any of
its three bloodmeals or possibly from the environ-
ment, as it spends 98% of its life cycle off-host in a
forested setting (Needham & Teel 1991; Fish 1993).
for additional symbioses
Consequently,
I. scapularis may be
involving microbes that beneﬁt
quite high.
Library preparation. Library preparation of the puriﬁed
PCR products was performed using Illumina’s Nex-
tera XT Index Kit, providing unique dual indices for
each sample,
to be
sequenced on the same Illumina MiSeq reagent car-
tridge and ﬂow cell. Prior to indexing, a supplemen-
tary quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed to
determine the optimal number of cycles for the index-
ing reaction. A subset of
the PCR products for all
sample pools and the one negative were indexed
using 25 lL KAPA SYBR FAST qPCR Master Mix
(Kapa Biosystems), 10 lL sdH2O, 5 lL Nextera XT
Index 1 Primer, 5 lL Nextera XT Index 2 Primer and
5 lL puriﬁed PCR product. This subset was run on
an ABI 7300 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosys-
tems, Inc.) with an initial denaturation of 95 °C for
3 min followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 10 s and
55 °C for 30 s, and a plate read after each cycle. The
optimal cycle number for each sample was deter-
mined based on the number of cycles needed for the
qPCR ampliﬁcation curve to begin to peak.
Samples were indexed using 25 lL KAPA HiFi HotS-
tart Ready Mix (Kapa Biosystems), 10 lL sdH2O, 5 lL
Nextera XT Index 1 Primer, 5 lL Nextera XT Index 2
Primer and 5 lL puriﬁed PCR product as suggested by
Illumina. The thermal cycling conditions for the index-
ing PCR consisted of an initial denaturation at 95 °C for
3 min, followed by the optimal number of cycles (8) of
98 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 30 s on a
Techne Prime Elite Thermal Cycler. Indexed amplicons
were puriﬁed with Agencourt AMPure XP beads (Beck-
man Coulter Genomics) following Illumina’s protocol.
The indexed and puriﬁed amplicons were quantiﬁed
using a High Sensitivity dsDNA Assay on a QUBIT 2.0
Fluorometer (Life Technologies) with 3 lL of gDNA.
The size integrity of the amplicons was validated on a
(Agilent Technologies). Equimolar
2100 Bioanalyzer
amplicon quantities were pooled, denatured and com-
loading
bined with denatured 20% PhiX at
After analysing the taxonomic summaries for all sam-
ple pools, the genus Rickettsia was found to be the most
abundant. To gauge the identity and potential diversity
of Rickettsia species and strains in blacklegged ticks, we
carried out a phylogeny-informed assessment. First, we
isolated 4 315 478 sequences matching the genus Rick-
ettsia using the ‘ﬁlter_fasta.py’ script in QIIME and col-
lapsed them into 91 519 unique sequences using FASTX-
(Gordon 2011). We aligned those unique
TOOLKIT
sequences to an alignment of 241 full-length, reference
16S rRNA Rickettsia sequences retrieved from GenBank,
while accounting for their phylogenetic relationships.
This was achieved by aligning the 241 reference
sequences in MAFFT (Katoh & Standley 2013) with
default parameters
closely related nucleotide
sequences. Then, a maximum-likelihood (ML) phyloge-
netic tree was estimated in RAXML v8.2.8 (Stamatakis
2014) using the general time-reversible nucleotide sub-
stitution model and among-site rate heterogeneity mod-
elled by the Γ distribution and four discrete rate
categories (Yang 1994). The ﬁnal alignment employed
the reference alignment and tree along with the shorter
A total of 21 samples – three pools for each of the ﬁve
life stage categories (lab-reared larvae, ﬁeld-collected
larvae, ﬁeld-collected nymphs, ﬁeld-collected adult
females, and ﬁeld-collected adult males), and three
pools for female salivary glands and female midguts –
generated 10 896 297 raw reads on one Illumina MiSeq
ﬂow cell. A total of 6 908 532 sequences passed ﬁlter
and were assigned taxonomy. This resulted in 116 941–
452 654 (mean = 328 977, SD = 96 960) high-quality,
merged sequences per sample (Table S1, Supporting
information). The negative control resulted in <0.001%
(n = 606) of all sequences and was excluded from fur-
ther analysis. The conditional uncovered probability of
the samples, on average,
indicated a high likelihood
that over 99.9% of the bacterial taxa in the samples was
covered. Rarefaction curves from a depth of 1000 to
100 000 sequences indicated sufﬁcient sequencing cov-
erage, as demonstrated by observed OTU accumulation
curves reaching a plateau (Fig. S2, Supporting informa-
tion).
Fig. 1 Measures of a-diversity for each development stage. Each a-diversity measure (A), observed number of OTUs, (B) Faith’s phy-
logenetic diversity, (C) Shannon’s index and (D) Simpson’s index were calculated at a rarefaction depth of 100 000 sequences.
relative abundance in males (mean = 8.4%) and was
found in all other life stages, but not in all samples,
with a low relative abundance (<0.1%). All ﬁeld-col-
lected developmental stages contained Sphingomonas,
Methylobacterium, Hymenobacter, Pseudomonas, Rhizobium,
Agrobacterium, Luteibacter, Mycobacterium and Curtobac-
terium. Both Borrelia and Anaplasma were only found in
nymphs and adults.
the developmental
stages were signiﬁcantly different according to a PER-
MANOVA (unweighted F = 4.16, R2 = 0.62, P = 0.001,
weighted
The
unweighted UniFrac (which does not account for abun-
dance data) PCoA explained 41.78% (Axis 1) and
12.03% (Axis 2) of the variation among developmental
stages and showed clustering separation for lab-raised
larvae and females (Fig. 3A). The weighted UniFrac
PCoA explained 82.36% (Axis 1) and 9.55% (Axis 2) of
the variation, with two male
clustering
together (Fig. 3B).
We placed 91 519 sequences on a phylogenetic tree
composed of 241 full-length 16S rRNA reference
sequences using the EPA ML procedure. The vast
majority (i.e. >89 000) of our sequences were placed on
the Ixodes tick endosymbiont clade, and its component
endosymbionts
subclades
Dermacentor and Haemaphysalis ticks (Piesman & Gage
2004), Rickettsia amblyommii isolated from the American
lone star tick Amblyomma americanum (Stromdahl et al.
2008), Rickettsia conorii and Rickettsia rhipicephali isolated
from the brown dog tick Rhipicephalus sanguineus (Hayes
& Burgdorfer 1979; Parola et al. 2009). Overall, short
sequences could not be unambiguously placed on single
branches, but were rather assigned along a clade, which
lends a certain degree of conﬁdence. Global placement
uncertainty was elevated, as captured by the EPA’s
entropy measure (mean = 0.7767, SD = 0.0699). The
placement of our sequences on the reference tree can be
explored interactively on the iToL webserver (http://
itol.embl.de/tree/286234201192691468834200).
Whole females and female organs differed signiﬁ-
cantly for both unweighted (F = 5.044, R2 = 0.63,
P = 0.01) and weighted UniFrac measures (F = 2.04,
R2 = 0.41, P = 0.001) according to a PERMANOVA. Distinct
clustering was observed for each organ and the whole
tick when abundance data were not considered (un-
weighted UniFrac PCoA) explaining 39.53% (Axis 1)
and 22.35% (Axis 2) of the variation (Fig. 5A). Cluster-
ing of whole females and midguts away from salivary
abundance
gland
blacklegged ticks (Moreno et al. 2006; Yuan 2010; Haw-
lena et al. 2013; Rynkiewicz et al. 2015; Van Treuren et al.
2015). Rickettsia are obligate, intracellular bacteria associ-
ated with eukaryotes,
including arthropods (Perlman
et al. 2006). Although many Rickettsia species are non-
pathogenic (Ahantarig et al. 2013), a number of them are
including Rickettsia rick-
known tick-borne pathogens,
ettsii, R. conorii, R. sibirica, R. japonica, R. australis and
R. akari (Azad & Beard 1998). The Rickettsia endosym-
biont of I. scapularis, presumed to be nonpathogenic, has
been identiﬁed in this tick in previous studies (Noda
et al. 1997; Benson et al. 2004; Moreno et al. 2006; Gille-
spie et al. 2012; Kurtti et al. 2015) and is believed to be
the only Rickettsia species found in this tick (Gillespie
et al. 2012; Kurtti et al. 2015). Recently, the name Rick-
ettsia buchneri has been proposed for this species (Kurtti
et al. 2015). The vast majority of our sequences were
assigned to the rickettsial clade isolated from Ixodes ticks
using a phylogenetic tree-guided procedure. Although
individual short sequences could not be assigned to sin-
gle tree branches with full conﬁdence, they were mostly
assigned to neighbouring branches within a clade of sis-
ter endosymbionts isolated from the same tick species.
We interpret this as an indication of sufﬁcient evolution-
ary informativeness
identiﬁcation of our
sequences at the clade level grosso modo, combined with
the observation of greater divergence patterns of this
locus in Rickettsia.
The increase in the observed number of OTUs from
lab larvae to ﬁeld larvae, nymphs and adult males, as
well as the lower number of observed OTUs in adult
females, is concomitant with the relative abundance of
Rickettsia species throughout the life cycle. As Rickettsia
represented over 99% of the taxa in lab larvae and stea-
dily decreased to an average of 66% in adult males
throughout development, it seems likely that other bac-
teria replace Rickettsia. However, despite similar envi-
ronmental exposure, including the time off-host and the
number and types of host bloodmeals, host-seeking
adult male and female blacklegged ticks exhibited
markedly divergent bacterial communities from one
another. Female ticks harboured more homogeneous
bacterial
(Fig. 2). A less
diverse microbiome in females has also been recently
documented in both the blacklegged tick (Van Treuren
et al. 2015) and the lone star tick, Amblyomma ameri-
canum (Ponnusamy et al. 2014). An earlier study identi-
ﬁed Rickettsia in only half of their I. scapularis nymphs
examined (n = 10) compared to all of the larval samples
(n = 10) and concluded that the decrease in Rickettsia
between the larval and nymphal stages was due to the
possibility that male ticks lose Rickettsia species through
each subsequent moult (Noda et al. 1997). This was sup-
ported by the lack of Rickettsia in the testes of adult
males and its presence in adult female ovaries (Noda
et al. 1997). However, although we found relatively less
Rickettsia in males compared to females, our study indi-
cates that Rickettsia sp. are found in whole I. scapularis
adults of both sexes, a ﬁnding also recently reported
(Van Treuren et al. 2015). If all external abiotic and
Although a recent study by Narasimhan et al. (2014)
explored the microbiome of two different cohorts of lar-
vae hatched and reared in the lab (reared in sterile con-
ditions or so-called ‘normal’ containers), our study is
the ﬁrst to compare lab-hatched to ﬁeld-collected larvae.
The decrease in bacterial a-diversity observed in adult
females was also observed in freshly hatched, lab-raised
larvae. These larvae, having no exposure to the ﬁeld,
presumably contain only bacteria that were transovari-
ally transmitted. The high relative abundance of Rick-
ettsia observed in females (mean = 97.8%) was observed
at an even higher relative abundance in the lab-raised
larvae (99.5%), potentially due to certain bacteria found
in females that are not transferred to their offspring.
Transovarial transmission of Rickettsia has been detected
in a number of tick species (Macaluso et al. 2001, 2002;
Horta et al. 2006; Perlman et al. 2006), including I. scapu-
laris (Narasimhan et al. 2014), which our results sup-
port. It is possible that environmental bacteria present
on the tick’s cuticle persisted into the DNA isolation
procedure, despite sterilization with ethanol. However,
this is unlikely, due to the large differences in Rickettsia
present in lab-raised larvae compared to ﬁeld-collected
larvae. Furthermore, if bacteria did persist on the tick
cuticle following ethanol washes, this would have been
observed across all tick developmental stages, including
adult females, which was manifestly not the case.
Given the overwhelming abundance of Rickettsia
across life stages and organs, we attempted to dissect
its subgeneric diversity using phylogenetic criteria and
found the vast majority of the sequences to cluster
with bona ﬁde Ixodes tick rickettsial endosymbionts. It
remains unknown whether this is indicative of a geno-
mewide pattern of conservation due to a bottleneck or
a massive selective sweep accompanying symbiosis, or
a mere localized snapshot of sequence conservation at
this locus. I. scapularis is known so far to harbour one
endosymbiotic rickettsial species (Gillespie et al. 2012;
Kurtti et al. 2015), but ﬁner taxonomic resolution using
more informative genetic markers at
the subgeneric
and strain levels may provide additional insight into
population-level variation and adaptation to intracellu-
lar
life in coexistence with pathogens. Our study
focused on an area with one of the highest pathogen
prevalence levels in blacklegged ticks. Future studies
examining the functional interplay between tick micro-
biomes and pathogens over a larger geographic region
are warranted.