Even though they have limitations
like all other models, they present some important
immunological and histopathological aspects of IBD in
humans [16]. The most widely used and characterized
experimental model of erosion and inﬂammation related
to UC in mice is the dextran sulphate sodium (DSS)-
induced colitis, which is developed by DSS administration
either in the drinking water [16, 17] or via intragastric
catheter [18, 19]. The DSS induces a reproducible
acute colitis [16]; however, there is some controversy
regarding the type of inﬂammation that is induced. 2016, 56, 1–13

the animal care facility at the Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Manitoba. This was followed by multiple dilution steps using pre-
chilled hybridization buffer (HT1) (Illumina, San Diego,
CA, USA) to bring the pooled amplicons to a ﬁnal
concentration of 5 pM, measured by Qubit 2.0 Fluorom-
eter (Life technologies, Burlington, ON, Canada). The
sequencing data are uploaded into the Sequence Read
Archive (SRA) of NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra)
and are accessible through accession number SRR2830596. Bioinformatic analyses
The PANDAseq assembler [50] was used to merge
overlapping paired-end Illumina fastq ﬁles. Data were presented in loading scatter
plots. The new OTU table
was then used to generate metagenomic data after
normalizing the data by copy numbers, and to derive
relative Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG) Pathway abundance [61]. The KEGG data were
analyzed using STAMP (STatistical Analysis of Metage-
nomic Proﬁles) [62].

Statistical analysis
The UNIVARIATE procedure of SAS (SAS 9.3, 2012) was
used to test the normality of residuals for a-diversity
data. Phylum percentage data were also used to evaluate
statistical differences between the DSS and control
treatments. For the disease index activity, macroscopic
scores, weight loss score and inﬂammatory markers,
statistical analysis was performed using one-way ANOVA

(cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. The differences between groups were
considered signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. Dextran sulfate sodium and mice gut microbiota

5

Bacterial a-diversity in the colonic MAM was not
signiﬁcantly different between the control mice and
the DSS mice samples, suggesting that both sample
groups have similar bacterial species richness and
evenness (Fig. Microbiota composition at phylum and lower
taxonomic levels in the fecal samples
A total of 259,126 sequences were generated after quality
ﬁltering steps with an average of 28,791 high-quality
sequences per sample, which resulted in identiﬁcation of
11 phyla and 86 taxa. (cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

6

Peris Mumbi Munyaka et al. The p values shown
on top of each bar were calculated using SAS. a) Fecal
samples clustered separately according to treatment status of the mice, suggesting that DSS and control mice samples are composed of
distinct bacterial communities; (b) colon mucosa samples have shared bacterial communities. The p values were determined using
PERMANOVA. Results of the relative abundances of
various phyla are summarized in Fig. The low-abundance phyla (<1% of
included Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria,
community),
Cyanobacteria, Fibrobacteres, Lentisphaerae, Planctomy-
cetes, Spirochaetes, TM7, and Tenericutes. 2016, 56, 1–13

Dextran sulfate sodium and mice gut microbiota

9

Figure 6. ( Subsystems
or pathways overrepresented in the DSS or (control) mice colon samples have a positive or (negative) difference between mean proportions
and are indicated by red or (blue) coloring, respectively. In this regard, it
was worth noting that more taxa were signiﬁcantly
associated with the DSS treatment in fecal samples
compared to the colonic samples; however, several
taxa including: Bacteroides ovatus, g. Clostridium, rc4-4;
f. Clostridiaceae, Bacteroidaceae; and o. Bacteroidales,
RF39, and RF32 were positively associated with the DSS
treatment in both fecal and colonic mucosa samples. Generally,
despite these differences in relative abundances of
speciﬁc phylotypes, there appear to be a consensus in
overall decrease in biodiversity in IBD patients and in
murine models of colitis [33, 35, 68, 75].

The mechanisms by which DSS induced stronger
bacterial shifts in the feces than in the colon mucosa

are not fully understood. [6] Klag, T., Stange, F.E., Wehkamp,

J., 2013. Mouse models for the study of Crohn’s disease. Dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis in
mice. Hen egg lysozyme attenuates inﬂammation and
modulates local gene expression in a porcine model of
dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced colitis. [20] Kitajima, S., Takuma, S., Morimoto, M., 2000. The vagus nerve: a tonic
inhibitory inﬂuence associated with inﬂammatory bowel
disease in a murine model. [30] Erickson, A.R., Cantarel, B.L., Lamendella, R., Darzi, Y.,
et al., Dysfunction of the intestinal microbiome in inﬂammatory
bowel disease and treatment. Fecal microbial composition of ulcerative
colitis and Crohn’s disease patients in remission and
subsequent exacerbation. Guide to the Care
and Use of Experimental Animals, 2nd ed. [47] Khaﬁpour, E., Li, S., Plaizier, J.C., Krause, D.O., 2009. Ultra-high-throughput microbial community
analysis on the Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq platforms. Microbial ﬁngerprinting detects
unique bacterial communities in the faecal microbiota
of rats with experimentally-induced colitis. PyNAST: a ﬂexible tool for aligning sequences
to a template alignment. PERMANOVA: a FORTRAN computer
program for permutational multivariate analysis of
variance. Department of Statistics, University of
Auckland, New Zealand. [43] Heimesaat, M.M., Fischer, A., Siegmund, B., Kupz, A., et al., [65] Ghia, J.E., Blennerhassett, P., Collins, S.M., 2008.