Even though they have limitations
like all other models, they present some important
immunological and histopathological aspects of IBD in
humans [16]. The most widely used and characterized
experimental model of erosion and inﬂammation related
to UC in mice is the dextran sulphate sodium (DSS)-
induced colitis, which is developed by DSS administration
either in the drinking water [16, 17] or via intragastric
catheter [18, 19]. The DSS induces a reproducible
acute colitis [16]; however, there is some controversy
regarding the type of inﬂammation that is induced. This was followed by multiple dilution steps using pre-
chilled hybridization buffer (HT1) (Illumina, San Diego,
CA, USA) to bring the pooled amplicons to a ﬁnal
concentration of 5 pM, measured by Qubit 2.0 Fluorom-
eter (Life technologies, Burlington, ON, Canada). Bioinformatic analyses
The PANDAseq assembler [50] was used to merge
overlapping paired-end Illumina fastq ﬁles. Data were presented in loading scatter
plots. Also, the level of CRP, a
marker of systemic inﬂammation, and inﬂammatory
cytokines IL-1b and IL-6 increased in the DSS group
(p < 0.0001; Fig. (cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. 2016, 56, 1–13

6

Peris Mumbi Munyaka et al. a) Fecal
samples clustered separately according to treatment status of the mice, suggesting that DSS and control mice samples are composed of
distinct bacterial communities; (b) colon mucosa samples have shared bacterial communities. Results of the relative abundances of
various phyla are summarized in Fig. The low-abundance phyla (<1% of
included Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria,
community),
Cyanobacteria, Fibrobacteres, Lentisphaerae, Planctomy-
cetes, Spirochaetes, TM7, and Tenericutes. While majority of taxa were classiﬁed at the genus
level, some could only be afﬁliated to phylum (P), class (C), order (O), or family (F) levels. – Corrected p values were calculated using the Storey FDR correction. Generally,
despite these differences in relative abundances of
speciﬁc phylotypes, there appear to be a consensus in
overall decrease in biodiversity in IBD patients and in
murine models of colitis [33, 35, 68, 75].

The mechanisms by which DSS induced stronger
bacterial shifts in the feces than in the colon mucosa

are not fully understood. Given that the microbial analysis of diversity, commu-
nity composition and also changes at phylum level for
colonic samples did not show any signiﬁcant difference
between the DSS and control mice, the results suggest
that analysis at microbial functional level might reveal
important colitis-related changes in gut microbiome
that are otherwise not noticeable at higher phylogenetic
or community levels. Epidemiology and natural history of inﬂammatory bowel
diseases. [9] Hibi, T., Ogata, H., Sakuraba, A., 2002. The dextran sulphate sodium (DSS) model of colitis:
an overview. [30] Erickson, A.R., Cantarel, B.L., Lamendella, R., Darzi, Y.,
et al., [45] Canadian Council on Animal Care, 1993. [47] Khaﬁpour, E., Li, S., Plaizier, J.C., Krause, D.O., 2009. Longitudinal analysis of inﬂammation and micro-
biota dynamics in a model of mild chronic dextran sulfate
sodium-induced colitis in mice. [37] Schwab, C., Berry, D., Rauch, I., Rennisch, I., et al., PyNAST: a ﬂexible tool for aligning sequences
to a template alignment. Department of Statistics, University of
Auckland, New Zealand. [65] Ghia, J.E., Blennerhassett, P., Collins, S.M., 2008. Molecular-phylogenetic characterization of
microbial community imbalances in human inﬂamma-
tory bowel diseases.