Page 2

MICROBES AND NUTRITION DURING CRITICAL ILLNESS

It has been known for decades that intestinal bacteria make important contributions to
human metabolism and physiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Morowitz et al. An equally important objective is
to identify associations between the microbiome and human health and disease [12].

SPECIFIC CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE GUT MICROBIOTA TO HUMAN

METABOLISM

A particularly compelling example of the importance of the gut microbiota to host
metabolism is provided by comparing the nutritional status of germ-free (GF) and
conventionally raised laboratory animals. published the complete genome sequence of the
gram-negative anaerobe Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, a prominent member of the normal
intestinal microbiota [10]. Annotation and analysis of the genome revealed a sophisticated
apparatus for acquiring and digesting otherwise unusable dietary polysaccharides. Microbiota and protein metabolism

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Morowitz et al. Here, again, metagenomic analyses were used to prove that the gut microbiome of
animals fed a Western diet is enriched in genes encoding proteins related to energy harvest,
including phosphotransferase proteins that enable the transport of simple sugars such as
glucose and fructose. Subsequently, several studies have contrasted gut microbes in newborn animals

Surg Clin North Am. receiving either enteral or parenteral nutrition. These studies suggest that TPN-fed animals
have an increased relative abundance of potential pathogens, such as Clostridium
perfringens, that can forage on glycans lining the gut epithelium [45, 46]. However, it is not
known if these findings can be extended to critically ill adults that have shifted abruptly
from the fed to the fasting state. As a result, interventions in this
field have been introduced with a limited scientific foundation. Others with obvious relevance to nutrition are discussed. Interestingly, despite the fact that they are often used to treat patients
with disease, probiotics and prebiotics are viewed by regulatory agencies as nutritional
supplements rather than as pharmaceutical agents or biohazards. Most mechanistic studies in this area have centered upon production of
antimicrobial substances to inhibit colonization by pathogens, enhance the mucosal barrier
function, and downregulate mucosal inflammation [69]. It is particularly interesting that,
despite the growing awareness of how gut microbes contribute to energy balance and despite
the administration of probiotics/prebiotics as nutritional supplements, little research on this
topic has focused on how these agents specifically impact nutrition, metabolism, or energy
balance. First, it is apparent that future
evaluations of human nutritional status during critical illness should include consideration of
the gut microbiota. Acknowledgments

References

This work was supported by Grant No. GM62344-11 (JCA) from the National Institutes of Health. High-throughput diversity and functionality
analysis of the gastrointestinal tract microbiota. The commensal microbiology of the gastrointestinal tract. Colonic health: Fermentation and short chain fatty

acids. Regulation of short-chain fatty acid production. Contribution of microbial amino acids to amino acid homeostasis of the host. Pigs’ gastrointestinal microflora provide them with

essential amino acids. Urea nitrogen salvage mechanisms and their relevance to ruminants, non-

ruminants and man. The metabolism of carbon-labeled urea in the

germ free rat. Turnbaugh PJ, Backhed F, Fulton L, et al. Intestinal absorption of water-soluble vitamins: An update. Tilg H, Moschen AR, Kaser A. Obesity and the microbiota. Turnbaugh PJ, Hamady M, Yatsunenko T, et al. A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins. Shifts in clostridia, bacteroides and immunoglobulin-coating
fecal bacteria associated with weight loss in obese adolescents. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106(7):2365–2370. [ Influences of dietary and environmental stress on microbial populations

in the murine gastrointestinal tract. Regulation of myocardial ketone body

metabolism by the gut microbiota during nutrient deprivation. Kerver AJ, Rommes JH, Mevissen-Verhage E, et al. Prevention of colonization and infection in

critically ill patients: A prospective randomized study. Alverdy J, Zaborina O, Wu L. The impact of stress and nutrition on bacterial-host interactions at

the intestinal epithelial surface. Ecological effects of selective decontamination on

resistant gram-negative bacterial colonization. Probiotics and their potential health claims. Prebiotics and probiotics; modifying and mining the microbiota. Probiotic prophylaxis in predicted severe acute

pancreatitis: A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.