Page 2

MICROBES AND NUTRITION DURING CRITICAL ILLNESS

It has been known for decades that intestinal bacteria make important contributions to
human metabolism and physiology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Morowitz et al. An equally important objective is
to identify associations between the microbiome and human health and disease [12].

SPECIFIC CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE GUT MICROBIOTA TO HUMAN

METABOLISM

A particularly compelling example of the importance of the gut microbiota to host
metabolism is provided by comparing the nutritional status of germ-free (GF) and
conventionally raised laboratory animals. Mechanistic studies in gnotobiotic animals further demonstrated that, when B.
thetaiotaomicron senses a scarcity of fucose in the intestinal lumen, it actually induces the
gut epithelium to upregulate expression of fucosylated glycans that can be used by the
bacteria as an energy source without harming the host [16]. This body of work illustrates
how the remarkable host-microbe symbiosis can be teased apart by pairing genomic
sequencing efforts with creative in vivo laboratory studies. Intriguingly, colonization of GF mice with just a single gut microbe (B. thetaiotaocmicron,
discussed above) also yielded a significant increase in total body fat content, although the
increase in fat content was less than that seen with transfer of the complete mouse
microbiota. LESSONS LEARNED FROM STUDIES OF NUTRIENT EXCESS AND

DEPRIVATION

Obesity

Studying the relationship between the gut microbiota and energy balance in the extreme
states of obesity and starvation may improve our ability to assess and satisfy nutritional
needs in the ICU. Here, again, metagenomic analyses were used to prove that the gut microbiome of
animals fed a Western diet is enriched in genes encoding proteins related to energy harvest,
including phosphotransferase proteins that enable the transport of simple sugars such as
glucose and fructose. Most mechanistic studies in this area have centered upon production of
antimicrobial substances to inhibit colonization by pathogens, enhance the mucosal barrier
function, and downregulate mucosal inflammation [69]. It is particularly interesting that,
despite the growing awareness of how gut microbes contribute to energy balance and despite
the administration of probiotics/prebiotics as nutritional supplements, little research on this
topic has focused on how these agents specifically impact nutrition, metabolism, or energy
balance. First, it is apparent that future
evaluations of human nutritional status during critical illness should include consideration of
the gut microbiota. Acknowledgments

References

This work was supported by Grant No. GM62344-11 (JCA) from the National Institutes of Health. High-throughput diversity and functionality
analysis of the gastrointestinal tract microbiota. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999; 96(17):9833–
9838. [ 2000; 130(7):1857S–64S. [PubMed: 10867063]

19. Utilization of essential amino acids synthesized in the intestinal microbiota

of monogastric mammals. Urea nitrogen salvage mechanisms and their relevance to ruminants, non-

ruminants and man. The metabolism of carbon-labeled urea in the

germ free rat. Turnbaugh PJ, Backhed F, Fulton L, et al. A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins. Regulation of myocardial ketone body

metabolism by the gut microbiota during nutrient deprivation. Prolonged impact of antibiotics on intestinal microbial

ecology and susceptibility to enteric salmonella infection. de Smet A, Kluytmans JA, Cooper BS, et al. The effect of selective decontamination of the

digestive tract on mortality in multiple trauma patients: A multicenter randomized controlled trial. Probiotics and prebiotics in dietetics practice. Long J, Zaborina O, Holbrook C, Zaborin A, Alverdy J. Depletion of intestinal phosphate after

operative injury activates the virulence of P aeruginosa causing lethal gut-derived sepsis.