Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

2 of 13

The crucial role of the intestinal microbiota in modulating insulin resistance and the inﬂammatory
response in GDM pregnancies has been reported by a few studies [13,14]. It is well known that diet is
able to modulate the microbiota composition rapidly, within a few days [15,16]. Emerging evidence
has shown a differential role of speciﬁc nutrients on metabolic outcomes, based on the individual
microbial pattern. The potential impact of speciﬁc
dietary interventions on the gut bacteria composition and function is of considerable interest in the
search for the optimal strategy to prevent and treat GDM. Herein, we examine the updated evidence about this emerging topic. Methods

The following electronic databases were queried: PubMed (National Library of Medicine),
the Cochrane Library, EMBASE, and Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature
(CINAHL). upward arrows mean an increased abundance,
downward arrows mean a decreased abundance. On the other hand, the B-type individuals
could lose weight and improve their glucose metabolism with biﬁdobacteria-increasing interventions,
including prebiotics, such as inulin and oligosaccharides, or symbiotic treatment [86].

A Prevotellaceae-dominated intestinal microbiome has been observed after 3–16 months
from delivery in women with previous GDM when compared to women after a normoglycemic
pregnancy [41]. Other studies conﬁrmed an increased abundance of the genus Prevotella in GDM in
the second [38] and third [39] trimester of gestation compared to normoglycemic subjects. However, it
generally reverts to the
original status with
short-term dietary changes. Randomized controlled trials
are lacking. S.B. participated in the conception of the
paper, collection and interpretation of the references, manuscript writing and revision. Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

References

9 of 13

1. Frequency
of gestational diabetes mellitus at collaborating centers based on IADPSG consensus panel-recommended
criteria: The Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) Study. Hyperglycemia and adverse
pregnancy outcomes. CrossRef]
Vohr, B.R.; Boney, C.M. Gestational diabetes: The forerunner for the development of maternal and childhood
obesity and metabolic syndrome? Koren, O.; Goodrich, J.K.; Cullender, T.C.; Spor, A.; Laitinen, K.; Bäckhed, H.K.; Gonzalez, A.; Werner, J.J.;
Angenent, L.T.; Knight, R.; et al. Host remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes during
pregnancy. Meijnikman, A.S.; Gerdes, V.E.; Nieuwdorp, M.; Herrema, H. Evaluating Causality of Gut Microbiota in

Obesity and Diabetes in Humans. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

24. Wang, J.; Zheng, J.M.; Shi, W.; Xu, X.; Zhang, Y.; Ji, P.; Zhang, F.; Jia, Z.; Wang, Y.; Zheng, Z.; et al. Changes in the gut microbiota composition during pregnancy in patients with gestational
diabetes mellitus (GDM). CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

11 of 13

41. Lambeth, S.M.; Carson, T.; Lowe, J.; Ramaraj, T.; Leff, J.W.; Luo, L.; Bell, C.J.; Shah, V.O. Composition,
Diversity and Abundance of Gut Microbiome in Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes. Fat and vitamin intakes during pregnancy have stronger relations with
a pro-inﬂammatory maternal microbiota than does carbohydrate intake. Mokkala, K.; Röytiö, H.; Munukka, E.; Pietilä, S.; Ekblad, U.; Rönnemaa, T.; Eerola, E.; Laiho, A.; Laitinen, K.
Gut Microbiota Richness and Composition and Dietary Intake of Overweight Pregnant Women Are Related to
Serum Zonulin Concentration, a Marker for Intestinal Permeability. Bo, S.; Menato, G.; Lezo, A.; Signorile, A.; Bardelli, C.; De Michieli, F.; Massobrio, M.; Pagano, G. Dietary fat

and gestational hyperglycaemia. CrossRef] [PubMed]

© 2019 by the authors.