THE JOURNAL OF PEDIATRICS (cid:129) www.jpeds.com

Volume ■■ • ■■ 2018

Trial enrolled 881 pregnant women at 3 clinical sites in the US
(Boston, Massachusetts; St. Louis, Missouri; and San Diego,
California). Caretakers were in-
structed to collect approximately 2.5 milliliters of child stool
from a diaper using a tongue depressor 1-2 days prior to a study
visit and to store the sample in a home freezer until bringing
it to the visit in a freezer pack. The top principal component was used
in regression models. Questions regarding the child diet were asked beginning at
age 6 months. Operational taxonomic units identiﬁed at least
10 times in at least 10 subjects were used in microbiome-
wide analyses. Covariates in multivariable analysis, chosen on the
basis of prior studies,7,11 included mode of delivery, child race/
ethnicity (African American, Hispanic, white, other), age at stool
collection, treatment arm, and maternal education. Missing data
were considered missing at random and complete case analy-
sis was employed. Analysis covariates were the same
as for multivariable regression analyses described above, and
results were considered signiﬁcant at a false discovery rate of
.05 or less. T test was used for analysis of age at stool sample collection and c2 tests were used for all other comparisons. However, after adjusting
for demographic variables (mode of delivery, age, treatment,
maternal education, and race/ethnicity), breastfeeding vs
formula feeding and solid food introduction, the only asso-
ciation between the maternal diet and taxa selected a priori
for analysis was a positive association with Lactobacillus spp
(mean difference = 0.48; P = .02). We did not ﬁnd associations between the second principal
component of the maternal diet (representing high pasta, rice,
and noodle intake) and diversity or these 4 genera. We did
not detect an association between solid foods and relative abun-
dance of Bacteroides spp, Biﬁdobacterium spp, Lactobacillus spp,
or Clostridia spp in unadjusted analyses. After adjusting for de-
mographic variables, solid food introduction was positively as-
sociated with Clostridium spp (mean difference = 0.80 log
counts; P = .03) and this association remained signiﬁcant after
addition of infant breastfeeding vs formula feeding status and
maternal diet to the adjusted model (mean difference = 0.75
log counts, P = .05). We found that
Biﬁdobacterium spp counts were similar among breastfed and
formula-fed African American infants, and Hispanic and white
breastfed infants had higher levels of Biﬁdobacterium spp com-
pared with formula-fed Hispanic and White infants (African

Diet during Pregnancy and Infancy and the Infant Intestinal Microbiome

3

FLA 5.5.0 DTD ■ YMPD10154_proof ■ August 30, 2018

THE JOURNAL OF PEDIATRICS (cid:129) www.jpeds.com

Volume ■■

Table IV. Mean, SD for normally distributed variables (Shannon index, Richness). §Dietary variables: infant breastfeeding vs formula feeding and first principal component of maternal diet (high in vegetables and low in processed meats and deep fried foods). In an ethnically homogeneous population using targeted
quantitative polymerase chain reaction on stool samples col-
lected at age 1 month, Penders et al showed breastfed infants
had less Clostridia difﬁcile compared with formula-fed infants.7,30
This contrasts with our ﬁnding of a positive association between
breastfeeding and overall Clostridia spp, though we expect that
the inﬂuence of breastfeeding differs among individual species
within this genus. ■

Submitted for publication Apr 16, 2018; last revision received Jun 12, 2018;
accepted Jul 13, 2018

References

1. Peanut allergy prevalence among school-age children
in a US cohort not selected for any disease. Penders J, Thijs C, Vink C, Stelma FF, Snijders B, Kummeling I, et al. Factors
inﬂuencing the composition of the intestinal microbiota in early infancy. Yoshioka H, Iseki K, Fujita K. Development and differences of intestinal
ﬂora in the neonatal period in breast-fed and bottle-fed infants. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2014;112:222-
9. Litonjua AA, Lange NE, Carey VJ, Brown S, Laranjo N, Harshﬁeld BJ, et al. Chimeric 16S rRNA sequence formation and detection in
Sanger and 454-pyrosequenced PCR amplicons. The Ribo-
somal Database Project: improved alignments and new tools for rRNA
analysis. A microbial symbiosis factor pre-

vents intestinal inﬂammatory disease. Shida K, Takahashi R, Iwadate E, Takamizawa K, Yasui H, Sato T, et al. Ling Z, Li Z, Liu X, Cheng Y, Luo Y, Tong X, et al. Diet during Pregnancy and Infancy and the Infant Intestinal Microbiome

7

FLA 5.5.0 DTD ■ YMPD10154_proof ■ August 30, 2018

THE JOURNAL OF PEDIATRICS (cid:129) www.jpeds.com

Volume ■■

26. Human milk oligosaccharides promote the growth of staphylococci. Soto A, Martín V, Jiménez E, Mader I, Rodríguez JM, Fernández L.
Lactobacilli and biﬁdobacteria in human breast milk: inﬂuence of
antibiotherapy and other host and clinical factors. The average
value for the two questionnaires was taken for further analy-
sis. For cases in which information from one questionnaire was
missing, only information from the other questionnaire was
used. If the
answer was no, they were asked “How old was your baby when

you stopped breastfeeding.” In 21 cases, an age at cessation of
breastfeeding was not available. In these cases, if the stool sample
was collected within 30 days of completing the question-
naire, we assumed the child was on the same diet at the stool
collection as at questionnaire completion. Similar to the above, we used question-
naire responses obtained at 6 months to determine whether
a child was ingesting formula at the time of stool collection. At the 6 month visit, providers were asked, since we last
spoke with you, have you fed your baby any infant formula. Flow diagram of subjects included in study. The eigenvalue gives a measure of how much variance in the
data is reflected by each principal component.