Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

2 of 13

The crucial role of the intestinal microbiota in modulating insulin resistance and the inﬂammatory
response in GDM pregnancies has been reported by a few studies [13,14]. It is well known that diet is
able to modulate the microbiota composition rapidly, within a few days [15,16]. Emerging evidence
has shown a differential role of speciﬁc nutrients on metabolic outcomes, based on the individual
microbial pattern. The potential impact of speciﬁc
dietary interventions on the gut bacteria composition and function is of considerable interest in the
search for the optimal strategy to prevent and treat GDM. Herein, we examine the updated evidence about this emerging topic. In particular, we analyze
the changes in the gut microbiota and the diet–microbiota interactions occurring during healthy
pregnancies and pregnancies complicated by GDM. Methods

The following electronic databases were queried: PubMed (National Library of Medicine),
the Cochrane Library, EMBASE, and Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature
(CINAHL). The search strategy was performed using database speciﬁc subject headings and keywords;
restrictions to human studies were placed. Gut microbiota changes during the course of normoglycemic pregnancies and GDM
pregnancies. upward arrows mean an increased abundance,
downward arrows mean a decreased abundance. Nutrients
are able to interact directly with microbes by promoting or inhibiting their growth. The consumption of retinol and vitamin
D was associated with a relative increase in abundance of the pro-inﬂammatory Proteobacteria
phylum. Randomized controlled trials in which
strategies of dietary manipulation during pregnancy are employed to shape the gut microbiota
composition (such as reducing methylamines-contained foods, changing types of ﬁber intake) are
strongly advisable in order to evaluate the possibility of GDM prevention or control. On the other hand, the B-type individuals
could lose weight and improve their glucose metabolism with biﬁdobacteria-increasing interventions,
including prebiotics, such as inulin and oligosaccharides, or symbiotic treatment [86].

A Prevotellaceae-dominated intestinal microbiome has been observed after 3–16 months
from delivery in women with previous GDM when compared to women after a normoglycemic
pregnancy [41]. Other studies conﬁrmed an increased abundance of the genus Prevotella in GDM in
the second [38] and third [39] trimester of gestation compared to normoglycemic subjects. At present, we are still far from ﬁnding a personalized dietary
treatment for GDM patients. Finally, doubts have recently been raised about the beneﬁt of probiotics in preventing
GDM, thus questioning the role of microbiota in pregnancy hyperglycemia [96].

Table 1. The microbiota of GDM
patients can be transmitted
to the offspring. However, it
generally reverts to the
original status with
short-term dietary changes. Uncertainty about the causal
relationship between gut
dysbiosis and GDM. Randomized controlled trials
are lacking. Author Contributions: V.P. participated in the conception of the paper, collection and interpretation of the
references, manuscript writing and revision. S.B. participated in the conception of the
paper, collection and interpretation of the references, manuscript writing and revision. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results. Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

References

9 of 13

1. and for the HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group. Classiﬁcation and Diagnosis of Diabetes: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Hyperglycemia and adverse
pregnancy outcomes. Host remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes during
pregnancy. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

24. Wang, J.; Zheng, J.M.; Shi, W.; Xu, X.; Zhang, Y.; Ji, P.; Zhang, F.; Jia, Z.; Wang, Y.; Zheng, Z.; et al. Cortez, R.V.; Taddei, C.R.; Sparvoli, L.G.; Angelo, A.G.S.; Padilha, M.; Mattar, R.; Daher, S. Microbiome and

its relation to gestational diabetes. Mokkala, K.; Houttu, N.; Vahlberg, T.; Munukka, E.; Rönnemaa, T.; Laitinen, K. Gut microbiota aberrations

precede diagnosis of gestational diabetes mellitus. CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

11 of 13

41. Gomez-Arango, L.F.; Barrett, H.L.; Wilkinson, S.A.; Callaway, L.K.; McIntyre, H.D.; Morrison, M.;
Dekker Nitert, M. Low dietary ﬁber intake increases Collinsella abundance in the gut microbiota of
overweight and obese pregnant women. Lambeth, S.M.; Carson, T.; Lowe, J.; Ramaraj, T.; Leff, J.W.; Luo, L.; Bell, C.J.; Shah, V.O. Composition,
Diversity and Abundance of Gut Microbiome in Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes. Fat and vitamin intakes during pregnancy have stronger relations with
a pro-inﬂammatory maternal microbiota than does carbohydrate intake. Metabolic retroconversion of trimethylamine N-oxide and the gut
microbiota. Matsuzawa-Nagata, N.; Takamura, T.; Ando, H.; Nakamura, S.; Kurita, S.; Misu, H.; Ota, T.; Yokoyama, M.;
Honda, M.; Miyamoto, K.; et al. Hernandez, T.L.; van Pelt, R.E.; Anderson, M.A.; Reece, M.S.; Reynolds, R.M.; de la Houssaye, B.A.;
Heerwagen, M.; Donahoo, W.T.; Daniels, L.J.; Chartier-Logan, C.; et al. Women With Gestational Diabetes
Mellitus Randomized to a Higher-Complex Carbohydrate/Low-Fat Diet Manifest Lower Adipose Tissue
Insulin Resistance, Inﬂammation, Glucose, and Free Fatty Acids: A Pilot Study. A dietary ﬁber-deprived gut microbiota degrades the colonic mucus barrier
and enhances pathogen susceptibility. CrossRef] [PubMed]

© 2019 by the authors. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).