in

use

symptomatic

including preterm birth (PTB).1–4 Antibiotics are effective
in eradicating BV during pregnancy5 and are recommended
The
for
consequences of antibiotic use during pregnancy have been
poorly studied,7 but
there are concerns that antibiotic-
related changes in the vaginal microbiota8 are associated
with short- and long-term morbidity in infancy and later
years.9

pregnant women.6

Probiotics might be a safe and effective alternative to
antibiotics in restoring the imbalance of the vaginal micro-
biota found in BV. We therefore performed a randomised trial of a com-
available probiotic preparation in pregnant
mercially
women to assess its biological effects on the vaginal micro-
biota. After conﬁrming eligibility,
informed consent was
obtained and baseline data recorded. These were then packaged into tamper-proof
boxes. One swab was used to prepare a glass slide for Gram stain,
and the other was extracted into 3 ml of Brain Heart Infu-
sion broth (Unipath Ltd, Basingstoke, UK) containing 10%
glycerol and 0.005% cysteine hydrochloride. Sequence reactions
were spiked with 10% 12.5 pM PhiX DNA. Reads were ﬁl-
tered by quality score using DADA229 to remove sequences
with an expected error over 2 bp. The alpha diversity of the samples was estimated by calcu-
lating the Inverse Simpson index and compared between
groups by the Wilcoxon test. to the SOP available

taxonomic units

according

Statistical analysis
We used descriptive analysis to report baseline characteris-
tics of trial participants by allocated group. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

3

Husain et al. Otherwise, we reported the model without adjusting for
confounders. A
total of 997 women were excluded from the trial either
because they did not meet the inclusion criteria (270/1301)
or they declined to participate. At 18–20 weeks’ gestation, the rate of BV in the probi-
otic group was 15% (19/123) compared with 9% (10/115)
in the placebo group. In the placebo group, the
mean Nugent scores at the same time points were 1.17
(95% CI 0.67–1.67), 0.86 (95% CI 0.37–1.34), and 1.33
(95% CI 0.82–1.83), respectively (Figure 2). Previous observational studies and small-scale
randomised controlled trials in non-pregnant populations
have suggested that oral administration of probiotics can
alter the vaginal microbiota in a signiﬁcant number of
women where microbial imbalance exists.18–21 It is on this
basis that several commercial probiotic products are mar-
keted for the restoration and maintenance of a healthy
vaginal microbiota in both non-pregnant and pregnant
women.19,20 Our ﬁndings have not shown any effect on the
vaginal microbiota with the probiotic preparation used in
this trial. Finally, adherence to the trial intervention, although over
90% in both groups, was reliant on self-reporting because
participants rarely remembered to bring in unused capsules
for a count at their scheduled antenatal visits. However, it
has been shown that self-reported compliance is a reliable
substitute for capsule count, particularly in trials where
there is regular in-person follow up.25

Comparison with other studies
Results of clinical
trials in non-pregnant women have
reported positive effects of probiotics on BV.43 However,

01234567

Nugent Score

Husain et al. Our ﬁndings
those recently reported by Gille
et al.44 In a randomised, controlled trial, 320 women at
<12 weeks’ gestational age were allocated to once-daily oral
capsules of L. rhamnosus GR-1 or L. reuteri RC-14 or pla-
cebo for 8 weeks. Contribution to authorship
The trial was conceived by MM and MW, and designed by
SH and KK. EP and WW carried out the DNA sequencing. All participants provided
informed consent to take part in the trial. Data sharing
The research team will consider reasonable requests for
sharing of patient level data. The study was sup-
ported by the NIHR CRN portfolio with recruitment and
follow up of participants, and was sponsored by Queen
Mary University of London. References

1 DiGiulio DB, Callahan BJ, McMurdie PJ, Costello EK, Lyell DJ,
Robaczewska A, et al. Predictive value for preterm birth of
abnormal vaginal ﬂora, bacterial vaginosis and aerobic vaginitis
during the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy. Best Pract Res
Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2007;21:375–90. Identiﬁcation and H2O2 production of vaginal lactobacilli from
pregnant women at high risk of preterm birth and relation with
outcome. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2013;(1):CD000262. 15 Luoto R, Laitinen K, Nermes M,

Impact of maternal
probiotic-supplemented dietary counselling on pregnancy outcome
and prenatal and postnatal growth: a double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. Oral use of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GR-1 and L.

Probiotics and vaginal microbiota in pregnancy

fermentum RC-14 signiﬁcantly alters vaginal ﬂora:
placebo-controlled trial
Microbiol 2003;35:131–4. 22 Gy-Na-Tren - Homeopathic Treatment for Feminine Health. [ https://
5

www.natren.com/gy-na-tren-feminine-health.html].
December 2017. 25 Kaunitz AM, Portman D, Westhoff CL, Archer DF, Mishell DR Jr,
Foegh M. Self-reported and veriﬁed compliance in a phase 3 clinical
trial of a novel low-dose contraceptive patch and pill. http://clincalc.com/Stats/

SampleSize.aspx]. Accessed 1 July 2017. 28 Husain SM, Wilks M, Mupita M, Reddy SP, Hennessy EM,
Macfarlane AJ, et al. A core outcome set for evaluation of interventions to prevent
preterm birth. Annual live births by sex, ethnicity and month, maternities
by place of birth and with multiple births, and stillbirths by age of
parents
[https://www.ons.gov.uk/people
populationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/livebirths/bulletins/
birthcharacteristicsinenglandandwales/2015]. Accessed 31 January
2019. Telehealth for patients at high risk of cardiovascular
disease: pragmatic randomised controlled trial. Optimizing participation of
pregnant women in clinical trials: factors inﬂuencing decisions about
participation in medication and vaccine trials. 46 Chang HH, Larson J, Blencowe H, Spong CY, Howson CP, Cairns-
Smith S, et al. 44 Gille C, Boer B, Marschal M, Urschitz MS, Heinecke V, Hund V, et al.