of intravaginal nonoxyl-9 (an ingredient in spermicide and a commonly used cytotoxic control) and univer-
sal placebo gel (isotonic) found that both have inflammatory effects on cells of the cervix and endometrium12. While these products 
have been shown to negatively impact cells of the female reproductive tract, little is known about how vaginal 
lubricants impact potentially protective Lactobacillus spp. Over six hours of co-culture, the growth of one laboratory and 6 clinical strains of E. 
coli were significantly inhibited in coculture with all vaginal products tested (Table 1) except coconut oil (p < 0.02 for 
all), with an effect seen as soon as 2 hours (Fig. To test the observed interactions in a more high-fidelity model, the vaginal products with the most significant 
inhibitory effects in simple co-culture were then co-cultured with bacteria in the presence of an immortalized 
vaginal epithelial cell line (VK2, ATCC, VA) grown in keratinocyte serum-free (KSF) media. A 1:100 dilution of 
products was used to have a uniform dilution that also maintained viability of human cells with all products, and 
was chosen based on prior publications and preliminary experiments (Supplementary Fig. L. crispatus growth was stimulated by Replens Silky Smooth (p < 0.01). When exposed to a 1:100 dilution of KY Jelly, Replens Long-Lasting 
moisturizer, or Trimo-San in KSF media, the growth of L. crispatus was no longer inhibited (p > 0.05, Fig. Discussion
We demonstrate that several vaginal lubricant and moisturizing products commonly used by postmenopausal 
women inhibit both uropathogenic E. coli and commensal Lactobacillus spp. Change in bacterial growth with exposure to vaginal products in the presence of vaginal cells. ( b) Final change in growth of 
L. crispatus, as measured in CFU (in 1:100 diluted product and MRS/KSF cell culture media as control), 
demonstrating a lack of inhibition by KY Jelly, Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer and Trimo-San, regardless of 
the presence of human vaginal epithelial cells (p > 0.05). Previously, parabens in mouthwash and vaginal moisturizer have been found to decrease or inhibit oral 

Scientific RepoRtS  |         (2020) 10:7625  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-63652-x

3

www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/Lactobacillus spp.16. At the 1:100 dilution no products 
inhibited the growth of Lactobacillus spp., However, vaginal swabs from 235 women in a randomized 
trial of various nonoxynol-9 spermicide formulations found no significant alterations in vaginal microbiota with 
repeated use20. However, results may not be generalizable to other vaginal 
Lactobacillus spp. Materials and Methods
Bacterial culture preparation. The bacterial species used in these experiments include a laboratory strain 
of E. coli (ATCC 8739) and 6 clinical strains of E. coli provided by the Massachusetts General Hospital microbi-
ology lab, which had been isolated from women with cystitis. Bacterial suspensions of E. coli were created by 
inoculating BD Difco Nutrient Broth (Fisher Scientific, MA) and incubating for 6 hours at 37 °C with agitation. In a 96-well microplate, the following were added to each well: 75 µL fresh nutrient broth, 
50 µL test product, 25 µL E. coli broth culture at 0.5 OD, adapted from Kalyoussef et al.21. Each of the seven E. 
coli strains were tested against the five products and four controls (Table 1). Corresponding control wells, which 
served as blanks in calculations of optical density at 600 nm (OD600), were created for every test condition con-
taining 25 µL of nutrient broth medium instead of 25 µL of bacterial broth culture. OD600 measurements were taken at every 2 hours with a Biotek Gen5 plate reader 
(Burlington, VT). The plates were incubated anaerobically at 37 °C without agitation 
for 12 hours. 3), we continued with OD only for E. coli. All 
ingredients were plated on agar to confirm viability of the broth pre-cultures and sterility of test materials. Cell death was assessed with a lactate dehydro-
genase cytotoxicity assay (Fisher Scientific, MA). Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05. Foxman, B. Epidemiology of urinary tract infections: incidence, morbidity, and economic costs. Prospective cohort study of microbial and inflammatory events immediately preceding Escherichia coli recurrent 

urinary tract infection in women. J Infect Dis 200, 528–536, https://doi.org/10.1086/600385 (2009). Microbiol Spectr 4, https://doi.org/10.1128/microbiolspec. Steinberg, B. J. Women’s oral health issues. Microbes Infect 17, 173–183, https://
 

18. Gupta, K., Hillier, S. L., Hooton, T. M., Roberts, P. L. & Stamm, W. E. Effects of contraceptive method on the vaginal microbial flora: 
 

a prospective evaluation. PLoS One 7, e49506, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0049506 (2012). This work 
was supported in part by the Vincent Memorial Research Funds. Author contributions
Designed experiments: K.H. P.H. A.B. C.M. Conducted experiments: K.H., P.H., H.H., N.C. Analyzed data: K.H., 
.H., A.B., C.M. Drafted manuscript: K.H., P.H., C.M. Reviewed and approved final manuscript: All. P

Competing interests
Dr. Mitchell has served as a consultant for Lupin Pharmaceuticals and Scynexis, Inc. Dr. Mitchell receives 
research funding from Merck. Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-63652-x. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.M.

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder.