Brief Reviews

  e
Th

Journal of

Immunology

The Impact of Maternal Microbes and Microbial
Colonization in Early Life on Hematopoiesis

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

function of the immune system at distal tissues, including
primary lymphoid organs, such as the bone marrow (BM) and
thymus. 2

Copyright (cid:1) 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc. 0022-1767/18/$35.00

Kathy D. McCoy and Carolyn A. Thomson

All body surfaces are colonized by microbes, which oc-
curs through a dynamic process over the ﬁrst few years
of life. Initial colonizing microbes are transferred from
the maternal microbiota to the newborn through ver-
tical transmission. Received for publication December 22, 2017. Many factors, including
diet, antibiotic exposure, genotype, and method of delivery
(vaginal versus caesarean), are known to shape the developing
microbiome (1), and it is of crucial importance that we un-
derstand how these factors subsequently impact the develop-
ing immune system. By day 30 after
birth, the intestinal microbiome of infants exposed to IAP in
utero had higher proportions of Comamonadaceae, Staph-
ylococcaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, and an unclassiﬁed bacilli,
along with reduced proportions of Biﬁdobacteriaceae, Strep-
tococcaceae, an unclassiﬁed Lactobacillales, and an unclassiﬁed
Actinobacteria (8). Dietary metabolites can be transferred from mother to child
(12) and may have crucial roles in immune system develop-
ment and inﬂammatory immune responses in the offspring
(Fig. This
model allows microbial colonization to occur only during
pregnancy so that the dam becomes germ-free again prior to
giving birth to her germ-free pups. This study revealed that
maternal Ab-mediated vertical transfer of maternal microbial
components vastly altered gene expression in the intestine of

The Journal of Immunology

2521

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

FIGURE 1. One intriguing possibility that may account for
some of the changes in the neonatal immune system in re-
sponse to maternal colonization is raised by older studies il-
lustrating the presence of maternally derived hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) and other hematopoietic progenitor cells in
cord blood (21), from where they may seed the BM of the
developing fetus. In that study, microbial colonization during
neonatal life was shown to be required to limit accumulation
of invariant NK T cells in the lung and colon, and this effect
was mediated through microbiota-mediated epigenetic regu-
lation of CXCL16 (24). Exposure to microbes in early life is known to have an impact
on primary B cell development that occurs in hindgut B cell
structures in animals like the chicken and rabbit (reviewed in
Ref. Collectively, these factors can access distal sites, such as the BM, where they may regulate the proliferation and differ-
entiation of LSK HSCs, LSK multipotent progenitors, and their descendants (iii), thus shaping commitment to speciﬁc immune cell lineages (iv). 2

Neutrophil release from the BM is dependent on G-CSF
produced by vascular endothelial cells in response to TLR
ligation. 2

Impact of microbial signals on HSC function and leukocyte longevity

The microbial factors that regulate myeloid cell production
and differentiation in the BM may also control their subse-
quent expansion and longevity after their export to the pe-
riphery. Deshmukh, H. S., Y. Liu, O. R. Menkiti, J. Mei, N. Dai, C. E. O’Leary,
P. M. Oliver, J. K. Kolls, J. N. Weiser, and G. S. Worthen. Greenwood, C., A. L. Morrow, A. J. Lagomarcino, M. Altaye, D. H. Taft, Z. Yu,
D. S. Newburg, D. V. Ward, and K. R. Schibler. Effects of intrapartum anti-
microbial prophylaxis for prevention of group-B-streptococcal disease on the inci-
dence and ecology of early-onset neonatal sepsis. Nakajima, A., N. Kaga, Y. Nakanishi, H. Ohno, J. Miyamoto, I. Kimura, S. Hori,
T. Sasaki, K. Hiramatsu, K. Okumura, et al. The
maternal microbiota drives early postnatal innate immune development. B cell development and proliferation of mature B cells in human
fetal intestine. Gut microbiota metabolism of dietary ﬁber inﬂuences allergic
airway disease and hematopoiesis. Anti-
biotics impair murine hematopoiesis by depleting the intestinal microbiota. Higgins, D. M., J. Sanchez-Campillo, A. G. Rosas-Taraco, J. R. Higgins, E. J. Lee,
I. M. Orme, and M. Gonzalez-Juarrero. Boettcher, S., R. C. Gerosa, R. Radpour,

J. Bauer, F. Ampenberger,
M. Heikenwalder, M. Kopf, and M. G. Manz. Vaccinia virus infection modulates the hematopoietic cell compartments in
the bone marrow.