Food & Function

Paper

total resveratrol administered was recovered in the form of
resveratrol, dihydroresveratrol and derived metabolites (65.1%
along the gastrointestinal tract, and 0.5% in other tissues).17 So,
it may be very diﬃcult to reach eﬀective concentrations in
metabolism regulating tissues in vivo, e.g. visceral adipose
tissues. Colonic sample collection, xation and uorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH)
The cell-xation procedure was adapted from Schwiertz et al.21
One volume of the colonic contents was suspended in 9 ml of
phosphate-buﬀered saline (PBS) and vortexed with glass beads
for 3 min; then 0.2 ml of the suspension was xed in 0.6 ml
fresh 4% paraformaldehyde at 4 (cid:3)C overnight. Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. Statistics
Diﬀerences between two groups were analyzed by the one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) test followed by the Tukey's test. The data were expressed as
means with their standard errors. View Article OnlineFood & Function

Paper

Fig. Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF
group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES. Eﬀect of RES on gene expressions in the liver

Glucose and insulin are known to induce the expression of
lipogenic enzymes in the liver.25 Oil Red O staining of liver
sections conrmed that there was severe steatosis seen in HF
mice compared with the CT group, which was well prevented in
RES treatment mice (Fig. In contrast, RES ingestion normalized the expression of Scd1
(Fig. However, RES treatment signicantly suppressed the expres-
sion of Ppar-g, Acc1 and Fas, suggesting that RES inhibits
storage of triglycerides in the adipocytes (Fig. In addition, there was a decrease in the Lactobacillus
and Bidobacterium frequencies and an increase of Enterococcus
faecalis in HF mice compared with CT mice, which agree with
our previous studies that a high-fat diet signicantly decreases
the number of Lactobacillus and increases the number of
Enterococcus faecalis.30 Aer resveratrol intake, the numbers of
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium were signicantly increased. B) The principal component analysis (PCA) of
the ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization data from intestinal bacterial
communities (n ¼ 6). ( This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Food Funct., Aer knockout of the Fiaf gene, the increased
total body fat content of CONV-D mice markedly attenuates.8 By
analysis of GF and conventionalized, normal and Fiaf knockout
mice, Backhed et al.8 showed that Fiaf is a circulating lipopro-
tein lipase inhibitor and that its suppression is essential for the
microbiota-induced deposition of triglycerides in adipocytes. Each relative mRNA expression was determined by the ratio of
intensity to b-actin production. A) The
corresponding hematoxylin- and eosin-stained epididymal fat sections are shown. ( 2014, 5, 1241–1249 | 1247

Published on 01 April 2014. 31201805), the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities (no. The gut microbiota as an environmental
factor that regulates fat storage, Proc. Resveratrol exerts anti-obesity eﬀects via
mechanisms involving down-regulation of adipogenic and
inammatory processes in mice, Biochem. Variations of bacterial populations in
human feces measured by uorescent in situ hybridization
with group-specic 16S rRNA-targeted oligonucleotide
probes, Appl. Eﬀect of a low dose of dietary resveratrol
on colon microbiota, inammation and tissue damage in a
DSS-induced colitis rat model, J. Agric. Gut microbiota as a regulator of energy
homeostasis and ectopic fat deposition: mechanisms and
implications for metabolic disorders, Curr. and dietary polyphenols:

35 R. A. Kemperman, et al., 38 N. Fei and L. Zhao, An opportunistic pathogen isolated from
the gut of an obese human causes obesity in germfree mice,
ISME J., 2012, 7(4), 880–884.