Following screening, participants were admitted and placed on a WMD. Following the UF/OF phase, participants were on WMD for 2 d then on 
consecutive days underwent OGTT (day 16) measurement of 24-h energy expenditure in a whole-room indirect calorimeter (day 17) and measurement of 
fasting ANGPLT4 and heparin-induced measurement of LPL (day 18). As  expected,  the  absolute  number  of  calories  lost  per  day 
was significantly higher in overfed relative to underfed individuals 
(257.4 ± 91.2 kcal d−1 versus 123.5 ± 32.4 kcal d−1, Δ = 139.4 kcal d−1, 
P < 0.0001, paired Student’s t-test; Fig. c, Mean percentage calorie loss 
in stool (kcal d−1) in the vancomycin (n = 11) versus placebo (n = 13) groups. At  a  finer 
taxonomic level, we were able to identify four 16S ribosomal RNA 
sequence  variants  that  were  significantly  associated  with  the  diet 
arm (independent of order): A. muciniphila, Bacteroides coprocola, 
a  Lachnospiraceae  sp. Taken 
together,  these  results  indicate  the  overall  resiliency  of  the  gut 
microbiota faced with differences in caloric intake while also high-
lighting  a  small  number  of  diet-responsive  bacterial  species  that 
could contribute to the observed differences in nutrient absorption. 5e) based 
on  16S  rRNA  sequence  variants  analysis:  A.  muciniphila,  a  mucin-
degrading  bacterium  with  a  putative  role  in  preserving  gut  barrier 

NATURE MEDiciNE | www.nature.com/naturemedicine

ArticlesNature MediciNefunction24–26,  which  was  enriched  during  UF  and  in  the  vancomy-
cin group, and an unidentified species belonging to Lachnospiraceae 
NK4A136 group, which decreased during UF and vancomycin inter-
ventions. At the pathway level there was a more modest 
difference between groups; only 3 of 290 metabolic pathways were 
differentially abundant (all decreased) with vancomycin compared 
with placebo (Extended Data Fig. Discussion
In  this  two-phase  study  we  directly  measured  ingested  and  stool 
calories, demonstrating an increased and comparable stool calorie 
loss relative to ingested calories during two states: UF versus OF and 
oral vancomycin versus placebo. Each point represents a single sample 
(n = 156 samples), where color denotes subject identity and shape denotes diet (weight maintaining, WM). e, Venn diagram of 16S rRNA sequence variants 
significantly different between vancomycin and placebo, or UF and OF, respectively (FDR < 0.1, two-sided unpaired or paired Wilcoxon test). Δ indicates the difference (log expressed) between pre- and postdietary intervention measurements (c) and 
the difference (log expressed) between pre- and postrandomization measurements in vancomycin and placebo groups (d). Divergent metabolic outcomes arising from targeted 
 

manipulation of the gut microbiota in diet-induced obesity. Species-level functional profiling of metagenomes and 
 

metatranscriptomes. Total-body dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry 

NATURE MEDiciNE | www.nature.com/naturemedicine

(Lunar Prodigy, enCORE 2003 software version 7.53.002, GE Lunar) to assess body 
composition was performed on day 2. Volunteers 
ate under supervision and consumed at least 95% of the provided food. Similarly, food samples were made into a slurry and were lyophilized. Samples 
were run in duplicate and results averaged. If duplicate samples were >40 cal apart, 
calorimetry was repeated until duplicate samples were <40 cal apart or the mean of 
four consecutive readings was used. The 
intra-assay %CV was 1.58 and the inter-assay %CV was 4.46. LPS and zonulin were measured 
using an assay from CusaBio Technologies. DNA templates were diluted 100-fold before 
quantitative PCR (qPCR) of 16S rRNA gene copies was performed. The normalized amplicon pool was concentrated down to ~100 μl 
in a SpeedVac and then purified using 1× AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter). Raw Illumina reads underwent 
quality trimming and adaptor removal using Fastp66 and host read removal by 
mapping to the human genome (GRCh38) with Bowtie2 (ref. Ferraro, R., Boyce, V. L., Swinburn, B., De Gregorio, M. & Ravussin, E. 
 
Energy cost of physical activity on a metabolic ward in relationship to 
obesity. Wang, Q., Garrity, G. M., Tiedje, J. M. & Cole, J. R. Naive Bayesian classifier 
 
for rapid assignment of rRNA sequences into the new bacterial taxonomy. Q.Y.A. and D.D.T. generated the microbiome data. Additional 
support for the research in the Turnbaugh laboratory was provided by the National 
Institutes of Health (grant nos. P.J.T. holds an Investigators 
in the Pathogenesis of Infectious Disease Award from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund, 
is a Chan Zuckerberg Biohub investigator and is a Nadia’s Gift Foundation Innovator 

Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0801-z. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.B., P.J.T. or J.K.

Peer review information Joao Monteiro was the primary editor on this article and 
managed its editorial process and peer review in collaboration with the rest of the 
editorial team. NATURE MEDiciNE | www.nature.com/naturemedicine

ArticlesNature MediciNeExtended Data Fig. b, Phylogenetic tree of 16S rRNA sequence variants (SVs) where 
colored tips denote significantly different SVs between vancomycin (n=11) and placebo (n=13) groups (FDR<0.1, DESeq2 with two-sided Wald test) with 
color representing fold change comparing vancomycin to placebo. Phylum distribution of the SVs are indicated around the tree. The values are expressed as absolute values. c, mean fasting insulin concentration (mU/L). The sample size for each intervention refers to the volunteers 
who had available measurements of glucose and insulin during OGTT (oral glucose tolerance test). Software and code

Policy information about availability of computer code

Data collection

The first phase was a cross-over design in which all participants underwent in random order 3 days of over and underfeeding, followed by 
a second phase involving double blind randomized placebo-controlled assignment to administration of oral vancomycin or matching 
placebo. Stool samples were collected from appearance of first marker to appearance of the 

second marker and weighed during under- or overfeeding and after randomization to vancomycin. Stool samples were homogenized with bead beating 
for 5 min (Mini-Beadbeater-96, BioSpec) using the ZR BashingBead lysis matrix containing 0.1 and 0.5 mm beads (ZR-96 BashingBead 
Lysis Rack, Zymo Research) and the lysis solution provided in the ZymoBIOMICS 96 MagBead DNA Kit (Zymo Research). This statement should provide the following information, where applicable: 

- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A list of figures that have associated raw data 
- A description of any restrictions on data availability

All sequencing data generated in this study were deposited on the NCBI, under BioProject PRJNA589622. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.