Food & Function

Paper

total resveratrol administered was recovered in the form of
resveratrol, dihydroresveratrol and derived metabolites (65.1%
along the gastrointestinal tract, and 0.5% in other tissues).17 So,
it may be very diﬃcult to reach eﬀective concentrations in
metabolism regulating tissues in vivo, e.g. visceral adipose
tissues. Aer hybridization, 150 ml of hybridization solution
4 ng ml
was added, centrifuged at 4000 (cid:5) g for 15 min at room
temperature and then incubated in 200 ml of washing solution
(cid:4)1
(65 mmol l
EDTA, pH 8.0, 0.01% SDS) at 37 (cid:3)C for 20 min. Ornithine carbamoyl-transferase frozen liver tissue was sectioned
at 3–5 mm thickness and stained with oil red O. Histological
assessment of the tissue morphology was performed using an
Olympus light microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). Downloaded by University of Tennessee at Knoxville on 22/08/2014 19:06:30. View Article OnlinePaper

Food & Function

Table 1 Gene-speciﬁc primers used in qRT-PCR assaysa

Gene name

Abbreviation

Primer sequences (50–30)

Amplicon size (bp)

Fasting-induced adipose factor

Lipoprotein lipase

Cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1

Peroxisome proliferator activated
receptor g
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1

Fatty acid synthase

a F, forward; R, reverse. Each assay was performed in
duplicate in the same run. The data were expressed as
means with their standard errors. Results
Eﬀect of a high-fat diet and RES treatment on the body weight
and adiposity weight

The phenotype data indicated that the animals on the control
liver, and abdominal fat weight. The relative
abundance of the major bacterial groups indicated that, even
when considering a degree of interindividual variation, the HF
diet induced the gut microbiota dysbiosis (Fig. Moreover, the principal coordinate analysis scores plot
in Fig. View Article OnlineFood & Function

Paper

Fig. Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF
group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES. HDL-C, high density lipoprotein
cholesterol; LDL-C, low density lipoprotein cholesterol. In contrast, RES ingestion normalized the expression of Scd1
(Fig. However, RES treatment signicantly suppressed the expres-
sion of Ppar-g, Acc1 and Fas, suggesting that RES inhibits
storage of triglycerides in the adipocytes (Fig. Gut microbes, as environmental factors, may regulate fat
storage and aﬀect energy metabolism homeostasis, by acceler-
ation of the processing of dietary polysaccharides and induction
of de novo lipogenesis.6,28 In the present study, both the relative
abundance of the major bacterial divisions and principal coor-
dinate analysis showed that, the HF diet induced the gut
microbiota dysbiosis. These ndings are in line with Cani et al. ,29
who found that the high-fat diet disrupted gut microbiota by
promoting the growth of endotoxin producers. In addition, there was a decrease in the Lactobacillus
and Bidobacterium frequencies and an increase of Enterococcus
faecalis in HF mice compared with CT mice, which agree with
our previous studies that a high-fat diet signicantly decreases
the number of Lactobacillus and increases the number of
Enterococcus faecalis.30 Aer resveratrol intake, the numbers of
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium were signicantly increased. Similar results were reported by Larrosa et al. The
mechanism of how resveratrol aﬀects the gut microbiota
remains an important eld of future research. Bacte-
rial quantities are expressed as a percentage of EUB338 (n ¼ 8). ( D) The
Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes ratios contributed by the indicated target
bacterial populations (n ¼ 8). This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014

Food Funct., Bacterial quantities are expressed as relative abundance (%). and Lactobacillus
acidophilus, and Neyrinck et al.40 demonstrated that a poly-
phenol-rich extract of pomegranate peel increased the caecal
content weight and caecal pool of Bidobacteria spp. Each relative mRNA expression was determined by the ratio of
intensity to b-actin production. Values are means, with their standard errors represented by vertical bars (n ¼ 6). 6 Eﬀects of high-fat diet and RES supplementation on adipocyte hypertrophy through the PPAR signaling pathway in OP mice. ( A) The
corresponding hematoxylin- and eosin-stained epididymal fat sections are shown. ( 2014, 5, 1241–1249 | 1247

Published on 01 April 2014. 31201805), the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities (no. Resveratrol transport and metabolism by
human intestinal Caco-2 cells, J. Pharm. Distribution of [14C]-trans-resveratrol, a
cancer chemopreventive polyphenol, in mouse tissues aer
oral administration, Life Sci., Quantication of cytokine mRNA expression
by RT PCR in samples of previously frozen blood, J. Immunol. 28 C. A. Tennyson and G. Friedman, Microecology, obesity, and
probiotics, Curr. Gut microbiota as a regulator of energy
homeostasis and ectopic fat deposition: mechanisms and
implications for metabolic disorders, Curr. and dietary polyphenols:

35 R. A. Kemperman, et al., Novel approaches for analysing gut
and

microbes
opportunities, Microbiology., 38 N. Fei and L. Zhao, An opportunistic pathogen isolated from
the gut of an obese human causes obesity in germfree mice,
ISME J., 2012, 7(4), 880–884.