in

use

symptomatic

including preterm birth (PTB).1–4 Antibiotics are effective
in eradicating BV during pregnancy5 and are recommended
The
for
consequences of antibiotic use during pregnancy have been
poorly studied,7 but
there are concerns that antibiotic-
related changes in the vaginal microbiota8 are associated
with short- and long-term morbidity in infancy and later
years.9

pregnant women.6

Probiotics might be a safe and effective alternative to
antibiotics in restoring the imbalance of the vaginal micro-
biota found in BV. The probiotic preparation selected
has been shown to be safe when taken during preg-
nancy.14,15

Methods

conducted using an analysis plan agreed in advance with
the independent trial steering and data monitoring com-
mittee. After conﬁrming eligibility,
informed consent was
obtained and baseline data recorded. The swab used
to prepare the slide was stored at (cid:1)70 °C and later used in
the vaginal microbiota DNA proﬁling. Sequences were clus-
(OTUs) at a
tered into operational
sequence dissimilarity distance of 0.015 using an average
neighbour algorithm and then classiﬁed using a Na€ıve
Bayesian classiﬁer implemented in mothur with the Human
Oral Microbiome Database release 14.51 reference dataset. to the SOP available

taxonomic units

according

Statistical analysis
We used descriptive analysis to report baseline characteris-
tics of trial participants by allocated group. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

3

Husain et al. At 18–20 weeks’ gestation, the rate of BV in the probi-
otic group was 15% (19/123) compared with 9% (10/115)
in the placebo group. Previous observational studies and small-scale
randomised controlled trials in non-pregnant populations
have suggested that oral administration of probiotics can
alter the vaginal microbiota in a signiﬁcant number of
women where microbial imbalance exists.18–21 It is on this
basis that several commercial probiotic products are mar-
keted for the restoration and maintenance of a healthy
vaginal microbiota in both non-pregnant and pregnant
women.19,20 Our ﬁndings have not shown any effect on the
vaginal microbiota with the probiotic preparation used in
this trial. We did not take account of vaginal

6

ª 2019 The Authors. Our ﬁndings
those recently reported by Gille
et al.44 In a randomised, controlled trial, 320 women at
<12 weeks’ gestational age were allocated to once-daily oral
capsules of L. rhamnosus GR-1 or L. reuteri RC-14 or pla-
cebo for 8 weeks. Contribution to authorship
The trial was conceived by MM and MW, and designed by
SH and KK. EP and WW carried out the DNA sequencing. The study was sup-
ported by the NIHR CRN portfolio with recruitment and
follow up of participants, and was sponsored by Queen
Mary University of London. Identiﬁcation and H2O2 production of vaginal lactobacilli from
pregnant women at high risk of preterm birth and relation with
outcome. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2013;(1):CD000262. 7 Bookstaver PB, Bland CM, Grifﬁn B, Stover KR, Eiland LS,
in pregnancy. Health and Nutritional
Properties of Probiotics in Food Including Powder Milk with Live
Lactic Acid Bacteria. Pathogen elimination by probiotic Bacillus via signalling
interference. 15 Luoto R, Laitinen K, Nermes M,

Impact of maternal
probiotic-supplemented dietary counselling on pregnancy outcome
and prenatal and postnatal growth: a double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2013;168:75–9. http://clincalc.com/Stats/

SampleSize.aspx]. Accessed 1 July 2017. 28 Husain SM, Wilks M, Mupita M, Reddy SP, Hennessy EM,
Macfarlane AJ, et al. Annual live births by sex, ethnicity and month, maternities
by place of birth and with multiple births, and stillbirths by age of
parents
[https://www.ons.gov.uk/people
populationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/livebirths/bulletins/
birthcharacteristicsinenglandandwales/2015]. Accessed 31 January
2019. 41 Salisbury C, O’Cathain A, Thomas C, Edwards L, Gaunt D, Dixon
P, et al. 44 Gille C, Boer B, Marschal M, Urschitz MS, Heinecke V, Hund V, et al.