Following screening, participants were admitted and placed on a WMD. Following the UF/OF phase, participants were on WMD for 2 d then on 
consecutive days underwent OGTT (day 16) measurement of 24-h energy expenditure in a whole-room indirect calorimeter (day 17) and measurement of 
fasting ANGPLT4 and heparin-induced measurement of LPL (day 18). As  expected,  the  absolute  number  of  calories  lost  per  day 
was significantly higher in overfed relative to underfed individuals 
(257.4 ± 91.2 kcal d−1 versus 123.5 ± 32.4 kcal d−1, Δ = 139.4 kcal d−1, 
P < 0.0001, paired Student’s t-test; Fig. Taken together, these 
results support our hypothesis that both UF and vancomycin result 
in greater stool calorie loss relative to ingested calories (greater per-
centage  of  calories  measured  in  stool),  indicating  a  reduction  in 
nutrient absorption in both states. c, Mean percentage calorie loss 
in stool (kcal d−1) in the vancomycin (n = 11) versus placebo (n = 13) groups. 5e) based 
on  16S  rRNA  sequence  variants  analysis:  A.  muciniphila,  a  mucin-
degrading  bacterium  with  a  putative  role  in  preserving  gut  barrier 

NATURE MEDiciNE | www.nature.com/naturemedicine

ArticlesNature MediciNefunction24–26,  which  was  enriched  during  UF  and  in  the  vancomy-
cin group, and an unidentified species belonging to Lachnospiraceae 
NK4A136 group, which decreased during UF and vancomycin inter-
ventions. Discussion
In  this  two-phase  study  we  directly  measured  ingested  and  stool 
calories, demonstrating an increased and comparable stool calorie 
loss relative to ingested calories during two states: UF versus OF and 
oral vancomycin versus placebo. b, Shannon diversity in microbial communities of vancomycin and placebo groups 
(P < 0.0001, two-sided unpaired Wilcoxon test). Each data point shows the mean and standard deviation of samples from each 
subject (n = 70 samples from 24 subjects; P < 0.0001, determined using Adonis comparing effect of treatment and accounting for repeated measures 
per subject). The 
intra-assay %CV was 1.58 and the inter-assay %CV was 4.46. LPS and zonulin were measured 
using an assay from CusaBio Technologies. For the vancomycin versus 
placebo, 12 subjects per group gave us a power of 0.95 at an alpha of 0.05 to detect 
a 75 ± 49 kcal d−1 (mean ± s.d.) Mean values of triplicate 
reactions were taken for further downstream analyses. Raw Illumina reads underwent 
quality trimming and adaptor removal using Fastp66 and host read removal by 
mapping to the human genome (GRCh38) with Bowtie2 (ref. Regrouped, per-sample KEGG Orthology abundance profiles were 
joined into one abundance table and filtered to contain features with top 75% mean 
abundance (final n = 3,553 KEGG Orthology groups). Bray–Curtis dissimilarity was used to quantify 
compositional dissimilarity between microbial communities and the distance 
matrix was analyzed using Adonis PERMANOVA (R Vegan package) with 10,000 
replications. Ferraro, R., Boyce, V. L., Swinburn, B., De Gregorio, M. & Ravussin, E. 
 
Energy cost of physical activity on a metabolic ward in relationship to 
obesity. Additional 
support for the research in the Turnbaugh laboratory was provided by the National 
Institutes of Health (grant nos. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.B., P.J.T. or J.K.

Peer review information Joao Monteiro was the primary editor on this article and 
managed its editorial process and peer review in collaboration with the rest of the 
editorial team. NATURE MEDiciNE | www.nature.com/naturemedicine

ArticlesNature MediciNeExtended Data Fig. b, Phylogenetic tree of 16S rRNA sequence variants (SVs) where 
colored tips denote significantly different SVs between vancomycin (n=11) and placebo (n=13) groups (FDR<0.1, DESeq2 with two-sided Wald test) with 
color representing fold change comparing vancomycin to placebo. The sample size for each intervention refers to the volunteers 
who had available measurements of glucose and insulin during OGTT (oral glucose tolerance test). Software and code

Policy information about availability of computer code

Data collection

The first phase was a cross-over design in which all participants underwent in random order 3 days of over and underfeeding, followed by 
a second phase involving double blind randomized placebo-controlled assignment to administration of oral vancomycin or matching 
placebo. Absolute bacterial abundance was derived by adjustments for dilutions during DNA extraction, normalization, and 
PCR reaction preparation dividing by the total fecal mass used for DNA extraction in grams. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable: 

- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A list of figures that have associated raw data 
- A description of any restrictions on data availability

All sequencing data generated in this study were deposited on the NCBI, under BioProject PRJNA589622. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.