Brief Reviews

  e
Th

Journal of

Immunology

The Impact of Maternal Microbes and Microbial
Colonization in Early Life on Hematopoiesis

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

function of the immune system at distal tissues, including
primary lymphoid organs, such as the bone marrow (BM) and
thymus. 2

Copyright (cid:1) 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc. 0022-1767/18/$35.00

Kathy D. McCoy and Carolyn A. Thomson

All body surfaces are colonized by microbes, which oc-
curs through a dynamic process over the ﬁrst few years
of life. Initial colonizing microbes are transferred from
the maternal microbiota to the newborn through ver-
tical transmission. Received for publication December 22, 2017. Many factors, including
diet, antibiotic exposure, genotype, and method of delivery
(vaginal versus caesarean), are known to shape the developing
microbiome (1), and it is of crucial importance that we un-
derstand how these factors subsequently impact the develop-
ing immune system. As a result,

these pups rapidly succumbed to experimental infection with
Escherichia coli or Klebsiella pneumoniae. This study revealed that
maternal Ab-mediated vertical transfer of maternal microbial
components vastly altered gene expression in the intestine of

The Journal of Immunology

2521

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

FIGURE 1. This has been shown to impact the immune cell repertoire in the intestine and may affect susceptibil-
ity to intestinal pathogens. ( One intriguing possibility that may account for
some of the changes in the neonatal immune system in re-
sponse to maternal colonization is raised by older studies il-
lustrating the presence of maternally derived hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) and other hematopoietic progenitor cells in
cord blood (21), from where they may seed the BM of the
developing fetus. Recent work shows that the dif-
ferentiation fate of an HSC clone down a particular lineage is
predetermined by epigenetic modiﬁcations that are thought to
arise early during its development (23). In that study, microbial colonization during
neonatal life was shown to be required to limit accumulation
of invariant NK T cells in the lung and colon, and this effect
was mediated through microbiota-mediated epigenetic regu-
lation of CXCL16 (24). Microbes ﬁne-tune hematopoiesis during steady-state

In addition to stimulation following early life colonization,
recent studies have shown that steady-state hematopoiesis can
be regulated by the commensal microbiota; this is likely im-
portant for ﬁne-tuning immunity (Fig. Although it was unclear what
cell types mediated this response, one possibility is that it
reﬂects regulation of secondary mediator production by in-
testinal enterocytes stimulated by MAMPs from the com-
mensal bacteria. These effects of
hematopoiesis have functional consequences on host immune responses, reducing susceptibility to intestinal pathogens and modulating inﬂammatory responses, such as
to allergic airway challenge. Importantly, the BM phenotype could be rescued by treat-
ment with the antibiotic vancomycin, suggesting the in-
volvement of Gram-positive organisms, and it could be
phenocopied by transferring microbiota from mice fed the
high-fat diet to normal mice, suggesting a causative role for
the microbiota in mediating the hematopoietic changes. They found that exogenous administration of
the microbial metabolite propionate led to alterations in he-
matopoiesis, with a reduction in macrophage and dendritic
cell (DC) precursors in the BM. Thus, deﬁned changes in the microbiota,
resulting from antibiotic use or changes in our diet, may have
drastic effects on how our immune system tackles challenges
as a result of effects on hematopoiesis. In the case of
infection with E. coli, a TLR4-
dependent increase in circulating G-CSF leads to a massive
release of mature neutrophils into the circulation, as well as an
expansion of monocytes and immature neutrophils in the BM
(50). 2

Neutrophil release from the BM is dependent on G-CSF
produced by vascular endothelial cells in response to TLR
ligation. Development of intestinal microbiota in infants and its impact on health. Person, M. K., D. H. Esposito, R. C. Holman, J. M. Mehal, and B. J. Stoll. Risk factors for infectious disease death among infants in the United States. Early empiric antibiotic use
in preterm infants is associated with lower bacterial diversity and higher relative
abundance of Enterobacter. I. Reference values for neutrophilic cells. Functional
characterization of human receptors for short chain fatty acids and their role in
polymorphonuclear cell activation. Thorburn, A. N., C. I. McKenzie, S. Shen, D. Stanley, L. Macia, L. J. Mason,
L. K. Roberts, C. H. Wong, R. Shim, R. Robert, et al. Nakajima, A., N. Kaga, Y. Nakanishi, H. Ohno, J. Miyamoto, I. Kimura, S. Hori,
T. Sasaki, K. Hiramatsu, K. Okumura, et al. Broxmeyer, H. E. G., G. Hangoc, S. Cooper, R. C. Ribeiro, V. Graves, M. Yoder,
J. Wagner, S. Vadhan-Raj, L. Benninger, P. Rubinstein, et al. The neo-
natal window of opportunity-early priming for life. Published erratum appears
in 2017 Cell 168: 944–945.] B cell development and proliferation of mature B cells in human
fetal intestine. Microbial colonization inﬂuences early B-lineage development in the gut lamina
propria. Gut microbiota metabolism of dietary ﬁber inﬂuences allergic
airway disease and hematopoiesis. Balmer, M. L., C. M. Sch€urch, Y. Saito, M. B. Geuking, H. Li, M. Cuenca,
L. V. Kovtonyuk, K. D. McCoy, S. Hapfelmeier, A. F. Ochsenbein, et al. Sensing of
the microbiota by NOD1 in mesenchymal stromal cells regulates murine hemato-
poiesis. Microbes inside–from diversity to function:

the case of Akkermansia. The lineage2c-Kit+Sca-1+ cell response to Escherichia coli bacteremia in
Balb/c mice. Pivotal role
of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in the development of progenitors in the
common myeloid pathway. Boettcher, S., R. C. Gerosa, R. Radpour,

J. Bauer, F. Ampenberger,
M. Heikenwalder, M. Kopf, and M. G. Manz. Welner, R. S., R. Pelayo, Y. Nagai, K. P. Garrett, T. R. Wuest, D. J. Carr,
L. A. Borghesi, M. A. Farrar, and P. W. Kincade. The multifaceted biology of plasmacytoid

dendritic cells.