The causative role of the gut microbiota in the context
of MS is well characterized [14, 20, 21], but the role of
sexual
gut
microbiota in the context of MS, and the associated
mechanisms underlying such differences, are still un-
clear. 1q–t and Additional file 1: Figure S1o-r) and
LGCI (Fig. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 3 of 22

Fig. Data with different superscript letters are significantly different (P < 0.05). In order to
further identify microbial taxa that serve as biomarkers for
different groups, we performed liner discriminate analysis
(LDA) coupled with effect size measurements (LEfSe). Next, we employed PICRUSt to predict the
metagenomes and determine the changes in microbial
metabolic pathways (KEGG) across different groups [29].
Male/OVX groups were segregated from the other three
groups using PCoA applied on predicted functional path-
ways (Additional file 1: Figure S2c). Box plots (box showing the median, and the 25th and 75th percentiles, and the whiskers of the
graph show the largest and smallest values) were also used. After 8 weeks of WD and L-phe
(10 mM) treatment, we found that the L-phe-treated female
mice exhibited a significant increase in LPS-producing Pro-
teobacteria, decrease of B/E ratio, increase of the relative
abundance (RA) of Akkermansia muciniphila and no
differences in FIR/BAC ratio (Fig. Our findings indicate that IAP may be a primary factor
partially mediating the effects of estrogen on gut micro-
biota because IAP inhibition in the female mice led to the
development of ME, LGCI, and MS, associated with dra-
matic increase of Proteobacteria and reduction of the B/E
ratio and A. mucinophila abundance (Fig. 4) experiments contradict the protective effect of en-
dogenous estrogen against obesity in female mice, it is
well known that antibiotic usage [75] or gut dysbiosis [76]
impacts estrogen metabolism mediated by microbiota
Consequently, changes in circulating levels of estrogen
(Additional file 1 Figure S3m and Additional file 1:
Figure S4e) were found in female mice that received
male microbiota transplants or antibiotic treatment. Tissues were snap
frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at − 80 °C
for future analyses. 5) Analysis of the effects of isoflavones (ISO) on gut
microbiome, ME, LGCI, and MS: Ten-week-old
male (M) mice were fed a WD for 4 months to in-
duce MS and then divided into two groups: group
1: M, (n = 4), and group 2: M+ISO (n = 6). 6) Analysis of the effects of intestinal alkaline

phosphatase (IAP) inhibition on gut microbiome,
ME, LGCI, and metabolic abnormalities: To
determine the effects of inhibiting endogenous IAP
activity, 12-week-old WT mice on a WD were di-
vided into three groups ((male (M), female (F), and
F+L-phe)) (n = 5 per group) and allowed to drink
autoclaved water alone or water containing 10 mM
L-phenylalanine (L-phe) (Sigma, USA). Differential abundance analysis
(non-parametric ANOVA with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR-
corrected P values < 0.05) was performed on the RA of
microbiota data at different levels of taxonomy to identify
taxa with FDR-corrected P values < 0.05 (XLSTAT soft-
ware; Addinsoft, USA) [94] and then their RA (normalized
to percentage) were shown by a heat map with hierarchal
clustering (HCN) analysis [95] using GraphPad Prism ver-
sion 7.01 (La Jolla, CA). It couples
statistical significance with biological consistency and ef-
fect size estimation [96]. Microbiota-based biomarker
discoveries were done with LEfSe using the online galaxy
server (https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/galaxy/), and
the LDA scores derived from LEfSe analysis [96] were
used to show the relationship between taxon using a
cladogram (circular hierarchical tree) of significantly in-
creased or decreased bacterial taxa in the gut microbiota
between groups. LEfSe
analysis [96] was utilized to determine significant puta-
tive KEGG orthologs and pathway analyses [96].

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) concentration
Serum LPS concentrations were measured with a Toxin
Sensor Chromogenic Limulus Amebocyte Lysate (LAL)
Endotoxin Assay Kit (GenScript, Piscataway, NJ), follow-
ing the manufacturer’s instructions [15]. Briefly, serum
samples were diluted 10- to 50-fold with endotoxin-free
water, adjusted to the recommended pH, and heated for
10 min at 70 °C to minimize inhibition or enhancement
by contaminating proteins. subset of

Western blotting analysis of IAP
Western blotting on tissues and Caco-2 cell lysates was
performed as previously described [14]. After thawed,
the protein samples derived from Caco-2 cells, the ho-
mogenates were centrifuged at 15,000g at 4 °C for
15 min, and the supernatants were collected. The authors are also grateful to Marina Kang
for her editorial assistance and Jennifer Bian for her experimental assistance. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Author details
1Laboratory of Lipid Medicine and Technology, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 149 -13th
Street, Boston, MA 02129, USA. Giles DA, Moreno-Fernandez ME, Stankiewicz TE, Graspeuntner S, Cappelletti
M, Wu D, Mukherjee R, Chan CC, Lawson MJ, Klarquist J, et al. Caesar R, Tremaroli V, Kovatcheva-Datchary P, Cani PD, Backhed F. Crosstalk

between gut microbiota and dietary lipids aggravates WAT inflammation
through TLR signaling. Interactions between gut microbiota, host genetics and diet relevant to
development of metabolic syndromes in mice. Manson JE, Chlebowski RT, Stefanick ML, Aragaki AK, Rossouw JE, Prentice

RL, Anderson G, Howard BV, Thomson CA, LaCroix AZ, et al. Kang C, Wang B, Kaliannan K, Wang X, Lang H, Hui S, Huang L, Zhang Y,
Zhou M, Chen M, et al. Jacobs JP, Goudarzi M, Singh N, Tong M, McHardy IH, Ruegger P,
Asadourian M, Moon BH, Ayson A, Borneman J, et al.