The causative role of the gut microbiota in the context
of MS is well characterized [14, 20, 21], but the role of
sexual
gut
microbiota in the context of MS, and the associated
mechanisms underlying such differences, are still un-
clear. Moreover, 17β-E
treatment reduced the occurrence of ME and LGCI in the
M+E2 and OVX+E2 groups to levels equal to those female
mice (Fig. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 3 of 22

Fig. Serum levels of cytokines such as TNF-α (u), IL-1β (v), MCP-1 (w), IL-6 (x), and IL-10 (y). Data with different superscript letters are significantly different (P < 0.05). In order to
further identify microbial taxa that serve as biomarkers for
different groups, we performed liner discriminate analysis
(LDA) coupled with effect size measurements (LEfSe). Next, we employed PICRUSt to predict the
metagenomes and determine the changes in microbial
metabolic pathways (KEGG) across different groups [29].
Male/OVX groups were segregated from the other three
groups using PCoA applied on predicted functional path-
ways (Additional file 1: Figure S2c). a–e Markers of obesity (baseline (BL) and after FMT body weight and body weight gain in
the end (a), fat and lean body mass (% body weight) (b), gross appearance (dorsal and ventral aspects have been shown to differentiate the
female from male sex) of male, female, and F → M mice (c), glucose tolerance test results (d), and serum triglyceride levels ®. p Analysis at the
phylum level using RA (%). 6a, b and
Additional file 1: Figure S5i-j), we found significant dif-
ferences only in IAP between groups based on sex and
estrogen treatment (Fig. 6g, with no detection of
expression of Akp6), higher immunochemical staining of
IAP (Fig. Box plots (box showing the median, and the 25th and 75th percentiles, and the whiskers of the
graph show the largest and smallest values) were also used. After 8 weeks of WD and L-phe
(10 mM) treatment, we found that the L-phe-treated female
mice exhibited a significant increase in LPS-producing Pro-
teobacteria, decrease of B/E ratio, increase of the relative
abundance (RA) of Akkermansia muciniphila and no
differences in FIR/BAC ratio (Fig. 6v
with no differences in body weight gain (Fig. Edges (lines) represent sta-
tistically significant correlations, and are colored light
black for positive and blue for negative correlations. Leave one-out cross-validation (LOO-CV)
was applied. Our findings indicate that IAP may be a primary factor
partially mediating the effects of estrogen on gut micro-
biota because IAP inhibition in the female mice led to the
development of ME, LGCI, and MS, associated with dra-
matic increase of Proteobacteria and reduction of the B/E
ratio and A. mucinophila abundance (Fig. Microbiome           (2018) 6:205 

Page 15 of 22

respectively [80–82]. Estrogen inhibited the overgrowth of
Proteobacteria and E. coli and decreased the levels of LBS
and LBP under simulated microgravity [83]. In addition,
E2 supplementation in male [84] or OVX mice [61] pre-
vented obesity and MS, and genistein prevented obesity
and metabolic dysfunction in the mice, which was similar
to E2 supplementation in the same study [60, 61].

Conclusions
Our novel data demonstrate that the gut microbiome
mediates sexual dimorphism in MS. A portion of the liver was stored in 10%
formalin for histological analysis. Tissues were snap
frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at − 80 °C
for future analyses. 2) Determination of 17β-estradiol effects on gut micro-
biome, metabolic endotoxemia, low-grade chronic
inflammation, and metabolic syndrome: Ten-week-
old male (M), female (F), and ovariectomized
(OVX) mice maintained on control diet were pur-
chased from Charles River Laboratories and divided
in to five groups (n = 5/group), and were fed WD
and 17β-estradiol (E2) from week 11 to week 17. The water bottles were changed every week
for all the groups. 6) Analysis of the effects of intestinal alkaline

phosphatase (IAP) inhibition on gut microbiome,
ME, LGCI, and metabolic abnormalities: To
determine the effects of inhibiting endogenous IAP
activity, 12-week-old WT mice on a WD were di-
vided into three groups ((male (M), female (F), and
F+L-phe)) (n = 5 per group) and allowed to drink
autoclaved water alone or water containing 10 mM
L-phenylalanine (L-phe) (Sigma, USA). Di-
mensional reduction of the Bray-Curtis distance between
microbiome samples using PCoA ordination method
(PAST software) was done and significant differences
among groups were tested with permutational multivari-
ate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA), a multivariate
non-parametric one-way ANOVA, which utilizes the
sample-to-sample Bray-Curtis distance matrix directly. Differential abundance analysis
(non-parametric ANOVA with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR-
corrected P values < 0.05) was performed on the RA of
microbiota data at different levels of taxonomy to identify
taxa with FDR-corrected P values < 0.05 (XLSTAT soft-
ware; Addinsoft, USA) [94] and then their RA (normalized
to percentage) were shown by a heat map with hierarchal
clustering (HCN) analysis [95] using GraphPad Prism ver-
sion 7.01 (La Jolla, CA). LEfSe
analysis [96] was utilized to determine significant puta-
tive KEGG orthologs and pathway analyses [96].

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) concentration
Serum LPS concentrations were measured with a Toxin
Sensor Chromogenic Limulus Amebocyte Lysate (LAL)
Endotoxin Assay Kit (GenScript, Piscataway, NJ), follow-
ing the manufacturer’s instructions [15]. Briefly, serum
samples were diluted 10- to 50-fold with endotoxin-free
water, adjusted to the recommended pH, and heated for
10 min at 70 °C to minimize inhibition or enhancement
by contaminating proteins. The culture
medium was changed every other day. subset of

Western blotting analysis of IAP
Western blotting on tissues and Caco-2 cell lysates was
performed as previously described [14]. After thawed,
the protein samples derived from Caco-2 cells, the ho-
mogenates were centrifuged at 15,000g at 4 °C for
15 min, and the supernatants were collected. Differential expression
analysis on 16S sequencing data was conducted using
XLSTAT software program [94]. Multivariate statistical
analyses and power analyses (alpha = 0.05; effect size =
0.8) were conducted using PAST (version 2.17) [93] and
XLSTAT (version 2017.6) software products. The authors declare no competing financial interests. 2School of Microbiology, University College
Cork, Cork, Ireland. Kaliannan K, Wang B, Li XY, Kim KJ, Kang JX. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110(22):9066–71. Zhang C, Zhang M, Wang S, Han R, Cao Y, Hua W, Mao Y, Zhang X, Pang X, Wei
C, et al. Moussa L, Bezirard V, Salvador-Cartier C, Bacquie V, Lencina C, Leveque M,

Braniste V, Menard S, Theodorou V, Houdeau E. A low dose of fermented soy
germ alleviates gut barrier injury, hyperalgesia and faecal protease activity in a
rat model of inflammatory bowel disease. Chambliss KL, Barrera J, Umetani M, Umetani J, Kim SH, Madak-Erdogan Z,
Huang L, Katzenellenbogen BS, Katzenellenbogen JA, Mineo C, et al. Hormone
therapy dose, formulation, route of delivery, and risk of cardiovascular
events in women: findings from the Women’s Health Initiative observational
study. Manson JE, Chlebowski RT, Stefanick ML, Aragaki AK, Rossouw JE, Prentice

RL, Anderson G, Howard BV, Thomson CA, LaCroix AZ, et al. Reikvam DH, Erofeev A, Sandvik A, Grcic V, Jahnsen FL, Gaustad P, McCoy
KD, Macpherson AJ, Meza-Zepeda LA, Johansen FE. Gut microbiota mediates the protective effects of
dietary capsaicin against chronic low-grade inflammation and associated
obesity induced by high-fat diet. Yu K, Mu C, Yang Y, Su Y, Zhu W. Segment-specific responses of intestinal
epithelium transcriptome to in-feed antibiotics in pigs.