were  housed  individually  in  plastic  cages 
equipped with a running wheel (Coulbourn 
Instruments,  Whitehall,  PA);  however, 
wheels  were  locked  in  cages  of  seden­
tary mice. A diagram of the study design is shown 
in Figure 1. For each sample, 
amplified products were concentrated using 
a centrifuge filtration method and quanti­
fied by electro phoresis using an Agilent 2100 
Bioanalyzer  (Agilent  Technologies,  Santa 
Clara, CA). Each scan 
was captured using the GeneChip Microarray 
Analysis Suite (Affymetrix). Taxa­sample intersections were 

Vehicle
treatment

PCB
treatment

End of
experiment

Feces
collection
(2 days)

Feces
collection
(2 days)

Control data

PCB data

then calculated using abundance (AT) and 
binary matrices (BT). We  used 
hierarchical clustering via average­neighbor 
(HC­AN) and principal coordinate analysis 
(PCoA) to graphically summarize inter sample 
relationships according to AT and BT dis­
similarity scores. 726 

volume 121 | number 6 | June 2013  •  Environmental Health Perspectives

Choi et al. These taxa were then analyzed by 

PCoA with weighted Unifrac distance, which 
indicated significant differences in the compo­
sition of the microbial communities between 
the exercised and sedentary mice (Figure 2B). The taxa that were more abundant in 
the exercised group were in phylum Firmicutes, 
class Bacilli, and most of these were in order 
Lactobacillales. The 10 bacterial taxa with the greatest decrease in abundance following exposure of sedentary mice to the PCB mixture. Prediction analysis for microarrays (PAM)-selected distinctive bacterial taxa presenting differentially in the mouse gut microbiome of excercised versus 
sedentary mice. other aspects of gut physiology (e.g., peri­ 
stalsis; Song et al. Finally, exercise may influence the com­ 
position of the gut microbiome by altering the 
intestinal immune system. Thus, our data are consistent 
because we observed a decrease in the num­ 
ber of Erysipelotrichaceae in exercised mice 
that had lost a substantial amount of body 
weight;  this  is  associated  with  the  role  of 
Erysipelotrichaceae in energy production and 
adiposity (Claus et al. Chen W, Liu F, Ling Z, Tong X, Xiang C. 2012. Franz CM, Huch M, Abriouel H, Holzapfel W, Galvez A. 2011. Cancer Epidemiol 
Biomarkers Prev 15:2398–2407. Understanding the role of gut microbiome-host metabolic 
signal disruption in health and disease. In: Halogenated 
Biphenyls, Terphenyls, Naphthalenes, Dibenzo dioxins and 
Related Products (Kimbrough RD, Jensen AA, eds). New 
York:Elsevier Science Publishers, 345–364. Ley RE, Backhed F, Turnbaugh P, Lozupone CA, Knight RD, 
Gordon JI. BMC  Bioinformatics  7:371; 
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-7-371 [Online 7 August 2006]. 

Lustyk MK, Jarrett ME, Bennett JC, Heitkemper MM. Matsumoto  M,  Inoue  R,  Tsukahara  T,  Ushida  K,  Chiji  H, 
Matsubara N, et al. Meissner  M,  Lombardo  E,  Havinga  R,  Tietge  UJ,  Kuipers  F, 
Groen AK. Guide for the Care and Use 
of Laboratory Animals. pdf [accessed 2 May 2013]. 

Nelson TA, Holmes S, Alekseyenko AV, Shenoy M, Desantis T, 
Wu CH, et al.