were  housed  individually  in  plastic  cages 
equipped with a running wheel (Coulbourn 
Instruments,  Whitehall,  PA);  however, 
wheels  were  locked  in  cages  of  seden­
tary mice. Mice were allowed to exercise for 5 weeks, 
including 1 week to adapt to running and 
solitary housing. All treatments were performed via oral 
gavage using an 18­G gavage needle (3 cm 
length, curved, 2.25 mm ball diameter; Popper 
and Sons, New Hyde Park, NY). A diagram of the study design is shown 
in Figure 1. PhyloChip  arrays  were  washed, 
stained, and scanned using a GeneArray scan­
ner (Affymetrix, Cleveland, OH). Subsequently,  hybridization 
scores  were  calculated  as  log2(mean  probe 
fluorescence intensity) × 1,000. Before  classification 
analy sis,  we  performed  data  reduction  via 
multiple filtering steps as described by Hazen 
et al. ( Taxa­sample intersections were 

Vehicle
treatment

PCB
treatment

End of
experiment

Feces
collection
(2 days)

Feces
collection
(2 days)

Control data

PCB data

then calculated using abundance (AT) and 
binary matrices (BT). Pairwise BT and AT 
dissimilarity  scores  were  computed  using 
the Unifrac distance metric (Lozupone et al. 2002) as implemented in 
Prediction  Analysis  of  Microarrays  (PAM; 
http://www­stat.stanford.edu/~tibs/PAM/) 
was  used  to  identify  OTUs  with  the  most 
significant differences in abundance between 
comparison groups. As 
a result of these changes, the overall abun­
dance of bacteria significantly diminished (by 
2.2%) in PCB­exposed mice. Experimental design indicating treatment and sampling times. 726 

volume 121 | number 6 | June 2013  •  Environmental Health Perspectives

Choi et al. These taxa were then analyzed by 

PCoA with weighted Unifrac distance, which 
indicated significant differences in the compo­
sition of the microbial communities between 
the exercised and sedentary mice (Figure 2B). The taxa that were decreased 

in  the  exercised  group  belonged  to  phyla 
Tenericutes, Bacteroidetes, and Firmicutes. Exercise alters the structure and composition of the gut microbiome. ( 2012) and pathology have 
been  reported. For example, 
physical activity has been reported to increase 
excretion of primary bile acids to the gastro­ 
intestinal tract (Meissner et al. These changes 
in the intestinal immune system may lead to 
secondary alternations of the host–bacterial 
interaction and induce selective pressure on 
bacterial selection. 2012) reported that Erysipelotrichaceae 
were enriched in obese humans and mice, as 
well as in mice fed a high­fat diet, and noted 
that  the  abundance  of  Erysipelotrichaceae 
was  also  increased  in  patients  with  colo­ 
rectal cancer. Thus, our data are consistent 
because we observed a decrease in the num­ 
ber of Erysipelotrichaceae in exercised mice 
that had lost a substantial amount of body 
weight;  this  is  associated  with  the  role  of 
Erysipelotrichaceae in energy production and 
adiposity (Claus et al. These results suggest that the 
gut microbiome may be one of the primary 
targets of PCB­induced toxicity in subjects 
exposed orally to these environmental toxi­ 
cants. Chen W, Liu F, Ling Z, Tong X, Xiang C. 2012. Human intestinal 
lumen and mucosa-associated microbiota in patients with 
colorectal cancer. MBio  2:  e00271-10;  doi:10.1128/ 
mBio.00271-10. De  Hertogh  G,  Lemmens  B,  Verhasselt  P,  de  Hoogt  R, 
Sagaert X, Joossens M, et al. Physical activity and risk 
of colon and rectal cancers: the European Prospective 
Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition. Cancer Epidemiol 
Biomarkers Prev 15:2398–2407. Understanding the role of gut microbiome-host metabolic 
signal disruption in health and disease. New 
York:Elsevier Science Publishers, 345–364. Ley RE, Backhed F, Turnbaugh P, Lozupone CA, Knight RD, 
Gordon JI. Phylogeny 
of mercury resistance (mer) operons of gram-negative 
bacteria isolated from the fecal flora of primates. BMC  Bioinformatics  7:371; 
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-7-371 [Online 7 August 2006]. 

Lustyk MK, Jarrett ME, Bennett JC, Heitkemper MM. Does a physically active lifestyle improve symptoms in 
women with irritable bowel syndrome? Matsumoto  M,  Inoue  R,  Tsukahara  T,  Ushida  K,  Chiji  H, 
Matsubara N, et al. Guide for the Care and Use 
of Laboratory Animals. Washington, DC:National 
Academies Press. Santacruz A, Collado MC, Garcia-Valdes L, Segura MT, Martin-
Lagos JA, Anjos T, et al. Effect of 
moderate exercise on IgA levels and lymphocyte count in 
mouse intestine. Willems RJ, Hanage WP, Bessen DE, Feil EJ. Zhang H, DiBaise JK, Zuccolo A, Kudrna D, Braidotti M, Yu Y, 
et al.