Pregnancy and the Microbiome

that we are born germ free (Tissier, 1900) and is still the belief
of many physicians, numerous pieces of evidence now cast
doubt on this hypothesis, and suggest that a bacterial presence
already exists in the feto-placental unit (Hu et al., Moreover, we suggest that the
changes in the human microbiome are deeply connected to
the host’s physiological status, and that
these associations
have developed throughout co-evolution of microbiome and
host
to ensure improved ﬁtness. The diﬀerences
in microbiota composition at each body site are shaped by the
varying environmental conditions such as pH, levels of oxygen,
availability of nutrients, humidity, and temperature, enabling
various populations to thrive and perform diﬀerent functions
while interacting with the human host (Ursell et al., A wide range of factors can cause shifts in the composition
of
the microbiota (termed dysbiosis). Pregnancy and the Microbiome

FIGURE 1 | Microbiome changes during pregnancy. In an attempt to reveal the roles of the third trimester
microbial proﬁles, fecal transplantation was used to transfer
samples of ﬁrst- and third-trimester fecal microbiotas to germ-
free (GF) mice, and test
their physiological eﬀects. In a recent study in mice, Gohir et al. ( A study in which probiotics were administered to
pregnant women 14 days before C-section revealed modulation
of the infant microbiota, implying an early maternal eﬀect on the
oﬀspring’s microbiota (Rautava et al., Accordingly, in a study in
which mothers with allergic disease and atopic sensitization
received probiotics during the last 2 months of pregnancy and
the ﬁrst 2 months of lactation, a reduced risk for eczema in
the oﬀspring was observed compared to placebo treatment
(Rautava et al., As in the gut, the vaginal microbiome undergoes signiﬁcant
changes during pregnancy, including a signiﬁcant decrease in
overall diversity, increased stability (the community composition
changes over time), and enrichment with Lactobacillus species
(Aagaard et al., It was believed that cases

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

5

July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1031

Nuriel-Ohayon et al. With
the emergence of microbiome research and the realization that
changes in the maternal microbiome compositions occur during
pregnancy, it has been suggested that there may be correlations
between the microbial communities present, and the health of the
pregnancy (Mysorekar and Cao, 2014). and
and Ureaplasma,
higher alpha diversity. Alternatively, it was suggested that
hematogenous spread of oral microbes to the placenta might be
a driver of preterm birth (Aagaard et al., as

for

Finally,

evidence

a placental microbiome

is
accumulating, one emerging question is whether these bacterial
communities are diﬀerent in cases of pregnancy complications
such as preterm births. Interestingly, the mode of delivery has an eﬀect on the infant’s
oral microbiome, as well (Lif Holgerson et al., However,
none of
these studies directly tested the role of bacteria
colonizing the newborn in the development of disease. When comparing the gut, oral, and skin bacterial
communities of the C-section delivered babies, those exposed
to vaginal ﬂuids revealed signiﬁcantly more vagina-associated
bacteria, making their compositions more similar to vaginally
born infants. The most dominant bacteria in the colostrum (the ﬁrst milk
produced during late pregnancy, and contains antibodies)
included Weisella, Leuconostoc, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus,
and Lactococcus, whereas milk samples collected 1–6 months
post-partum harbored oral cavity related bacteria such as
Veillonella, Leptotrichia, and Prevotella, perhaps due to frequent
interaction with the infant’s oral microbiota (Cabrera-Rubio
et al., Text refers to changes in breast milk vs. formula feeding. For example, similar
characteristics and changes occur in pregnancy as in metabolic
syndrome, including dysbiosis, inﬂammation, and weight gain. HN was supported by Ministry of Science, Technology &
Space, State of Israel. ( A metagenomic approach to characterization of the vaginal microbiome
signature in pregnancy. Gut microbiota and
allergy: the importance of the pregnancy period. doi: 10.1515/jpm.2010.078

DiGiulio, D. B., Romero, R., Kusanovic, J. P., Gomez, R., Kim, C. J., Seok, K. S.,
et al. ( doi: 10.1016/S0083-6729(06)77011-X

Fujiwara, N., Tsuruda, K., Iwamoto, Y., Kato, F., Odaki, T., Yamane, N., et al. 10.1056/NEJM200005183422007

Gomez-Arango, L. F., Barrett, H. L., McIntyre, H. D., Callaway, L. K., Morrison,
M., Nitert, M. D., and group, S. T. (2016). Connections between the gut
microbiome and metabolic hormones in early pregnancy in overweight and
obese women. First-pass meconium samples from healthy term vaginally-
delivered neonates: an analysis of the microbiota. Kelly, D., Campbell, J. I., King, T. P., Grant, G., Jansson, E. A., Coutts, A.
G., et al. ( Commensal anaerobic gut bacteria attenuate inﬂammation
by regulating nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of PPAR-gamma and RelA. Nat. Succession of microbial consortia in the developing infant gut
microbiome. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2008.11.019

Kujovich, J. L. (2004). doi: 10.1177/0022034511418973

Lozupone, C. A., Stombaugh, J. I., Gordon, J. I., Jansson, J. K., and Knight, R.
(2012). doi:
10.1128/AEM.02063-08

McLean, N. W., and Rosenstein, I. J. (2000). doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1361830

Naik, S., Bouladoux, N., Wilhelm, C., Molloy, M. J., Salcedo, R., Kastenmuller,
W., et al. ( Role of cytokines

in preterm labor and birth. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2012.03.010

Valles, Y., Artacho, A., Pascual-Garcia, A., Ferrus, M. L., Gosalbes, M. J., Abellan, J.
J., et al. ( Intrauterine growth restriction: diagnosis and

management. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.