r e s o u r c e

(Online  Methods  and  Supplementary  Note  1)  to  ensure  that  the 
reconstructions meet the quality standards set by Thiele and Palsson 
(2010)9. 1f,g, Supplementary 
Table 3 and Supplementary Figs. 1d), and sensitivity 
to carbon source, fermentation product, and nutrient requirement 
data was greatly increased in the AGORA models with an average 
sensitivity of 1.00 ± 0.02 compared to 0.06 ± 0.09 for the draft models 
(Fig. When comparing eight AGORA reconstructions with the published 
genome-scale metabolic reconstructions for the same species, we found 
that the main differences in reaction content were in lipopolysaccha-
ride biosynthesis and transport pathways (Supplementary Tables 7  
and  8). a) The refinement 
pipeline starts with an automatic draft reconstruction generation from the online platforms Model SEED14 and KBase (Department of Energy Systems 
Biology Knowledgebase (KBase), http://kbase.us), followed by the translation of reaction and metabolite identifiers to match those of the human 
metabolic reconstruction, Recon 2.04 (ref. The number of reconstructions per phylum is shown above the phylum name. Values 
below Q1 – 1.5 × IQR and above Q3 + 1.5 × IQR are plotted as outliers. d) Gene essentiality accuracy 
predicted by the draft reconstructions, the AGORA reconstructions, and four published reconstructions (Supplementary Note 2) when compared 
against in vitro data sets48. ( and methane metabolism was unique to four archaea. and flux consistent reactions

Draft

AGORA

Actinobacteria
Bacteroidetes
Cyanobacteria
Firmicutes
Fusobacteria

Proteobacteria
Spirochaetes
Synergistetes
Tenericutes
Verrucomicrobia

Crenarchaeota
Euryarchaeota
Thaumarchaeota

nature biotechnology  VOLUME 35  NUMBER 1 

JANUARY 2017 

8 3

h

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

Sensitivity

Mean ± s.d. Validation of AGORA model predictions
We demonstrated the predictive capability of AGORA models using 
two  models,  Bacteroides  caccae  ATCC  34185  (a  fiber-degrading 
symbiont common in microbiomes of Western individuals29,30) and 
Lactobacillus  rhamnosus  GG  (LGG),  a  common  human  probiotic 
strain31. The reported chemically defined growth medium for 

LGG contains all amino acids and most vitamins32 but our in silico 
predictions suggested that these could be supplemented by growing 
LCG with B. caccae (Fig. Consistent with one previ-
ous in silico study33, the presence of oxygen resulted in a decrease in 
commensalism and mutualism, especially for Gammaproteobacteria 
(Supplementary  Fig. Bacteria in ecosystems engage in complex trophic webs based on 
interspecies interactions40, which cannot be inferred from microbial 
abundance41. 22), the human 
metabolism  reconstruction,  highlighting  the  complementarity  of 
host and microbial metabolisms. Amensalism: one microbe grows slower (Affected) in the 
paired simulation while the other microbe’s growth rate is unaffected 
(Unaffected). b) Hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance) of the  
ratio of pairwise interaction types per condition (i.e., diet and oxygen 
presence) on the taxonomic family level. See a for a description  
of the interaction types. Also 
shown are the number of reconstructions needed to capture 75%, 90%, and 95% of the full reaction diversity. METhODS
Methods, including statements of data availability and any associated 
accession codes and references, are available in the online version of 
the paper. S.M. and A.H. reconstructed the pipeline. Shafquat,  A.,  Joice,  R.,  Simmons,  S.L.  &  Huttenhower,  C.  Functional  and 
phylogenetic assembly of microbial communities in the human microbiome. 8 8  

VOLUME 35  NUMBER 1 

JANUARY 2017  nature biotechnology

© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. McCloskey,  D.,  Palsson,  B.O.  &  Feist,  A.M.  Basic  and  applied  uses  of  genome-scale 
metabolic network reconstructions of Escherichia coli. Fleming,  R.M.T.,  Vlassis,  N.,  Thiele,  I.  &  Saunders,  M.A.  Conditions  for  duality 
between  fluxes  and  concentrations  in  biochemical  networks. Any AGORA 
reconstruction can be downloaded in SBML format from the VMH website on 
the “Downloads” page. 2010)30 and by Rajilić-Stojanović 
and  de  Vos  (2014)51,  we  obtained  472  additional  draft  reconstructions 
from  Model  SEED  and  KBase  (Department  of  Energy  Systems  Biology 
Knowledgebase,  http://kbase.us),  both  of  which  use  the  RAST  annotation 
server52 to annotate the genomes and build the draft metabolic networks14. We identified futile cycles by con-
straining each reaction flux to zero individually and computed the flux through 
the ATP demand reaction using flux balance analysis (FBA)34. If a vitamin biosynthesis pathway 
was present in a reconstruction that should not synthesize the vitamin based 
on genomic and experimental data, we added a transport and exchange reac-
tion for the vitamin and removed the reaction(s) that had been gap-filled by 
the Model SEED or KBase pipelines. We say a matrix S is net flux 
consistent if there exist matrices and such that, where each row contains at least 
one nonzero entry. We expanded these files with the appropriate gene sequences for 
respiration, quinone biosynthesis, B-vitamin synthesis, and central metabolic 
pathways were retrieved from the web interface of the PubSEED platform60. Carbon source and fermentation phenotypes. The in silico 
gene essentiality analysis was carried out under rich medium conditions for 
the draft, AGORA, and published models, by constraining the flux through all 
reactions associated with a deleted gene to 0 mmol/gDW/h and maximizing 
the BOF. Using FBA, 
growth  of  the  microbial  pair  was  maximized  under  both  diets  (Western  
and high-fiber diet), aerobically and anaerobically (Supplementary Table 9). We monitored the number of reactions added by each new reconstruction. Extracellular polar metabolites from the 
supernatant samples and external concentration curves for each compound of 
interest were extracted applying a liquid–liquid extraction (Methanol/Water). The potential of B. caccae and LGG to consume 
and produce metabolites in silico was computed using FVA25 and compared 
with GC-MS measurements. Bauer,  E.,  Laczny,  C.C.,  Magnusdottir,  S.,  Wilmes,  P.  &  Thiele,  I.  Phenotypic 
differentiation of gastrointestinal microbes is  reflected in their  encoded  metabolic 
repertoires. The RAST Server: rapid annotations using subsystems technology. Magnúsdóttir, S., Ravcheev, D., de Crécy-Lagard, V. & Thiele, I. Systematic genome 
assessment  of  B-vitamin  biosynthesis  suggests  co-operation  among  gut  microbes. Database  resources  of  the  National  Center  for 

Biotechnology Information.