r e s o u r c e

(Online  Methods  and  Supplementary  Note  1)  to  ensure  that  the 
reconstructions meet the quality standards set by Thiele and Palsson 
(2010)9. 1d), and sensitivity 
to carbon source, fermentation product, and nutrient requirement 
data was greatly increased in the AGORA models with an average 
sensitivity of 1.00 ± 0.02 compared to 0.06 ± 0.09 for the draft models 
(Fig. When comparing eight AGORA reconstructions with the published 
genome-scale metabolic reconstructions for the same species, we found 
that the main differences in reaction content were in lipopolysaccha-
ride biosynthesis and transport pathways (Supplementary Tables 7  
and  8). The AGORA models have been curated for carbon source utilization 
and fermentation product secretion; they outperformed the published 
models for those functions, as measured by a sensitivity analysis of 
the carbon source uptake and fermentation product secretion of both 
seven published models and AGORA models (Supplementary Fig. Values 
below Q1 – 1.5 × IQR and above Q3 + 1.5 × IQR are plotted as outliers. The reconstructions are ordered based on phyla and 
taxonomic classes. Validation of AGORA model predictions
We demonstrated the predictive capability of AGORA models using 
two  models,  Bacteroides  caccae  ATCC  34185  (a  fiber-degrading 
symbiont common in microbiomes of Western individuals29,30) and 
Lactobacillus  rhamnosus  GG  (LGG),  a  common  human  probiotic 
strain31. The reported chemically defined growth medium for 

LGG contains all amino acids and most vitamins32 but our in silico 
predictions suggested that these could be supplemented by growing 
LCG with B. caccae (Fig. Even though AGORA reconstructions do not cover 
all of the species-specific aspects of manually curated reconstruc-
tions (e.g., lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis), the performance of each 
of  eight  AGORA  models  was  on  par  with  that  of  their  previously 
published, manually curated models of the same strain (Fig. Low-fiber diets are thought to modulate the microbiota composi-
tion  by  depleting  commensal  microbe-to-microbe  interactions35. Based on hierarchical clustering of the ratio of pairwise interaction 

nature biotechnology  VOLUME 35  NUMBER 1 

JANUARY 2017 

8 5

© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. We found that central metabolic 
traits were predicted to define co-growth interactions as a function of 
diet composition and oxygen availability (Fig. 22), the human 
metabolism  reconstruction,  highlighting  the  complementarity  of 
host and microbial metabolisms. Amensalism: one microbe grows slower (Affected) in the 
paired simulation while the other microbe’s growth rate is unaffected 
(Unaffected). METhODS
Methods, including statements of data availability and any associated 
accession codes and references, are available in the online version of 
the paper. S.M. and A.H. reconstructed the pipeline. reprints and permissions information is available online at http://www.nature.com/
reprints/index.html. Shafquat,  A.,  Joice,  R.,  Simmons,  S.L.  &  Huttenhower,  C.  Functional  and 
phylogenetic assembly of microbial communities in the human microbiome. McCloskey,  D.,  Palsson,  B.O.  &  Feist,  A.M.  Basic  and  applied  uses  of  genome-scale 
metabolic network reconstructions of Escherichia coli. A total of 
192 draft-reconstruction-derived models could not carry flux through the 
BOF on anaerobic rich medium (all exchange reactions open, aside from the 
oxygen exchange reaction). We ensured that no metabolite in a model could be produced 
from nothing, which would indicate mass or charge imbalanced reactions. We  retrieved  the  nucleotide  gene  sequence 
of each microbe using the Perl API from the Model SEED and KBase web 
interface. Similarly, a model 
was considered to be able to secrete a fermentation product if the maximum 
possible flux through the fermentation product exchange reaction was posi-
tive (>10−6 mmol/gDW/h). The RAST Server: rapid annotations using subsystems technology. Thiele, I., Vo, T.D., Price, N.D. & Palsson, B.O. Expanded metabolic reconstruction 
of Helicobacter pylori (iIT341 GSM/GPR): an in silico genome-scale characterization 
of single- and double-deletion mutants. Database  resources  of  the  National  Center  for 

Biotechnology Information.