Hullar and Fu

Page 2

Here, we present below examples of the role of the microbiome in dietary metabolism, an 
overview of eukaryotic epigenetic mechanisms, and microbially-derived metabolites that are 
relevant to eukaryotic epigenetic changes in gene expression that may be linked to colon 
cancer. Hypermethylation of genes involved 
in pathways identified as the hallmarks of cancer: cell cycle regulation, DNA repair, 
apoptosis, hormone response, carcinogen metabolism, angiogenesis and metastases are 
found in several human cancers 2, 23-26

Methylation of DNA in the coding region of a gene, especially the conversion of cytosine to 
5-methylcytosine, leads to CpG dinucleotides that affect expression of target genes. Cell proliferation is inhibited, apoptosis is induced, and the 
cells are exfoliated into the lumen. While inhibition of HDACs is a common mechanism to inhibit cancer growth, the effect of 
SCFA on the prevention of colorectal cancer has been inconsistent. In support of this 
hypothesis, we showed recently that the fecal bacteria from individuals who excrete higher 
amounts of ITC in their urine after a standard meal of cooked broccoli metabolize more 
glucoraphanin in-vitro.61

Studies suggest that the exposure to ITCs in-vivo may well translate to prevention or 
reduction in tumor growth through the effects on DNA methylation, histone modification, 
and miRNA. Sulforaphane (SFN), an ITC, prevents carcinogen or genetically induced colon 
cancer in rodent models. Recent studies have shown that sulforaphane is an HDAC inhibitor 
and leads to an increase in global and local histone acetylation.62, 63 Similar to butyrate, 
SFN causes p21 upregulation and cell cycle arrest. They include phenolic acids (hydroxybenzoic acids 
and hydroxycinnamic acids), anthocyanins, flavonoids (flavanols, flavonols, flavones, 
flavonones, and isoflavones), stilbenes, lignans, and curcuminoids. Polyphenols have exhibited differential selection for different species in the microbial 
community by either acting as an antibiotic or a prebiotic which may influence human 
exposure to microbial metabolites of polyphenols. Fish oil from cold water fish and plants provides dietary sources of ω 3 long chain 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (3ω LC-PUFA). Epidemiologic studies have shown that these 
fats are protective against colon and prostate cancer although there are conflicting results. Distinct distal gut microbiome diversity and composition in 

healthy children from Bangladesh and the United States. 454 pyrosequencing reveals a shift in fecal microbiota of 
healthy adult men consuming polydextrose or soluble corn fiber. Pinto bean consumption changes SCFA profiles in fecal 

fermentations, bacterial populations of the lower bowel, and lipid profiles in blood of humans. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. [PubMed: 21376230] 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. Lafon-Hughes L, Di Tomaso MV, Mendez-Acuna L, et al. Chromatinremodelling mechanisms in 

cancer. The human colon cancer methylome shows similar 
hypo- and hypermethylation at conserved tissue-specific CpG island shores. Many roads to maturity: microRNA biogenesis pathways and their 

regulation. Dietary fibre, whole grains, and risk of colorectal cancer: 

systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. The effects of short-chain fatty acids on human colon 
cancer cell phenotype are associated with histone hyperacetylation. Kiefer J, Beyer-Sehlmeyer G, Pool-Zobel BL. Waldecker M, Kautenburger T, Daumann H, et al. Influence of plant and bacterial myrosinase activity on the 
metabolic fate of glucosinolates in gnotobiotic rats. Hydrolysis of glucosinolates to isothiocyanates after ingestion 
of raw or microwaved cabbage by human volunteers. Sulforaphane causes epigenetic repression of hTERT 

expression in human breast cancer cell lines. Van Dorsten FA, Daykin CA, Mulder TP, et al. Green tea and black tea consumption in relation to colorectal 
cancer risk: the Singapore Chinese Health Study. Impact of polyphenols from black tea and red wine/

grape juice on a gut model microbiome. Rajavelu A, Tulyasheva Z, Jaiswal R, et al. Function and disruption of DNA Methyltransferase 3a 
cooperative DNA binding and nucleoprotein filament formation. Metabolic fate of (-)-[4-H-3]epigallocatechin gallate 
in rats after oral administration. PubMed: 21913246] 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. Dietary intake of omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids 

and risk of colorectal cancer in a prospective cohort of US men and women. Druart C, Neyrinck AM, Vlaeminck B, et al. Contribution of the 7beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 

from Ruminococcus gnavus N53 to ursodeoxycholic acid formation in the human colon. Large-bowel carcinogenesis: fecal constituents of populations with 

diverse incidence rates of colon cancer. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 14

108. Hypotheses for the etiology of colorectal cancer--an overview. Serfaty L, Bissonnette M, Poupon R. Ursodeoxycholic acid and chemoprevention of colorectal 

cancer.