Hullar and Fu

Page 2

Here, we present below examples of the role of the microbiome in dietary metabolism, an 
overview of eukaryotic epigenetic mechanisms, and microbially-derived metabolites that are 
relevant to eukaryotic epigenetic changes in gene expression that may be linked to colon 
cancer. Hypermethylation of genes involved 
in pathways identified as the hallmarks of cancer: cell cycle regulation, DNA repair, 
apoptosis, hormone response, carcinogen metabolism, angiogenesis and metastases are 
found in several human cancers 2, 23-26

Methylation of DNA in the coding region of a gene, especially the conversion of cytosine to 
5-methylcytosine, leads to CpG dinucleotides that affect expression of target genes. Butyrate can then accumulate in the nucleus where it functions as an HDAC inhibitor and 
inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis. In support of this 
hypothesis, we showed recently that the fecal bacteria from individuals who excrete higher 
amounts of ITC in their urine after a standard meal of cooked broccoli metabolize more 
glucoraphanin in-vitro.61

Studies suggest that the exposure to ITCs in-vivo may well translate to prevention or 
reduction in tumor growth through the effects on DNA methylation, histone modification, 
and miRNA. They include phenolic acids (hydroxybenzoic acids 
and hydroxycinnamic acids), anthocyanins, flavonoids (flavanols, flavonols, flavones, 
flavonones, and isoflavones), stilbenes, lignans, and curcuminoids. Polyphenols have exhibited differential selection for different species in the microbial 
community by either acting as an antibiotic or a prebiotic which may influence human 
exposure to microbial metabolites of polyphenols. Bile is secreted from the gall bladder into the small intestine to help emulsify fats 
during digestion. Alvarez-Venegas R. Bacterial SET domain proteins and their role in eukaryotic chromatin 

modification. De Filippo C, Cavalieri D, Di Paola M, et al. Ross AB, Bruce SJ, Blondel-Lubrano A, et al. Pinto bean consumption changes SCFA profiles in fecal 

fermentations, bacterial populations of the lower bowel, and lipid profiles in blood of humans. Effects of resistant starch on the colon in healthy volunteers: 
possible implications for cancer prevention. Herceg Z. Epigenetics and cancer: towards an evaluation of the impact of environmental and 

dietary factors. Scheppach W, Bartram HP, Richter F. Role of Short-Chain Fatty-Acids in the Prevention of 

Colorectal-Cancer. The effects of short-chain fatty acids on human colon 
cancer cell phenotype are associated with histone hyperacetylation. Waldecker M, Kautenburger T, Daumann H, et al. Formation of allyl isothiocyanate from sinigrin in the digestive 
tract of rats monoassociated with a human colonic strain of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. Hydrolysis of glucosinolates to isothiocyanates after ingestion 
of raw or microwaved cabbage by human volunteers. Green tea and black tea consumption in relation to colorectal 
cancer risk: the Singapore Chinese Health Study. Rajavelu A, Tulyasheva Z, Jaiswal R, et al. The heterocyclic ring fission and dehydroxylation of catechins 
and related compounds by Eubacterium sp strain SDG-2, a human intestinal bacterium. Metabolic fate of (-)-[4-H-3]epigallocatechin gallate 
in rats after oral administration. Epigenetic modulation of mechanisms involved in 

inflammation: Influence of selected polyphenolic substances on histone acetylation state. PubMed: 21913246] 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. Dietary intake of omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids 

and risk of colorectal cancer in a prospective cohort of US men and women. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 14

108.