Cultured human gastrointestinal microbiota

997

cus, and Peptococcus (Moore & Holdeman, 1974a). FEMS Microbiology Reviews
published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Federation of European Microbiological Societies. GenBank
Accession Numbers of the SSU rRNA gene sequence are provided for each species and the family names are indicated. 1002

M. Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c & W.M. de Vos

these bacteria are responsible for protein degradation in
the gastrointestinal tract (Shen et al., FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 (2014) 996–1047

ª 2014 The Authors. are still considered to be opportunistic
pathogens, several decades of research have testiﬁed that
many Bacteroidetes species are highly adjusted to the gas-
trointestinal tract, where they live in high abundance (up
(cid:1)1 of intestinal material; Eggerth & Gagnon,
to 1011 cells g
1933; Moore & Holdeman, 1974a; Benno et al., Because of their broad metabolic potential, the role of
in the gastrointestinal microbiota is

the Bacteroidetes

complex: while the reduced abundance of the Bacteroide-
tes in some cases is associated with obesity (Ley, 2010)
and irritable bowel syndrome (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., syndrome patients

irritable bowel

(cid:1)1 of

Clostridia

The class Clostridia clusters bacteria that are dominant
and frequently detected in the lower gastrointestinal tract
that are distributed within the families: Clostridiaceae,
Christensenellaceae, Eubacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae, Pepto-
streptococcaceae, Ruminococcacea as well as bacteria with
an unclear taxonomic status that are classiﬁed within
Clostridiales Incertae Sedis families XI and XIII (Garrity
et al., The Negativi-
cutes are typically isolated from the oral cavity or the
proximal small bowel (Rogosa, 1965; Simon & Gorbach,
1986), but representative species from this group can be
detected in high abundances even in the lower intestinal
tract. Members of the Negativicutes are assacharolytic
and utilize end=products of sugar metabolisms of other
gastrointestinal bacteria (such as lactate or succinate) to
produce propionate, forming an important trophic chain. The species
indicated in bold are based on the SSU rRNA gene sequence clustering within the Erysipelotrichi in contrast to their ofﬁcial classiﬁcation. FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 (2014) 996–1047

Kandleria vitulina, AB210825
Catenibacter mitsuokai, AB030226

Eggerthia catenaformis, AJ621549

Cultured human gastrointestinal microbiota

1021

are

that

currently uncultured species

on the SSU rRNA gene sequence, they are interrelated
with the members of the Erysipelotrichi class of the Firmi-
cutes (Fig. Phylogenetic tree the human
gastrointestinal species that belong to the
class of the Betaproteobacteria. Human gastrointestinal
tract-associated sulfate-reducing bacteria include the ace-
tate-utilizing Desulfobacter spp., Hence, their prevalence is low in samples from the lower
gastrointestinal tract (Hansen et al., These bacteria can be detected
in the human oral cavity and the gastrointestinal tract,
while a recent study of the microbiota along the gastroin-
testinal tract has shown that TM7 bacteria are one of the
common microorganisms, widely distributed among
humans (Stearns et al., References

Alexieff A (1911) Sur la nature des formations dites ‘Kystes de

Trichomonas intestinalis’. 1991 and Eubacterium plautii (S(cid:1)eguin 1928) Hofstad
and Aasjord 1982, with description of Flavonifractor plautii
gen. Gosalbes MJ, Llop S, Vall(cid:4)es Y, Moya A, Ballester F & Francino
MP (2013) Meconium microbiota types dominated by lactic
acid or enteric bacteria are differentially associated with
maternal eczema and respiratory problems in infants. Kostic AD, Gevers D, Pedamallu CS et al. ( Moore WEC & Holdeman LV (1974b) Special problems

associated with the isolation and identiﬁcation of intestinal
bacteria in fecal ﬂora studies. Maruo T, Sakamoto M, Ito C, Toda T & Benno Y (2008)

Adlercreutzia equolifaciens gen. 2009) Proximal small
intestinal microbiota and identiﬁcation of rod-shaped
bacteria associated with childhood celiac disease. Palmer C, Bik EM, Digiulio DB, Relman DA & Brown PO
(2007) Development of the human infant intestinal
microbiota. Sokol H, Seksik P, Rigottier-Gois L, Lay C, Lepage P,

Podglajen I, Marteau P & Dor(cid:1)e J (2006) Speciﬁcities of the
fecal microbiota in inﬂammatory bowel disease. Taras D, Simmering R, Collins MD, Lawson PA & Blaut M
(2002) Reclassiﬁcation of Eubacterium formicigenerans
Holdeman and Moore 1974 as Dorea formicigenerans gen.