Cultured human gastrointestinal microbiota

997

cus, and Peptococcus (Moore & Holdeman, 1974a). FEMS Microbiology Reviews
published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Federation of European Microbiological Societies. The members of the Biﬁdobacterium genus are nonmotile,
anaerobic or microaerophilic bacteria that produce ace-
tate and lactate as major fermentation products from sug-
sugars by these bacteria is
ars. GenBank
Accession Numbers of the SSU rRNA gene sequence are provided for each species and the family names are indicated. 1002

M. Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c & W.M. de Vos

these bacteria are responsible for protein degradation in
the gastrointestinal tract (Shen et al., FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 (2014) 996–1047

ª 2014 The Authors. are still considered to be opportunistic
pathogens, several decades of research have testiﬁed that
many Bacteroidetes species are highly adjusted to the gas-
trointestinal tract, where they live in high abundance (up
(cid:1)1 of intestinal material; Eggerth & Gagnon,
to 1011 cells g
1933; Moore & Holdeman, 1974a; Benno et al., The species indicated in bold are
based on the SSU rRNA gene sequence clustering within the families that are designated on the ﬁgure in contrast to their ofﬁcial classiﬁcation. For the other gastrointestinal species that belong to the order of the Bacillales see Fig. 1012

M. Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c & W.M. de Vos

the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract, is associated
with celiac disease, although the abundance of these bac-
teria can be depleted with the withdrawal of gluten from
the diet of patients (Collado et al., syndrome patients

irritable bowel

(cid:1)1 of

Clostridia

The class Clostridia clusters bacteria that are dominant
and frequently detected in the lower gastrointestinal tract
that are distributed within the families: Clostridiaceae,
Christensenellaceae, Eubacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae, Pepto-
streptococcaceae, Ruminococcacea as well as bacteria with
an unclear taxonomic status that are classiﬁed within
Clostridiales Incertae Sedis families XI and XIII (Garrity
et al., the
Clostridiaceae ofﬁcially groups Sarcina spp., which based on the SSU rRNA gene sequence cluster within distant phylogenetic groups, are depicted in the gray area. Several studies of the microbiota of irritable bowel
syndrome patients and controls have shown that organ-
isms related to these misclassiﬁed Ruminococcus spp. Two of
these gastrointestinal bacteria,
namely Catabacter hongkongensis and C. minuta, form a
the
separate cluster within the Clostridiales order of
Clostridia class and are the only cultured representatives
of a phylogenetic group that was previously detected only
in various molecular studies and was in a previous review
designated as uncultured Clostridiales II (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojano-
vi(cid:1)c et al., in human health, although several studies
have shown an increased abundance of Veillonella spp. FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 (2014) 996–1047

Kandleria vitulina, AB210825
Catenibacter mitsuokai, AB030226

Eggerthia catenaformis, AJ621549

Cultured human gastrointestinal microbiota

1021

are

that

currently uncultured species

on the SSU rRNA gene sequence, they are interrelated
with the members of the Erysipelotrichi class of the Firmi-
cutes (Fig. Proteobacteria

Bacteria belonging to the phylum Proteobacteria are com-
monly detected in the gastrointestinal samples and this
group of the true Gram-negative bacteria is particularly
diverse, although not very abundant – typically all
Proteobacteria account about 1% of the total microbiota
(Holdeman et al., Phylogenetic tree the human
gastrointestinal species that belong to the
class of the Betaproteobacteria. Hence, their prevalence is low in samples from the lower
gastrointestinal tract (Hansen et al., 2008), but even when
tinal
present, these bacteria constitute an extremely minor frac-
tion, as indicated by the fact that only one of over 15 000
SSU rRNA gene sequences in the study of the microbiota
of inﬂammatory bowel disease patients and controls orig-
inated from a Gemmatimonadetes bacterium (Frank et al., The presence of the Planctomycetes in the human gas-
trointestinal tract was reported only in molecular-based
studies (Wilson & Blitchington, 1996; De Filippo et al., In an early cultivation study,
which dates from 1968, a single methanogenic species,
isolated from four of ﬁve individuals, was identiﬁed as
Methanobrevibacter ruminantium (Nottingham & Hun-
gate, 1968). Eukarya

Different microeukaryal species can be detected in the
human gastrointestinal tract, and although this group of
organisms is subdominant, it is widely distributed com-
ponent of the gastrointestinal microbiota. Having in mind their source, and
instability (as illustrated in the results of longitudinal fol-
low up of fungal microbiota; Scanlan & Marchesi, 2008),
it is likely that these fungi are not a constant and func-
tionally relevant part of the gastrointestinal microbiota. in the healthy human gastrointestinal

these organisms

tract,

it

A number of Eukarya classiﬁed within the phylum of
Apicomplexa in addition to Micosporidia form a group of
intestinal spore-forming protozoa that cause intracellular

ª 2014 The Authors. References

Alexieff A (1911) Sur la nature des formations dites ‘Kystes de

Trichomonas intestinalis’. Batchelor MD (1919) Aerobic spore-bearing bacteria in the

intestinal tract of children. 1991 and Eubacterium plautii (S(cid:1)eguin 1928) Hofstad
and Aasjord 1982, with description of Flavonifractor plautii
gen. Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis 32: 637–645. Eggerth AH & Gagnon BH (1933) The bacteroides of human

feces. 2011) Determinants of

the human infant intestinal microbiota after the

FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 (2014) 996–1047

ª 2014 The Authors. Gosalbes MJ, Llop S, Vall(cid:4)es Y, Moya A, Ballester F & Francino
MP (2013) Meconium microbiota types dominated by lactic
acid or enteric bacteria are differentially associated with
maternal eczema and respiratory problems in infants. Johnson EH, Windsor JJ & Clark CG (2004) Emerging from
obscurity: biological, clinical, and diagnostic aspects of
Dientamoeba fragilis. Kabeerdoss J, Shobana Devi R, Regina Mary R & Ramakrishna
BS (2012) Faecal microbiota composition in vegetarians:
comparison with omnivores in a cohort of young women in
southern India. Kostic AD, Gevers D, Pedamallu CS et al. ( a mucin-degrading bacterium from the
swine intestinal tract and emended description of the genus
Cloacibacillus. Maruo T, Sakamoto M, Ito C, Toda T & Benno Y (2008)

Adlercreutzia equolifaciens gen. Sokol H, Seksik P, Rigottier-Gois L, Lay C, Lepage P,

Podglajen I, Marteau P & Dor(cid:1)e J (2006) Speciﬁcities of the
fecal microbiota in inﬂammatory bowel disease. Taras D, Simmering R, Collins MD, Lawson PA & Blaut M
(2002) Reclassiﬁcation of Eubacterium formicigenerans
Holdeman and Moore 1974 as Dorea formicigenerans gen. List of archaeal species that can be members of
the human gastrointestinal microbiota, with a reference
that provides the link between the species and gastroin-
testinal tract as ecological niche.