Microbiome  (2017) 5:158 

Page 2 of 19

infant nutrition, and common clinical practices in neonatal
care [14–20]. We hypothesize that assembly and function
of the preterm infants’ gut microbiota is associated with
postnatal growth patterns and represents a yet unexplored
personalized therapeutic potential for optimizing infant
development. A total of 2 rectal swabs were collected from
the 2 PROP full-term infants, and 46 rectal swabs from the
23 RPRC full-term infants: one near birth (≤ 20 day of life
[DOL]) and—for the RPRC subjects only—a second at
1 month of age (20 < DOL ≤ 50) (Table 1). Microbiome  (2017) 5:158 

Page 3 of 19

Consequently, we used gestational age at birth and PMA
for our analyses. Three phases of the preterm infant gut microbiota
Characterization of microbiota from all subjects and
time points spanning PMA from 24 to 46 weeks identi-
fied Bacilli, Gammaproteobacteria, and Clostridia as by

far the most abundant taxa, with relative abundances of
41.75, 23.0, and 22.5% respectively, accounting for 87.0%
of the total observed abundance (Fig. The groupings
and bars within each group indicate the phases of the first and second sample of a pair of consecutive samples, respectively, and are ordered as
described in c. Transition probabilities are included in the table below the graph. P values indicate the significance of each association while
beta values indicate the direction and magnitude of the relationship between
weight Z-score and the covariates

subjects at their first sample (61.8 vs 32.0%, p = 0.025). Specifically, all preterm longi-
tudinal samples (n = 705) were divided into two groups or
periods of equal functional variance based on fitted micro-
biota taxa abundance, an early period (< 34 weeks PMA;
n = 362) and a late period (≥ 34 weeks PMA; n = 343)
(Fig. Using linear mixed-effects re-
gression models as described for the phase-based nutrition
analysis (Methods-Model A) with the weight Z-score as

Grier et al. 0

10

20

30

50

60

70

80

40
Day Of Life

Grier et al. Potential associations of nutrition and medications with
phase
After identifying the microbiota phase as a significant
factor in infant growth, we sought to identify potential
associations of nutrition and medications with phase by
including them as explanatory variables and microbiota
phases P1 and P2 as the outcome (with P3 as the baseline
phase) in a multivariate mixed-effects logistic regression
model. Beta values are the estimated regression coefficients and p values are
computed from the likelihood ratio tests. For clarity, only significant associations are reported in this table. It has
in preterm infants, passage of
been established that
meconium as stool is both delayed and prolonged and is
observed well beyond the first stool, with final clearance
occurring up to several weeks after birth [34].

To identify potential associations between the presence
of meconium and P1 of the microbiota, we examined the
relationship between clearance of the meconium from the
stool and the initial transition of the microbiota out of P1
(Fig. Consistent with other studies, we determined that this
programmed, non-random developmental succession of
microbiota is largely determined by PMA [5, 6]. What
drives this patterned succession toward a homeostatic
relationship between the infant and colonizing microbiota
is not known, but likely involves complex interactions be-
tween the mucosal immune system as well as metabolic
interactions within the gut microbial community and the
surrounding tissue and microenvironment, which remain
dynamic during periods of gastrointestinal development in
early life. We determined that transi-
tion from meconium to normal infant stool is associated
with transition of the microbiota out of P1. Third, in both the phase- and period-based
models, the abundance of several dominant infant gut
microbiota taxa (e.g., Bifidobacterium) [37, 53] were signifi-
cantly affected by gestational age at birth, PMA at sam-
pling, total calories and proportions of macronutrients
consumed at the week of sampling, and multiple clinical
variables. Reads
containing more than four mismatches to the known
primer sequences or more than three mismatches to all
barcode sequences were excluded from subsequent pro-
cessing and analysis. Comparing taxonomic composition, functional capacity,
and week-to-week dissimilarity between phases
Analysis of variance of taxa abundance at all taxonomic
levels across the three phases of the microbiota was con-
ducted using a Kruskal-Wallis test, and the results are
summarized in Additional file 4: Table S3. Microbiome  (2017) 5:158 

Page 15 of 19

assessed at each taxonomic level using the metagen-
omicsSeq zero-inflated Gaussian test [64], and the re-
sults are summarized in Additional file 5: Tables S4A–C.
Testing for differential functional capacity between the
phases was performed using LEfSe [67] with per-sample
normalization to 1 M total counts, minimum effect size
of 2.0, alpha of 0.1, an all-against-all strategy, and other-
wise default parameters. The results are summarized in
Additional file 7: Table S6. The interactions
included in both models are defined as the products of
the nutrition/medication variables and period/phase-re-
lated covariates. Weighted UniFrac Principal Coordinate Analyses of
phase and Dirichlet component. ( DOCX 18 kb)

Additional file 4: Table S3. nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs00001297.v1.p1 and
url http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=
phs00001347.v2.p1. Authors’ contributions
SRG, GSP, RMR, and Y-HL designed the study. ALG, HAK, BH, HH, and SM
collected and processed the specimens. All authors reviewed the
final manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 5Division of Infectious Disease, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Rochester, NY, USA. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2014;111(34):12522–7. Yatsunenko T, Rey FE, Manary MJ, Trehan I, Dominguez-Bello MG, Contreras M,
Magris M, Hidalgo G, Baldassano RN, Anokhin AP, et al. Collado MC, Rautava S, Aakko J, Isolauri E, Salminen S. Human gut

colonisation may be initiated in utero by distinct microbial communities in
the placenta and amniotic fluid. Abdulkadir B, Nelson A, Skeath T, Marrs EC, Perry JD, Cummings SP,
Embleton ND, Berrington JE, Stewart CJ. Routine use of probiotics in
preterm infants: longitudinal impact on the microbiome and metabolome. Intestinal microbiota composition after antibiotic treatment in
early life: the INCA study. Duty SM, Mendonca K, Hauser R, Calafat AM, Ye X, Meeker JD, Ackerman R,
Cullinane J, Faller J, Ringer S. Potential sources of bisphenol A in the
neonatal intensive care unit. Heida FH, Beyduz G, Bulthuis ML, Kooi EM, Bos AF, Timmer A, Hulscher JB. Neu J, Pammi M. Pathogenesis of NEC: impact of an altered intestinal

microbiome. Using the LMS method to calculate z-scores for the
Fenton preterm infant growth chart. Microbiome  (2017) 5:158 

Page 19 of 19

67.