Diseases 2018, 6, 56

2 of 10

between the gut microbiome and CVDs to promote an understanding of the latest perspectives of the
role of the gut microbiome in CVDs. Trimethylamine-N-oxide and CVDs

A close relationship between the gut microbe-dependent production of trimethylamine-N-oxide
(TMAO), derived from speciﬁc dietary nutrients such as choline and carnitine, and future
cardiovascular events has been widely recognized [10]. Trimethylamine (TMA), which is produced by
the gut microbial enzymes TMA lyases, is a precursor of TMAO. Elevated blood TMAO levels have been directly linked to poor
outcomes in patients with CVDs, such as coronary artery disease and acute and chronic heart failure
(Table 1) [11–16]. Tang et al., Further studies are warranted to elucidate the causal relationship between these
metabolites and CVD. was also signiﬁcantly higher in the patients
with CAD than in the healthy subjects. was found to decrease in
patients with atherosclerotic ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack [27], Bacteroides spp. The negative

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

5 of 10

correlations between Streptococcus spp. Ruminococcus, Acinetobacter, and Veillonella increased in the HF patients,
whereas Alistipes, Faecalibacterium, and Oscillibacter decreased. Year

Study Population

Country

Analysis

Results

2012 Nat. 12 patients with symptomatic atherosclerosis
(myocardial infarction or cerebrovascular events)
and 13 age- and sex-matched healthy individuals. Sweden

Gut metagenome

Collinsella ↑, Eubacterium ↓, Roseburia ↓ in patients
with symptomatic atherosclerosis. have reported a metagenomic shotgun sequencing study with 218 CAD patients and 187 healthy
subjects [30]. They revealed alterations in gut microbial functional modules in CAD patients, such as
the phosphotransferase system, amino acid transporters, vitamin metabolism, lipopolysaccharide
biosynthesis, and the activities of SCFAs and TMA lyases. In such cases, an in vitro fermentation
system simulating the human intestinal tract may help to evaluate the functionality or safety of these
interventions under highly reproducible conditions without the ethical issues [40]. Speciﬁcally, we can
culture feces from patients with prebiotics or probiotics in an in vitro fermentation system and analyze
how the gut microbiome, and its metabolites and functions, are changed after the intervention. It is important to pay attention to the complexities of
translating the ﬁndings from an animal model to humans. With increasing awareness of the relationship between the
gut microbiome and CVD, we have high expectations for the clinical application of gut microbiome
modulation. Author Contributions: T.Y. conceived and wrote the manuscript and made critical revisions. Article Processing Charges was sponsored by MDPI. CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ridker, P.M.; Danielson, E.; Fonseca, F.A.H.; Genest, J.; Gotto, A.M.J.; Kastelein, J.J.P.; Koenig, W.; Libby, P.;
Lorenzatti, A.J.; MacFadyen, J.G.; et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2018 Update: A Report From the
American Heart Association. CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shimokawa, H.; Miura, M.; Nochioka, K.; Sakata, Y. Heart failure as a general pandemic in Asia. Tang, W.H.; Wang, Z.; Fan, Y.; Levison, B.; Hazen, J.E.; Donahue, L.M.; Wu, Y.; Hazen, S.L. Prognostic value
of elevated levels of intestinal microbe-generated metabolite trimethylamine-N-oxide in patients with heart
failure: Reﬁning the gut hypothesis. Cho, C.E.; Taesuwan, S.; Malysheva, O.V.; Bender, E.; Tulchinsky, N.F.; Yan, J.; Sutter, J.L.; Caudill, M.A.
Trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) response to animal source foods varies among healthy young men and is
inﬂuenced by their gut microbiota composition: A randomized controlled trial. Analysis of Gut Microbiota in Coronary Artery Disease Patients: A Possible Link
between Gut Microbiota and Coronary Artery Disease. Emoto, T.; Yamashita, T.; Kobayashi, T.; Sasaki, N.; Hirota, Y.; Hayashi, T.; So, A.; Kasahara, K.; Yodoi, K.;
Matsumoto, T.; et al. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-inﬂammatory
commensal bacterium identiﬁed by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients. Cui, X.; Ye, L.; Li, J.; Jin, L.; Wang, W.; Li, S.; Bao, M.; Wu, S.; Li, L.; Geng, B.; et al.