Diseases 2018, 6, 56

2 of 10

between the gut microbiome and CVDs to promote an understanding of the latest perspectives of the
role of the gut microbiome in CVDs. Moreover, we have raised several issues that should be considered
when interpreting previous evidence. Trimethylamine-N-oxide and CVDs

A close relationship between the gut microbe-dependent production of trimethylamine-N-oxide
(TMAO), derived from speciﬁc dietary nutrients such as choline and carnitine, and future
cardiovascular events has been widely recognized [10]. Trimethylamine (TMA), which is produced by
the gut microbial enzymes TMA lyases, is a precursor of TMAO. 2015 J. Card Fail

Patients who were undergoing elective
diagnostic cardiac catheterization

Stable heart failure patients underwent
elective coronary angiographic evaluation

Chronic systolic heart failure with
comprehensive echocardiographic evaluation

112 in USA

Adverse clinical events
(death/transplantation)

2016 Heart

Acute heart failure

972 in UK

All-cause mortality (death) and a
composite of death or re-hospitalization
due to heart failure (death/HF)

2016

Am. These metabolites have
also been reported to have a link to CVDs. The increased production of acetate by the gut microbiota of rodents leads to the activation
of the parasympathetic nervous system, which promotes increased glucose-stimulated insulin secretion,
hyperphagia, and obesity. High serum levels
of phenylacetylglutamine have been observed in patients with advanced chronic kidney disease,
and as a strong and independent risk factor for overall mortality and cardiovascular diseases [24].
P-cresyl sulfate, a secondary metabolism of p-cresol, is also a microbial metabolite. The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, an indicator of dysbiosis, increased in the CAD patients
compared with the non-CAD controls. was also signiﬁcantly higher in the patients
with CAD than in the healthy subjects. was found to decrease in
patients with atherosclerotic ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack [27], Bacteroides spp. Furthermore, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii,
which exhibits anti-inﬂammatory effects [32], was also signiﬁcantly depleted in the CAD patients. Of note, the co-abundance network structure differed between the two groups. The negative

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

5 of 10

correlations between Streptococcus spp. On the other hand, the positive correlation between Bacteroides spp. and Erysipelotrichaceae bacterium
was seen only in the healthy subjects. Year

Study Population

Country

Analysis

Results

2012 Nat. 12 patients with symptomatic atherosclerosis
(myocardial infarction or cerebrovascular events)
and 13 age- and sex-matched healthy individuals. Sweden

Gut metagenome

Collinsella ↑, Eubacterium ↓, Roseburia ↓ in patients
with symptomatic atherosclerosis. China

Gut metagenome

Enterobacteriaceae (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., and Enterobacter aerogenes),
Streptococcus spp., Issues to Be Considered When Interpreting the Studies

Most clinical studies compare the gut microbial composition between patients and healthy controls. While we already know that diet, prebiotics, probiotics, a speciﬁc IgA antibody, and enzymes can
modulate the gut microbiome and its function [38,39], these interventions for patients with CVD are
constrained by ethical considerations or funding limitations. In such cases, an in vitro fermentation
system simulating the human intestinal tract may help to evaluate the functionality or safety of these
interventions under highly reproducible conditions without the ethical issues [40]. Speciﬁcally, we can
culture feces from patients with prebiotics or probiotics in an in vitro fermentation system and analyze
how the gut microbiome, and its metabolites and functions, are changed after the intervention. With increasing awareness of the relationship between the
gut microbiome and CVD, we have high expectations for the clinical application of gut microbiome
modulation. Author Contributions: T.Y. conceived and wrote the manuscript and made critical revisions. Funding: This research was funded by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 24591114, 16K09516 (T.Y.) and 17K09497
(K.H.), The Japanese Circulation Society Translational Research Foundation (K.H.), Uehara Memorial Foundation
(K.H.), Takeda Scientiﬁc Foundation (T.Y.), Senshin Medical Research Foundation (T.Y.), Yakult Bioscience Research
Foundation (T.Y.), Hyogo Science and Technology Association (T.Y. and K.H.), and Kondou Kinen Medical
Foundation (T.Y.). Article Processing Charges was sponsored by MDPI. Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest. Hyperresponsivity to low-dose endotoxin during progression to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
is regulated by leptin-mediated signaling. CrossRef] [PubMed]
Tang, W.H.W.; Kitai, T.; Hazen, S.L. Gut Microbiota in Cardiovascular Health and Disease. CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ridker, P.M.; Danielson, E.; Fonseca, F.A.H.; Genest, J.; Gotto, A.M.J.; Kastelein, J.J.P.; Koenig, W.; Libby, P.;
Lorenzatti, A.J.; MacFadyen, J.G.; et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2018 Update: A Report From the
American Heart Association. Tang, W.H.; Wang, Z.; Fan, Y.; Levison, B.; Hazen, J.E.; Donahue, L.M.; Wu, Y.; Hazen, S.L. Prognostic value
of elevated levels of intestinal microbe-generated metabolite trimethylamine-N-oxide in patients with heart
failure: Reﬁning the gut hypothesis. Hu´c, T.; Nowinski, A.; Drapala, A.; Konopelski, P.; Ufnal, M. Indole and indoxyl sulfate, gut bacteria
metabolites of tryptophan, change arterial blood pressure via peripheral and central mechanisms in rats. Emoto, T.; Yamashita, T.; Kobayashi, T.; Sasaki, N.; Hirota, Y.; Hayashi, T.; So, A.; Kasahara, K.; Yodoi, K.;
Matsumoto, T.; et al. Proton pump inhibitors alter the composition of the gut microbiota. Dysbiosis and compositional alterations with aging in the gut microbiota of patients with
heart failure. Cui, X.; Ye, L.; Li, J.; Jin, L.; Wang, W.; Li, S.; Bao, M.; Wu, S.; Li, L.; Geng, B.; et al. Predictive functional proﬁling of microbial communities
using 16S rRNA marker gene sequences. Kanehisa, M.; Furumichi, M.; Tanabe, M.; Sato, Y.; Morishima, K. KEGG: New perspectives on genomes,

37. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).