Microbiome  (2017) 5:158 

Page 2 of 19

infant nutrition, and common clinical practices in neonatal
care [14–20]. We hypothesize that assembly and function
of the preterm infants’ gut microbiota is associated with
postnatal growth patterns and represents a yet unexplored
personalized therapeutic potential for optimizing infant
development. Three phases of the preterm infant gut microbiota
Characterization of microbiota from all subjects and
time points spanning PMA from 24 to 46 weeks identi-
fied Bacilli, Gammaproteobacteria, and Clostridia as by

far the most abundant taxa, with relative abundances of
41.75, 23.0, and 22.5% respectively, accounting for 87.0%
of the total observed abundance (Fig. To characterize the apparent
developmental phases of
the premature infant gut
microbiome, we used threshold values for the log ratio
the three predominant bacterial classes—Bacilli,
of
Gammaproteobacteria, and Clostridia—to construct a
decision tree that permits objective assignment of indi-
vidual microbiota samples to one of the three phases
based on their composition (Fig. The high concord-
ance observed between DMM components and phases
provides statistically grounded support for our heuris-
tic model (See Additional file 3: Table S2 for details). The relationship between day of life (DOL) for the initial transition out of P1 and from meconium to normal infant stool was
modeled by linear regression. Potential associations of nutrition and medications with
phase
After identifying the microbiota phase as a significant
factor in infant growth, we sought to identify potential
associations of nutrition and medications with phase by
including them as explanatory variables and microbiota
phases P1 and P2 as the outcome (with P3 as the baseline
phase) in a multivariate mixed-effects logistic regression
model. Beta values are the estimated regression coefficients and p values are
computed from the likelihood ratio tests. For clarity, only significant associations are reported in this table. The remaining 38 infants that were observed to be
in P1 at their first rectal sample were included in a linear
regression model using gestational age at birth and the
DOL of their last P1 sample before their initial transition
to another phase as explanatory variables, with the DOL
of meconium clearance as the dependent variable. Third, in both the phase- and period-based
models, the abundance of several dominant infant gut
microbiota taxa (e.g., Bifidobacterium) [37, 53] were signifi-
cantly affected by gestational age at birth, PMA at sam-
pling, total calories and proportions of macronutrients
consumed at the week of sampling, and multiple clinical
variables. Microbiome  (2017) 5:158 

Page 15 of 19

assessed at each taxonomic level using the metagen-
omicsSeq zero-inflated Gaussian test [64], and the re-
sults are summarized in Additional file 5: Tables S4A–C.
Testing for differential functional capacity between the
phases was performed using LEfSe [67] with per-sample
normalization to 1 M total counts, minimum effect size
of 2.0, alpha of 0.1, an all-against-all strategy, and other-
wise default parameters. The results are summarized in
Additional file 7: Table S6. As an example, the linear associations of P2
and percent lipids * P2 with the weight z-score are both
significant (beta = − 0.7766 for P2 and 5.658 for lipids *
P2); meaning that while P2 is correlated with a smaller
weight z-score as compared with the baseline (P3), a
higher percent of lipid intake for P2 subjects increases
the weight Z-scores for subjects in P2. DOCX 18 kb)

Additional file 4: Table S3. C. Results of differential abundance tests
(metagenomeSeq zero-inflated Gaussian) of all bacterial taxa between
microbiome phases 1 and 3. ( AG, XQ, HAK, TJM,
LS, KMS, MTC, GSP, and SRG drafted the manuscript. All authors reviewed the
final manuscript. 5Division of Infectious Disease, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Rochester, NY, USA. Patterned
progression of bacterial populations in the premature infant gut. Abdulkadir B, Nelson A, Skeath T, Marrs EC, Perry JD, Cummings SP,
Embleton ND, Berrington JE, Stewart CJ. Bekkali N, Hamers SL, Schipperus MR, Reitsma JB, Valerio PG, Van Toledo L,
Benninga MA. Gupta RW, Tran L, Norori J, Ferris MJ, Eren AM, Taylor CM, Dowd SE, Penn D.
Histamine-2 receptor blockers alter the fecal microbiota in premature
infants. Heida FH, Beyduz G, Bulthuis ML, Kooi EM, Bos AF, Timmer A, Hulscher JB. Greengenes, a chimera-checked 16S rRNA
gene database and workbench compatible with ARB. Microbiome  (2017) 5:158 

Page 19 of 19

67.