118

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 2013), and fecal microbiota transplantation is
highly effective for the treatment of recurrent Clostridium difficile
infection (Van Nood et al. TOOLS TO DISSECT THE ROLE OF THE GUT
MICROBIOME IN MICE

Most studies that address the causal relationship between the
presence of bacteria and host physiology have been based on
rather extreme changes in microbiota, such as the use of germ-
free (GF) mice, which are born and reared without exposure to
any live microbes, and treatment with broad-spectrum antibi-
otics. For example, broad-spectrum antibiotics change bacte-
rial populations in the murine large intestine, reducing the total
number of bacteria and diminishing local cytokine production
(Hill and Artis 2010). 121

contrast, colonization of 8-week-old GF mice could not reverse
the elevated numbers of iNKT cells (Olszak et al. However, antibiotic treatment is
not necessary to establish an exogenous microbiota (Manichanh
et al. Especially in the first week after weaning, co-
inciding with the introduction of solid food, the pups are chal-
lenged by a rapidly changing microbiota until intestinal home-
ostasis is established, which generally occurs 11–17 days after
weaning (Schloss et al. By contrast, others
showed that gender differences in microbiota composition do
exist but that this observation is genotype dependent (Fushuku
and Fukuda 2008a; Gomez et al. The microbiomes of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

124

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. For example, phenotypic differences between TLR-
deficient C57BL/6J mouse colonies mainly reflected a diver-
gence of the microbiota after extended isolated breeding of the
colonies (Ubeda et al. the exact contribution to experimental out-
comes is poorly understood. Viable counts
of the total bacterial load have revealed large differences in the
cecal microbiota among mice of the same strain from differ-
ent vendors (Hufeldt et al. This type of variation is not
restricted to commercially available strains but also plays a role
when comparing studies performed in different animal labora-

tory sources (Ubeda et al. Also of concern are the differences in func-
tional biochemical activities of the microbiota of mice raised
under SPF conditions or under conventional conditions (Norin
and Midtvedt 2010). One might expect that the development of spontaneous dis-
eases in transgenic or knockout mice will depend on whether
they are housed in an SPF or in a conventional environment. 125

Variable that influences
microbiota composition

Possible complication

Maternal transmission
Diet
Environment, stress
Stress
Cage effect

Genetic drift
Standardization fallacy
Logistic problems

Table 1. Therefore, susceptibility to obesity requires an
intact mucosal immunity that guides diet-induced changes to
the microbiota. However, cohousing of mice with dif-
ferent genotypes (e.g. wild type and knockout) has been shown
to change the gut microbial composition, affecting their natu-
ral immunological responses to a treatment or a disease trigger
(Garrett et al. In case the effect is more subtle,
it is recommended to separate littermate controls according to
their genotype right after weaning for at least 30 days before
the experiment so that the mice can develop their inherent mi-
crobiota; however, they should be divided over several cages. Increasing evidence sug-
gests that the microbial environment influences the innate
and adaptive immune system and largely determines the out-
come of such investigations, even in disease models where the
microbiome is not under investigation. G.0787.13; G0C3114], a
Methusalem grant [BOF09/01M00709]), Ghent University grants
(MRP, GROUP-ID consortium), a grant from the ‘Foundation
against Cancer’ [2012–188]) and grants from the Flanders Insti-
tute for Biotechnology (VIB). Colitis induced in mice with
dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) is mediated by the NLRP3 in-
flammasome. Campbell JH, Foster CM, Vishnivetskaya T, et al. Carlisle EM, Poroyko V, Caplan MS, et al. Influence of stressor-induced nervous system ac-
tivation on the intestinal microbiota and the impor-
tance for immunomodulation. Commisson to the Council and the European Parliament. Sixth report on the statistics on the number of animals
used for experimental and other scientific purposes in
the Member States of the European Union. Maternal western diet causes inflam-
matory milk and TLR2/4-dependent neonatal toxicity. Friswell MK, Gika H, Stratford IJ, et al. Site and strain-specific
variation in gut microbiota profiles and metabolism in ex-
perimental mice. Hufeldt MR, Nielsen DS, Vogensen FK, et al. Oral treatment with probi-
otic Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC533 (La1) for a specific part
of the weaning period prevents the development of atopic
dermatitis induced after maturation in model mice, NC/Nga. Meslin JC, Fontaine N, Andrieux C. Variation of mucin distribu-
tion in the rat intestine, caecum and colon: effect of the bac-
terial flora. Contemporary
prevalence of infectious agents in laboratory mice and rats. A human gut microbial gene catalogue
established by metagenomic sequencing. Genomic vari-
ation landscape of the human gut microbiome. Schloss PD, Schubert AM, Zackular JP, et al. SIGIRR, a negative regulator
of TLR/IL-1R signalling promotes Microbiota dependent re-
sistance to colonization by enteric bacterial pathogens. Rakoff-Nahoum S, Paglino J, Eslami-Varzaneh F, et al. Microbial genomics and infectious diseases. Sonnenberg GF, Artis D. Innate lymphoid cell interactions with
microbiota: implications for intestinal health and disease.