118

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. 2013; Lawley and Walker 2013), protect against epithelial injury (Rakoff-Nahoum et al. TOOLS TO DISSECT THE ROLE OF THE GUT
MICROBIOME IN MICE

Most studies that address the causal relationship between the
presence of bacteria and host physiology have been based on
rather extreme changes in microbiota, such as the use of germ-
free (GF) mice, which are born and reared without exposure to
any live microbes, and treatment with broad-spectrum antibi-
otics. DEVELOPMENT OF THE MURINE GUT
MICROBIOME AND THE INTESTINAL IMMUNE
SYSTEM

Mammals are GF in utero; however, some reports indicate that
gut colonization may start before birth. For example, the presence of peptidoglycan, a constituent of
Gram-negative bacteria, is necessary to drive the genesis of gut
lymphoid follicles through NOD1 signaling in epithelial cells
(Bouskra et al. The microbiomes of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-abstract/40/1/117/2467665
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018

124

FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 2016, Vol. Also of concern are the differences in func-
tional biochemical activities of the microbiota of mice raised
under SPF conditions or under conventional conditions (Norin
and Midtvedt 2010). A change
in the microbiota promotes weight gain in DIO by interact-
ing with a lymphotoxin-dependent mucosal defense pathway
(Upadhyay et al. Surprisingly, oral treatment with purified L. reuteri,
one of the bacteria found in this prebiotic yogurt, did not change
the gut microbiome composition or caloric intake but triggered
IL-10-producing Treg cells, which dampens obesity-associated
Th17 proinflammatory responses. Differences in animal feed might contribute to the lack of re-
producibility of animal model experiments between institutes,
and the type of feed should be mentioned upon publication. Acute DSS-colitis and the role of the inflammasome components NRLP3 and caspase-1 in disease development. However, cohousing of mice with dif-
ferent genotypes (e.g. wild type and knockout) has been shown
to change the gut microbial composition, affecting their natu-
ral immunological responses to a treatment or a disease trigger
(Garrett et al. In case the effect is more subtle,
it is recommended to separate littermate controls according to
their genotype right after weaning for at least 30 days before
the experiment so that the mice can develop their inherent mi-
crobiota; however, they should be divided over several cages. G.0787.13; G0C3114], a
Methusalem grant [BOF09/01M00709]), Ghent University grants
(MRP, GROUP-ID consortium), a grant from the ‘Foundation
against Cancer’ [2012–188]) and grants from the Flanders Insti-
tute for Biotechnology (VIB). Influence of stressor-induced nervous system ac-
tivation on the intestinal microbiota and the impor-
tance for immunomodulation. Dupaul-Chicoine J, Yeretssian G, Doiron K, et al. Friswell MK, Gika H, Stratford IJ, et al. Site and strain-specific
variation in gut microbiota profiles and metabolism in ex-
perimental mice. Hooijmans CR, Leenaars M, Ritskes-Hoitinga M. A gold stan-
dard publication checklist to improve the quality of ani-
mal studies, to fully integrate the Three Rs, and to make
systematic reviews more feasible. Oral treatment with probi-
otic Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC533 (La1) for a specific part
of the weaning period prevents the development of atopic
dermatitis induced after maturation in model mice, NC/Nga. Markowitz VM, Chen IM, Palaniappan K, et al. Microbial exposure during early
life has persistent effects on natural killer T cell function. Contemporary
prevalence of infectious agents in laboratory mice and rats. Shimomura Y, Mizoguchi E, Sugimoto K, et al. Sommer F, B ¨ackhed F. The gut microbiota–masters of host de-
velopment and physiology. Vanden Berghe T, Hulpiau P, Martens L, et al.