Cho and Blaser

Page 2

Characterizing the microbiome

Tools for studying the metagenome

individuals, and possibly, their disease risks. A catalogue of the
such clusters could correspond to the proposed taxonomic ENTEROTYPES
microbial genes present in the human gut, for example, is being generated using several
approaches including sequencing, assembling and characterizing non-redundant microbial
genes from fecal samples19, and whole genome sequencing of reference microbial species20. As sequencing and bioinformatics technologies continue to evolve (see ref 21 for a review of
the state-of-the-art technologies), scientific priorities will include elucidating the ‘core’
metagenome that occupies a specific human niche, and discerning the differences between
normal and diseased hosts.. As an example of the latter, Greenblum et al. By categorizing metagenomic sequences based on

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01. However,
with repeated perturbations, the effects of gene loss can be amplified by downstream effects
on co-colonizing microbes (secondary extinctions) and on the host. In many host species, paternal contributions to offspring traits have been well
documented57,58; these observations have been extended to the microbiome, where paternal
contributions to offspring H. pylori allele composition have been shown59, In any event,
there is evidence for extensive horizontal gene transfer (HGT) within human populations,
functional classes, and ecological niches60, indicating the site-specificity and dynamism of
selection on the human microbiome. In the gut, the ratio of Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes changes
with age78. Residential microbes can contribute to somatic mutagenesis by causing
genotoxicity secondary to inflammation, increased cell proliferation, and production of pro-
mutagenic metabolites (e.g. butyrate)80. The enrichment of Fusobacterium species (not
limited to F. nucleatum) was confirmed when evaluating the mucosal microbiome of
colorectal cancers compared to adjacent normal tissues from 99 subjects101. Compared to germ-free mice, the presence
of a microbiome in conventional mice leads to suppression of intestinal epithelium
angiopoietin-related protein 4, which inhibits lipoprotein lipase, increasing downstream
triglyceride accumulation in the hepatic parenchyma and adipocytes117. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 9

The gut microbiota and pbesity

exposure disturbs the gut microbiome118,119, but roles for the microbiome in steatosis are
unresolved. This may be a
mechanism in rheumatoid arthritis, another chronic idiopathic inflammatory condition. Dissimilarity of <1% in 16S rRNA sequences has
commonly been used to define an OTU but <3% and <5% have also
been used

An exclusivity scenario in which the abundance of one species leads
to another species being less abundant than would be expected by
chance

Food ingredients that confer specific changes in the gut microbiome
and lead to beneficial effects in the host

References

1. Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological
Sciences. Bacterial community variation in human body habitats across space and time. Palmer C, Bik EM, DiGiulio DB, Relman DA, Brown PO. Sjolund M, Wreiber K, Andersson DI, Blaser MJ, Engstrand L. Long-term persistence of resistant

Enterococcus species after antibiotics to eradicate Helicobacter pylori. The Journal of investigative dermatology. Dobzhansky T. Further Data on the Variation of the Y Chromosome in Drosophila Pseudoobscura. New York:

Columbia University Press; 1942. Comparative analysis of salivary bacterial microbiome diversity in edentulous
infants and their mothers or primary care givers using pyrosequencing. Antibiotic administration alters the community structure of the

gastrointestinal micobiota. Microbial ecology: human gut microbes associated

with obesity. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 22

Figure 1.