Cho and Blaser

Page 2

Characterizing the microbiome

Tools for studying the metagenome

individuals, and possibly, their disease risks. Although a focus on bacteria
is important, inquiries aimed at archaea, viruses, and retroviruses, is also needed. By categorizing metagenomic sequences based on

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01. Indicator organisms such as Helicobacter pylori32 and
reptococcus mutans33 highlight some differences across the microbiota34 and
S
t
metagenome35 among human ethnic groups; however, the extent of ethnic variation in
overall metagenomic composition is unknown. The human microbiome represents one or more complete ecosystems. As has occurred in the human stomach with the loss of a dominant species51,52,
body sites then can harbor alternative stable states. All are subject to perturbation in the course of
normal development and aging, and especially with disease. Important questions in this field involve determining if such temporal changes are
life-stage specific, and whether they are predetermined by host genetic characteristics, or by
environmental factor. In many host species, paternal contributions to offspring traits have been well
documented57,58; these observations have been extended to the microbiome, where paternal
contributions to offspring H. pylori allele composition have been shown59, In any event,
there is evidence for extensive horizontal gene transfer (HGT) within human populations,
functional classes, and ecological niches60, indicating the site-specificity and dynamism of
selection on the human microbiome. The diseases listed below review some current recent
investigations (Table 1). In H. pylori-negative individuals, gastric
microbiota diversity is high; most of the prominent gastric phylotypes (Streptococcus,
Actinomyces, Prevotella, Gemella) also are abundant in the oropharynx of these
individuals93; indicating that either many constituents are swallowed from more proximal
sites, or that close relatives of the oral microbiota colonize more distally. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 10

Perspectives

For understanding causation and pathogenesis, model organisms provide an important
approach. To better understand the implications of microbiota and metagenome variation in human
health and disease, the field needs improved informatics tools, including new approaches for
understanding the complexity of the metadata132. He is a Professor of Medicine and Microbiology at the
NYU Langone Medical Center, USA. Genetic differences between selected and
non-selected hosts are a source of selectable variation

The anatomic structure around each hair shaft that consists of the
hair shaft and follicle, the sebaceous gland, and the erector pili
muscle

An organism (e.g. microbe) that may have a pathogenic or symbiotic
relationship with another organism (e.g. its host), depending on
context. A type of gastric bypass surgery primarily used for the treatment of
morbid obesity. Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. PubMed:
20534435] Describes vaginal microbiome differences and similarities in women of reproductive age
who vary by ethnicity, and explores factors related to bacterial vaginosis

5. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological
Sciences. PubMed: 19234110] A comparison of germ-free and
conventional animals to show that the microbiome has substantial effects on host blood
metabolites, including the metabolism of amino acids and organic acids

12. Greenblum S, Turnbaugh PJ, Borenstein E. Metagenomic systems biology of the human gut

microbiome reveals topological shifts associated with obesity and inflammatory bowel disease. An African origin for the intimate association between humans and Helicobacter

pylori. A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins. Palmer C, Bik EM, DiGiulio DB, Relman DA, Brown PO. Sjolund M, Wreiber K, Andersson DI, Blaser MJ, Engstrand L. Long-term persistence of resistant

Enterococcus species after antibiotics to eradicate Helicobacter pylori. Borrvall C, Ebenman B. Early onset of secondary extinctions in ecological communities following

the loss of top predators. Molecular analysis of the bacterial microbiota in the human stomach. Ecology drives a global network of gene exchange connecting the human

microbiome. The Journal of investigative dermatology. A new theory on cancer-inducing mechanism. Community analysis of chronic wound bacteria using 16S rRNA gene-based

pyrosequencing: impact of diabetes and antibiotics on chronic wound microbiota. Fusobacterium nucleatum infection is prevalent in human colorectal

carcinoma. Specific microbiota direct the differentiation of IL-17-producing T-helper cells in
the mucosa of the small intestine. Association of NOD2 leucine-rich repeat variants with susceptibility to Crohn's

disease. Enteric dysbiosis associated with a mouse model of alcoholic liver disease. Analysis of gut microbial regulation of host gene expression along the length of

the gut and regulation of gut microbial ecology through MyD88. Can we harness knowledge of the microbiome to improve diagnostics for

disease status and susceptibility? * NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 22

Figure 1. Such site-specific
differences as well as observed conservation between human hosts provide an important
framework to determine the biological and pathological significance of a particular
microbiome composition. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 27

Examples of association of human conditions with particular microbiota characteristics

Table 1

Disease

Psoriasis

Reflux esophagitis

Relevant finding

Reference

Increased ratio of Firmicutes to Actinobacteria

88

Esophageal microbiota dominated by
gram-negative anaerobes
Gastric microbiota with low or absent H. pylori

Obesity

Reduced ratio of Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes

Childhood-onset asthma

Absent gastric Helicobacter.