First we explored in detail the in vitro inhibitory effects of a selection of LGC strains against growth and 
pathogenic properties (adhesion to vaginal cells and hyphae formation) of Candida albicans. We examined the vaginal microbiome over four weeks: before, during, and after the 
use of the probiotic gel and compared the group requiring rescue medication (RM; 3 × 200 mg fluconazole) with 
the group not requesting this antifungal treatment. Results
In vitro selection of LGc strains for anti-Candida effects. When applying the strains simultaneously with C. albi-
cans, the strains were able to reduce adhesion of C. albicans, e.g. L. pentosus KCA1 by 78.0% (Fig. c) Adhesion percentage of 
LGC strains to VK2/E6E7 cells, a cell line of vaginal keratinocytes. ( The regular growth medium without 
any added microorganisms was used as a negative control. ( Significant 
differences were tested with pairwise Wilcoxon tests and significance levels are indicated when p < 0.05. Scientific RepoRtS  |         (2020) 10:7976  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-64705-x

4

www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/visit 2 = 6.1.108 CFU/ml). Of note, when we stratified 
the samples in women who did or did not use RM, the following trend was observed: the women who used RM 
started off with a higher load of fungi and lactobacilli and ended with on average with similar fungal concen-
trations and lower concentrations of lactobacilli as compared to the women who did not use RM (Fig. We also investigated the bacterial community present in the samples. This ASV showed a lower relative 
abundance than L. plantarum/pentosus (mean relative abundance at visit 2: 11.0% versus 37.9% of LGC 5). Previous studies have reported successes in using probiotics for VVC treatment (in combination with azole 
treatment), but these were mostly aimed at reducing the rate of recurrence and did not test the lactobacilli as 
stand-alone treatments for acute pathology10–13,31. To evaluate the potency of the LGC strains to inhibit the growth of Candida albicans (inoculated at 2.103 
CFU/ml), a spot assay was performed as described previously32. L. pentosus KCA1, L. plantarum WCFS1 and L. 
rhamnosus GG, were selected for a proof-of-concept trial in patients. The lactobacilli-containing gel was devel-
oped in collaboration with the Belgian biotech company YUN nv (see ‘Competing interest’ statement). proof of concept study for evaluation of LGc-containing gel, ethical approval and informed 
consent. After signing informed consent forms, patients were asked to administer 2.5 ml of the gel daily for 10 con-
secutive days. Patients were 
monitored over four weeks and asked to return three times after the intake visit (day 0): at day 7 (visit 2, during 
treatment with gel), day 14 (visit 3) and day 28 (visit 4). At all visits, a gynaecological examination was performed, 
which included the scoring of symptoms, collection of a vaginal smear for pH, two vaginal swabs (for microscopy 
and culture) and collection of vaginal lavage samples. The vaginal lavage fluids obtained were stored fro-
zen at −80 °C until microbiome analysis, performed as described in De Boeck et al.37, with minor modifications. PCR products were 
purified (AMPure XP PCR purification, Beckmann Coulter) and pooled equimolarly. estimation of LGc and fungal concentrations using qpcR.  To supplement the microbiome data with 
estimations of absolute abundances of lactobacilli and yeast, the DNA samples obtained before were subjected to 
qPCR analysis, as described previously43. Data availability
The obtained sequencing data and metadata is available under ENA accession number PRJEB33108. Received: 13 September 2019; Accepted: 15 April 2020;
Published: xx xx xxxx

References
  1. Rev. 72, 728–64, Table of Contents (2008). Diverse vaginal microbiomes in reproductive-age women with vulvovaginal candidiasis. Lactic acid bacteria colonization and clinical outcome after probiotic supplementation in conventionally treated 

bacterial vaginosis and vulvovaginal candidiasis. Differential NF-kB pathways induction by Lactobacillus plantarum in the duodenum of healthy humans 
 

correlating with immune tolerance. Introducing EzBioCloud: A taxonomically united database of 16S rRNA gene sequences and whole-genome 
 

nonspecific vaginitis. van den Broek, M. F. L., De Boeck, I., Claes, I. J. J., Nizet, V. & Lebeer, S. Multifactorial inhibition of lactobacilli against the respiratory 
 

tract pathogen Moraxella catarrhalis. Interplay between Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Candida and the involvement of exopolysaccharides. Deriving accurate microbiota profiles from human samples with low bacterial content through post-sequencing 
 

processing of Illumina MiSeq data. bioRxiv 463307, 
 

https://doi.org/10.1101/463307 (2018). Draft genome sequence of Lactobacillus plantarum CMPG5300, a human vaginal isolate. Chan, R. C. Y., Reid, G., Irvin, R. T., Bruce, A. W. & Costerton, J. W. Competitive exclusion of uropathogens from human 
 

uroepithelial cells by Lactobacillus whole cells and cell wall fragments. We acknowledge Servier 
Medical Art for the images used in Fig. E.O. prepared 
the graphs and performed statistical analysis (with help of S. Wittouck). competing interests
The authors declare the following competing interests. Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-64705-x. Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material.