This 
chapter reviews the natural trajectory of the composition 
of  the  microbiota  during  pregnancy  and  early  life  and 
outlines  the  current  knowledge  on  the  interaction  be-
tween the microbiota and neurodevelopment. The Proteobacte-
ria expansion can help the body with the increased ener-
getic  requirement  that  is  characteristic  of  the  third  tri-
mester [33]. Interestingly, when gut microbiota from this 
time period was transferred to microbiota-depleted rats, 
they showed increased adiposity, reduced glucose toler-
ance  and  inflammation,  signs  of  metabolic  syndrome 
[30].  This  suggests  that  the  changes  in  gut  microbiota 
composition during pregnancy have an adaptive role for 
maternal and newborn health. Indeed, a va-
riety of exogenous factors affect the trajectory of micro-
biota composition during pregnancy. Administration of probiot-

19

Microbiota and Neurodevelopmental Trajectories Ann Nutr Metab 2019;74(suppl 2):16–27DOI: 10.1159/000499144Table 3. As we have re-
viewed, clinical and preclinical studies suggest that diet, 
stress and drugs can interact with the natural trajectory of 
the  microbiota  and  play  a  part  in  programming  brain 
health (Fig. Disclosure Statement

The writing of this article was supported by Nestlé Nutrition 
Institute. M.G.C. is funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodows-
ka-Curie grant agreement No. T.G.D. has been an invited 
speaker at meetings organized by Servier, Lundbeck, Janssen and 
AstraZeneca and has received research funding from Mead John-
son, Cremo, Suntory Wellness, Nutricia and 4D Pharma. Mind-altering microor-
ganisms: the impact of the gut microbiota on 
brain and behaviour. 2004 Dec; 23(6 Sup-
pl): 588S–95S.

  7  Barker  DJ,  Gluckman  PD,  Godfrey  KM, 
Harding JE, Owens JA, Robinson JS. Reduced anxiety-like behavior and central 
neurochemical  change  in  germ-free  mice. 26  Hoban AE, Stilling RM, Moloney G, Shana-
han F, Dinan TG, Clarke G, et al. The micro-
biome regulates amygdala-dependent fear re-
call. Mech-
anisms 
underlying  microbial-mediated 
changes in social behavior in mouse models 
of  autism  spectrum  disorder. 29  Luczynski P, Tramullas M, Viola M, Shanah-
an F, Clarke G, O’Mahony S, et al. Alterations in the Vaginal Microbiome by 
Maternal Stress Are Associated with Metabol-
ic Reprogramming of the Offspring Gut and 
Brain. 43  Zacarías MF, Collado MC, Gómez-Gallego C, 
Flinck H, Aittoniemi J, Isolauri E, et al. Re-
search review: maternal prenatal distress and 
poor  nutrition  –  mutually  influencing  risk 
factors affecting infant neurocognitive devel-
opment. 46  Steegenga  WT,  Mischke  M,  Lute  C,  Boek-
schoten MV, Lendvai A, Pruis MG, et al. Ma-
ternal exposure to a Western-style diet causes 
differences in intestinal microbiota composi-
tion and gene expression of suckling mouse 
pups. 47  Buffington SA, Di Prisco GV, Auchtung TA, 
Ajami  NJ,  Petrosino  JF,  Costa-Mattioli  M. 
Microbial  Reconstitution  Reverses  Maternal 
Diet-Induced Social and Synaptic Deficits in 
Offspring. Folate 
and  epigenetics:  why  we  should  not  forget 
bacterial  biosynthesis. 58  Jarde  A,  Lewis-Mikhael  AM,  Moayyedi  P, 
Stearns JC, Collins SM, Beyene J, et al. Prebiotics  for  the  prevention  of  allergies:  A 
systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  of  ran-
domized  controlled  trials. 66  Azad MB, Coneys JG, Kozyrskyj AL, Field CJ, 
Ramsey CD, Becker AB, et al. 78  Zijlmans  MA,  Korpela  K,  Riksen-Walraven 
JM, de Vos WM, de Weerth C. Maternal pre-
natal stress is associated with the infant intes-
tinal  microbiota. 86  Perez-Muñoz  ME,  Arrieta  MC,  Ramer-Tait 
AE,  Walter  J.  A  critical  assessment  of  the 
“sterile  womb”  and  “in  utero  colonization” 
hypotheses: implications for research on the 
pioneer  infant  microbiome. Canadian 
Healthy  Infant  Longitudinal  Development 
(CHILD) Study Investigators. Asthma at 
8 years of age in children born by caesarean 
section. 108  Penders  J,  Thijs  C,  Vink  C,  Stelma  FF,  
Snijders B, Kummeling I, et al. Birth delivery mode alters 
perinatal cell death in the mouse brain. Term or Preterm Cesarean Section Delivery 
Does  Not  Lead  to  Long-term  Detrimental 
Consequences in Mice. Birth by cae-
sarean  section  and  school  performance  in 
Swedish  adolescents-  a  population-based 
study. 114  Dominguez-Bello MG, De Jesus-Laboy KM, 
Shen N, Cox LM, Amir A, Gonzalez A, et al. Consump-
tion of human milk glycoconjugates by in-
fant-associated  bifidobacteria:  mechanisms 
and  implications. 131  Panigrahi P, Parida S, Nanda NC, Satpathy 
R, Pradhan L, Chandel DS, et al. 133  Indrio F, Di Mauro A, Riezzo G, Civardi E, 
Intini C, Corvaglia L, et al. 138  Cowan CS, Callaghan BL, Richardson R. The 
effects of a probiotic formulation (Lactoba-
cillus rhamnosus and L. helveticus) on de-
velopmental trajectories of emotional learn-
ing in stressed infant rats. 139  Desbonnet L, Garrett L, Clarke G, Kiely B, 
Cryan JF, Dinan TG. Natural 
history of the infant gut microbiome and im-
pact  of  antibiotic  treatment  on  bacterial 
strain diversity and stability. Differences 
in fecal microbial metabolites and microbi-
ota of children with autism spectrum disor-
ders.