Mei Wang

Sharon M. Donovan

Introduction

Over the past decade, the essential role that the gut micro-
biota plays in the developmental programming of the neo-
nate, including growth trajectories, metabolism, and immune 
and cognitive development, has been demonstrated [1–3]. 
Thus, fostering the development of the microbiome in the 
first 1000 days of life is critical to supporting lifelong health. Toddlers (2–3 Years of Age)

In Australian 2- to 3-year-olds, both habitual diet, as meas-
ured by a Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ), and recent 
dietary intake, as measured by a 24-h recall 3 days prior to 
fecal sample collection, influenced fecal microbiota com-
position [30]. Dairy intake was negatively associated with 
species richness and diversity and Bacteroidetes abundance, 
but was positively associated with Erysipelatoclostridium 
spp. The fecal microbiome of the rural children displayed 
significantly greater alpha diversity (Chao1 index). In the USA, 
the recommended dietary fiber intake is 14 g/1000 kcal or 
25 g for females and 38 g for males. Further large-scale studies are 
needed with different fiber sources. For example, supplementation of pregnant and 
lactating women with L. rhamnosus GG (LGG), L. acidophi-
lus La-5 and B. animalis subsp. They observed that infants whose 
mother received probiotics had lower counts of Bifidobacte-
rium and a higher percentage of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus 
than placebo at 6 months of age [68]. In addition, several 
groups investigated the diversity of infant microbiota, report-
ing that administration of probiotics during pregnancy and 
lactation, or directly to infants after delivery have no or lim-
ited effects on alpha and beta diversity of infant microbiota 
[65, 67, 70] (Table 3). These studies varied in terms of 
age of the children (newborns to age 18), type of probiotic, 
dose administered, and duration of the intervention. 1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

year, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
interspace profiling, mo month, qPCR quantitative PCR, T-RFLP terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism, RT-qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, VD vaginally delivered, y 
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. •  Better understanding of diet–microbiome–host interac-
tions is needed, but represents an enormous opportunity 
to refine dietary interventions with the goal of supporting 
a healthy microbiome and human well-being. Fallani M, Young D, Scott J. Intestinal microbiota of 6-week-
 
old infants across Europe: geographic influence beyond delivery 
mode, breast-feeding, and antibiotics. https ://doi.org/10.1371/journ 
al.pone.00213 13. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 2011;108:4578–4585. Laursen MF, Bahl MF, Michaelsen KF, Licht TR. Dynamics and stabiliza-
 
tion of the human gut microbiome during the first year of life. Impact of diet in 
 
shaping gut microbiota revealed by a comparative study in chil-
dren from Europe and rural Africa. 2017;. https ://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb .2017.00197 . Kisuse J, La-Ongkham O, Nakphaichit M, et al. Urban diets linked 
 
to gut microbiome and metabolome alterations in children: a com-
parative cross-sectional study in Thailand. Structure and function of 
 
the healthy pre-adolescent pediatric gut microbiome. https ://doi.org/10.1186/s4016 8-015-0101-x. Position  of  the  American  Dietetic  Associa-
 
tion:  health  implications  of  dietary  fiber. Guidelines on Nutrition Label-
 
ling CAC/GL 2-1985 as Last Amended 2010. Joint FAO/WHO 
Food Standards Programme, Secretariat of the Codex Alimenta-
rius Commission. Reverri EJ, Devitt AA, Kajzer JA, Baggs GE, Borschel MW. Review of the clinical experiences of feeding infants formula con-
taining the human milk oligosaccharide 2′-fucosyllactose. Whisner CM, Martin BR, Nakatsu CH, et al. Soluble corn fiber 
 
increases calcium absorption associated with shifts in the gut 
microbiome:  a  randomized  dose-response  trial  in  free-living 
pubertal females. Cuello-Garcia  C,  Brozek  JL,  Fiocchi  A,  et  al. Probiotics  for 
 
the prevention of allergies: a systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis of randomized controlled trials. Szajewska H. What are the indications for using probiotics in 
 

children? Nestle Nutr Workshop Ser Pediatr Program. Garcia Rodenas CL, Lepage M, Ngom-Bru C, Fotiou A, Papaga-
 
roufalis K, Berger B. Effect of formula containing Lactobacillus 
reuteri DSM 17938 on fecal microbiota of infants born by cesar-
ean-section. Effects  of Bifidobacte-
 
rium  supplementation  on  intestinal  microbiota  composition 
and the immune response in healthy infants. Safety of Bifidobacterium ani-
 
malis subsp. Power SE, O’Toole PW, Stanton C, Ross RP, Fitzgerald FG. Non-invasive stool-based 
 
detection  of  infant  gastrointestinal  development  using  gene 
expression profiles from exfoliated epithelial cells. Am J Physiol 
Gastrointest Liver Physiol. Schwartz S, Friedberg I, Ivanov I, et al. A metagenomic study 
 
of diet-dependent interaction between gut microbiota and host 
in  infants  reveals  differences  in  developmental  and  immune 
responses. Publisher’s  Note  Springer  Nature  remains  neutral  with  regard  to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.