Mei Wang

Sharon M. Donovan

Introduction

Over the past decade, the essential role that the gut micro-
biota plays in the developmental programming of the neo-
nate, including growth trajectories, metabolism, and immune 
and cognitive development, has been demonstrated [1–3]. 
Thus, fostering the development of the microbiome in the 
first 1000 days of life is critical to supporting lifelong health. Toddlers (2–3 Years of Age)

In Australian 2- to 3-year-olds, both habitual diet, as meas-
ured by a Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ), and recent 
dietary intake, as measured by a 24-h recall 3 days prior to 
fecal sample collection, influenced fecal microbiota com-
position [30]. Dairy intake was negatively associated with 
species richness and diversity and Bacteroidetes abundance, 
but was positively associated with Erysipelatoclostridium 
spp. These findings may 
reflect the higher consumption of complex carbohydrates in 
rural children. [ They observed that infants whose 
mother received probiotics had lower counts of Bifidobacte-
rium and a higher percentage of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus 
than placebo at 6 months of age [68]. In addition, several 
groups investigated the diversity of infant microbiota, report-
ing that administration of probiotics during pregnancy and 
lactation, or directly to infants after delivery have no or lim-
ited effects on alpha and beta diversity of infant microbiota 
[65, 67, 70] (Table 3). Stearns JC, Zulyniak MA, de Souza RJ, et al. https ://doi.org/10.1371/journ 
al.pone.00213 13. Duranti  S,  Lugli  GA,  Mancabelli  L.  Maternal  inheritance  of 
 
bifidobacterial communities and bifidophages in infants through 
vertical  transmission. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 2011;108:4578–4585. 1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

25. Impact of diet in 
 
shaping gut microbiota revealed by a comparative study in chil-
dren from Europe and rural Africa. 2017;. https ://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb .2017.00197 . Kisuse J, La-Ongkham O, Nakphaichit M, et al. Enterotypes of the human 
 

gut microbiome. Structure and function of 
 
the healthy pre-adolescent pediatric gut microbiome. https ://doi.org/10.1186/s4016 8-015-0101-x. Position  of  the  American  Dietetic  Associa-
 
tion:  health  implications  of  dietary  fiber. Mobley  AR,  Jones  JM,  Rodriguez  J,  Slavin  J,  Zelman  KM. Whisner CM, Martin BR, Nakatsu CH, et al. Soluble corn fiber 
 
increases calcium absorption associated with shifts in the gut 
microbiome:  a  randomized  dose-response  trial  in  free-living 
pubertal females. Cuello-Garcia  C,  Brozek  JL,  Fiocchi  A,  et  al. Prenatal  probiotic 
 
administration can influence Bifidobacterium microbiota devel-
opment in infants at high risk of allergy. Rinne M, Kalliomaki M, Arvilommi H, Salminen S, Isolauri E. 
 
Effect of probiotics and breastfeeding on the bifidobacterium 
and lactobacillus/enterococcus microbiota and humoral immune 
responses. Laursen MF, Laursen RP, Larnkjær A, Michaelsen KF, Bahl 
 
MI, Licht TR. Effect of daily 
 
intake  of  Lactobacillus  casei  on  microbial  diversity  and 
dynamics  in  a  healthy  pediatric  population. Am J Physiol 
Gastrointest Liver Physiol. A metagenomic study 
 
of diet-dependent interaction between gut microbiota and host 
in  infants  reveals  differences  in  developmental  and  immune 
responses.