Ananthakrishnan
 
 

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

FIGURE 1. Tools for Microbiome Sequencing

There are several recent reviews on sequencing and anal-
ysis  of  the  microbiome,  although  a  full  discussion  of  these 
methods  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  review.28-31  In  brief,  com-
monly  used  methods  to  study  the  microbiome  use  either 
amplicon sequencing methods that analyze the partial genome 
or whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing. The 
2

investigators obtained fecal samples from 33 patients with CD 
who  stopped  infliximab  therapy  (as  part  of  an  interventional 
study  to  assess  the  rate  of  relapse  after  biologic  cessation). Fecal  samples  were  obtained  at  therapy  cessation,  2  months, 
6 months, and the end of follow-up. Cross-sectional compari-
sons  were  also  made  with  29  healthy  control  patients. Over 
follow-up, 19 patients relapsed and 14 remained in remission. Interestingly, although all patients were 
in clinical remission at study entry, a lower baseline abundance 
of F. prausnitzii (P = 0.014) and Bacteroides (P = 0.030) pre-
dicted relapse after therapy cessation in addition to biochem-
ical markers such as an elevated serum C-reactive protein. Note  that  the  culture  supernatant  also  had  a  similar  effect  in 
reducing the severity of this particular colitis, suggesting that 
the  effect  of  F.  prauznitzii  may  be  mediated  in  part  through 
the  production  of  anti-inflammatory  metabolites. Consistent with other observations, 
responders  had  a  less  dysbiotic  microbiome  at  baseline  than 
nonresponders. In a study by Michail and colleagues, pa-
tients who were steroid-responsive showed greater diversity at 
baseline than nonresponders.44

The  author  and  colleagues  previously  performed 
metagenomic  sequencing  from  fecal  samples  of  85  patients 
with  IBD  initiating  treatment  with  vedolizumab.25  The  study 
cohort included 43 patients with UC and 42 patients with CD. The primary outcome, remission at week 14, was attained by 31 
patients. This  difference  was  noted  primarily  at  the 
species  level. Note  that  patients  with  CD  who  had  endo-
scopic recurrence had a greater abundance of Enterococcus and 
Veillonella and that those who remained in postsurgical remis-
sion had a higher abundance of butyrate-producing Firmicutes, 
Bacteroides,  Prevotella,  and  Parabacteroides. During  in-
duction,  patients  who  responded  (defined  by  a  reduction  in 
fecal  calprotectin)  showed  increasing  diversity  and  similarity 
to  healthy  control  patients,  whereas  a  similar  effect  was  not 
observed  among  those  who  were  nonresponders. Some  of  these  metabolite  exchanges, 
such as with butyrate, resolved posttreatment and most other 
exchanges  persisted. The  PROTECT  cohort  recruited  400  children 

did not (q = 0.09 and 0.06, respectively). Aden et al24 performed a prospective study of 12 patients 
with  IBD,  17  patients  with  rheumatic  disease,  and  19  healthy 
control  patients  who  provided  fecal  samples  at  baseline  and 
2,  6,  and  30  weeks  after  treatment  with  anti-TNF  therapy. None of the taxa profiled 
predicted response to anti-TNF therapy. However, the rate of 
metabolite  exchange  between  organisms  (ie,  metabolic  inter-
change) was lower at baseline in nonresponding patients with 
IBD than in healthy control patients in contrast to those who 

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 

Microbiome-Based Biomarkers

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

TABLE 2. Limitations of Existing Data and Suggestions for 
Future Research

1. A  second  important  challenge  with  existing  data  is  the  wide  vari-
 
ability in the definition of outcomes. This in-
consistency complicates an understanding of the impact of the biologic 
parameter being studied and of such external influences. However, existing studies 
are limited by small sample sizes and significant heterogeneity 
preventing robust validation. Similar to what has been achieved 
and is highly critical for advancing science in other fields (such 
as  genetics),  multicenter  collaborations  of  relatively  homoge-
neous populations and uniform accepted definitions controlling 
for  confounders  are  essential  to  move  such  microbiome-based 
biomarkers from a research endeavor to clinical practice. The  gut  microbiota  in  immune-

mediated inflammatory diseases. Kostic AD, Xavier RJ, Gevers D. The microbiome in inflammatory bowel disease: 

current status and the future ahead. Inflammation, antibiotics, and diet as 
environmental stressors of the gut microbiome in pediatric Crohn’s disease. Multi-omics  of  the  gut  microbial  ecosystem  in  inflammatory  bowel  diseases. Kugathasan S, Denson LA, Walters TD, et al. Darfeuille-Michaud A, Boudeau J, Bulois P, et al. Hyams JS, Davis Thomas S, Gotman N, et al. Ananthakrishnan AN, Luo C, Yajnik V, et al. Fecal microbiota signatures are as-
sociated with response to ustekinumab therapy among Crohn’s disease patients. Sequencing and beyond: integrating 
molecular  “omics”  for  microbial  community  profiling. Predictive metabolomic profiling of 
microbial communities using amplicon or metagenomic sequences. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-in-
flammatory commensal bacterium identified by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn 
disease patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105:16731–16736. De  Cruz  P,  Kang  S,  Wagner  J,  et  al. Sokol  H,  Brot  L,  Stefanescu  C,  et  al.; Prominence of ileal mucosa-associated microbiota to predict postoperative endo-
scopic recurrence in Crohn’s disease. How to predict clinical relapse in inflamma-

tory bowel disease patients.