The majority of these techniques are based on the extraction of DNA and the ampliﬁcation of the 16S
ribosomal RNA gene (rRNA) [5,6]. 16S rRNA sequencing has become the most useful technique to
highlight diversity and abundance of the microbiome. After deﬁning microbiota
variations within and between individuals, we highlight the involvement of gut microbiota dysbiosis
in various intestinal and extra-intestinal disorder development and we describe the strong relationship
between gut microbiota diversity and health. Clostridium genera represent
95% of the Firmicutes phyla. Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

3 of 22

Figure 1. Examples of taxonomic gut microbiota composition. Variations in the Same Individual

Human gut microbiota vary taxonomically and functionally in each part of the GI tract and
undergo variations in the same individual due to infant transitions, age, and environmental factors
such as antibiotic use. Microbiota variations within individuals are summarized in Table 1. Speciﬁc properties of antibiotics such as
antimicrobial effects or mode of action are powerful forces for the selection of intestinal microbiota
and are partially responsible for the shifts in bacterial composition during antibiotic therapy [46].

Each class of antibiotics has different properties and excretion systems, resulting in different

patterns of alteration in the microbiome composition [47].

A cultivation-independent survey of gut microbiota composition of three persons before, during,
and after two exposures to the same antibiotic (ciproﬂoxacin) [48] has been conducted. Microbiota variations within individuals. Lachnospiraceae *
Peptostreptococcaceae *
Clostridiaceae *

Ruminococcus spp. [14]

↓

↑

↑

↓

↑

↓

↑

[15,16,19]

[16,20]

[22–26]

[21–23,27]

[27,30–32,38]

[27,30–32]

[36,37]

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

8 of 22

Actinobacteria

Bacteroidetes

Firmicutes

Proteobacteria

Fusobacteria

Verrucomicrobia

Euryarchaeota

Bacteria
Diversity

Ref. Indeed, an enterotype is a functional
harmonious association of several bacteria species rather than a systematic addition of bacteria species. 53] demonstrated that the microbiota of obese children are provided with
an elevated Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio compared to the microbiota of lean children [53].
low relative proportions of Biﬁdobacterium vulgatus and high concentrations of
Furthermore,
Lactobacillus spp. SCFAs are higher in obese children suggesting
elevated substrate utilization. Results showed that AN intestinal microbiota
showed a signiﬁcant increase in Enterobacteriaceae and Methanobrevibacter smithii compared with healthy
controls [55]. On the contrary, the genera Roseburia, Ruminococcus, and Clostridium were depleted in
line with the observed reduction in AN of the total SCFAs [55].

BMI levels represent a valid predictive value for gut microbiota dysbiosis. Studies have
demonstrated that gut microbiota variations are correlated with increased or depleted production
of SCFAs that may respectively contribute to the pathophysiology of obesity or AN. European gut microbiota (Western diet) have principally an enterotype Bacteroides
(enterotype I): the European diet rich in lipids and animal proteins allows energy production from
carbohydrates and proteins through fermentation [13]. David et al. [ Gut Microbiota Abundance

Actinobacteria

Bacteroidetes

Firmicutes

Proteobacteria

Verrucomicrobia

Euryarchaeota

Spirochaetes

Bacteria
Diversity

Ref. Recent advances in research have demonstrated that this mutualistic gut
microbiota–host relationship appears to play a critical role for many extra-intestinal diseases such
as metabolic diseases and neurological disorders with “gut–brain axis” interactions [81], but also
for complex multifactorial diseases such as age-related macular degeneration with “gut–retina axis”
interactions [82].

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

14 of 22

3.2.1. A metagenome-wide association study of gut microbiota of T2D Chinese sufferers [94]
demonstrated that patients with type 2 diabetes were characterized by a decrease in butyrate-producing
bacteria such as Roseburia spp. and an increase in various opportunistic pathogens (Clostridium spp., Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic, rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated
with impaired cognition and cerebral accumulation of amyloid-beta peptides. 103] linked
the gut microbiota composition with cognition and inﬂammation in HE. A catalog of reference
genomes from the human microbiome. Underwood, M.A.; Gaerlan, S.; De Leoz, M.L.; Dimapasoc, L.; Kalanetra, K.M.; Lemay, D.G.; German, J.B.;
Mills, D.A.; Lebrilla, C.B. Human milk oligosaccharides in premature infants: Absorption, excretion, and
inﬂuence on the intestinal microbiota. Bezirtzoglou, E.; Tsiotsias, A.; Welling, G.W. Microbiota proﬁle in feces of breast- and formula-fed newborns
by using ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Sakurama, H.; Kiyohara, M.; Wada, J.; Honda, Y.; Yamaguchi, M.; Fukiya, S.; Yokota, A.; Ashida, H.;
Kumagai, H.; Kitaoka, M.; et al. Borgo, F.; Riva, A.; Benetti, A.; Casiraghi, M.C.; Bertelli, S.; Garbossa, S.; Anselmetti, S.; Scarone, S.;
Pontiroli, A.E.; Morace, G.; et al. David, L.A.; Maurice, C.F.; Carmody, R.N.; Gootenberg, D.B.; Button, J.E.; Wolfe, B.E.; Ling, A.V.; Devlin, A.S.;
Varma, Y.; Fischbach, M.A.; et al. [CrossRef]
Joossens, M.; Huys, G.; Cnockaert, M.; De Preter, V.; Verbeke, K.; Rutgeerts, P.; Vandamme, P.; Vermeire, S.
Dysbiosis of the faecal microbiota in patients with Crohn’s disease and their unaffected relatives. De Palma, G.; Nadal, I.; Medina, M.; Donat, E.; Ribes-Koninckx, C.; Calabuig, M.; Sanz, Y. Intestinal dysbiosis
and reduced immunoglobulin-coated bacteria associated with coeliac disease in children. groups associated with paediatric coeliac disease. Genomic analysis identiﬁes association of Fusobacterium with colorectal carcinoma. CrossRef] [PubMed]

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

21 of 22

83. Kim, K.A.; Gu, W.; Lee, I.A.; Joh, E.H.; Kim, D.H. High fat diet-induced gut microbiota exacerbates
inﬂammation and obesity in mice via the TLR4 signaling pathway. Zhang, C.; Zhang, M.; Wang, S.; Han, R.; Cao, Y.; Hua, W.; Mao, Y.; Zhang, X.; Pang, X.; Wei, C.; et al. Gut microbiome alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. CrossRef] [PubMed]

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

Neurosci. Bailey, M.T.; Dowd, S.E.; Galley, J.D.; Hufnagle, A.R.; Allen, R.G.; Lyte, M. Exposure to a social stressor alters the
structure of the intestinal microbiota: Implications for stressor-induced immunomodulation. CrossRef] [PubMed]

© 2019 by the authors. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).