Ananthakrishnan
 
 

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

FIGURE 1. A total of 35% of the cohort remained in remission 
at week 54. This  difference  was  noted  primarily  at  the 
species  level. Note  that  patients  with  CD  who  had  endo-
scopic recurrence had a greater abundance of Enterococcus and 
Veillonella and that those who remained in postsurgical remis-
sion had a higher abundance of butyrate-producing Firmicutes, 
Bacteroides,  Prevotella,  and  Parabacteroides. The  PROTECT  cohort  recruited  400  children 

did not (q = 0.09 and 0.06, respectively). The most in-
formative features in this model were the abundance of various 
Clostridiales and the abundance of Veillonella, Bacteroides, and 
Anaerostipes. Aden et al24 performed a prospective study of 12 patients 
with  IBD,  17  patients  with  rheumatic  disease,  and  19  healthy 
control  patients  who  provided  fecal  samples  at  baseline  and 
2,  6,  and  30  weeks  after  treatment  with  anti-TNF  therapy. Twenty-three  patients  who  were  treated  with  either  anti-TNF 
drugs  or  vedolizumab  acted  as  control  patients. Interestingly, 
patients with IBD but not with rheumatic disease demonstrated 
a shift in diversity toward that of the control patients with anti-
TNF therapy, suggesting that this effect was likely mediated in 
part  by  resolution  of  intestinal  inflammation  rather  than  di-
rect effect of the biologic agent.24 When compared to healthy 
control patients, 14 indicator phylotypes, notably Coprococcus 
and  R.  inulinivorans,  were  differentially  distributed  between 
patients with IBD and healthy control patients. However, the rate of 
metabolite  exchange  between  organisms  (ie,  metabolic  inter-
change) was lower at baseline in nonresponding patients with 
IBD than in healthy control patients in contrast to those who 

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 

Microbiome-Based Biomarkers

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

TABLE 2. Limitations of Existing Data and Suggestions for 
Future Research

1. While 
decreasing the cost of the more comprehensive sequencing methods 
that also define bacterial function and the recognition of variation 
in biologic effect even at the level of individual strains, the develop-
ment of microbiome-based therapies requires more comprehensive 
microbial profiling to truly identify modifiable targets. In addition, 
most  studies  have  relied  on  the  comparison  of  relative  microbial 
abundances,  which,  in  addition  to  the  species  of  interest,  may  be 
influenced by total microbial counts and changes in the abundance 
of other species. For example, 
although genetic association studies in IBD could make rapid strides in 
identifying potentially causal gene variants by the relative ease and con-
sistency of defining a disease state (CD, UC, or control), microbiome-
based  prediction  studies  have  required  more  nuanced,  time-varying 
definitions of outcomes (such as treatment response) that have differed 
between cohorts, limiting the ability to pool data. Dysfunction of the intestinal microbiome 

in inflammatory bowel disease and treatment. Kugathasan S, Denson LA, Walters TD, et al. Dysbiosis, inflammation, and response 
to treatment: a longitudinal study of pediatric subjects with newly diagnosed in-
flammatory bowel disease. Dynamics of metatranscription in 
the inflammatory bowel disease gut microbiome. Ananthakrishnan AN, Luo C, Yajnik V, et al. Fecal microbiota signatures are as-
sociated with response to ustekinumab therapy among Crohn’s disease patients. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-in-
flammatory commensal bacterium identified by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn 
disease patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105:16731–16736. De  Cruz  P,  Kang  S,  Wagner  J,  et  al. Sokol  H,  Brot  L,  Stefanescu  C,  et  al.; Busquets D, Mas-de-Xaxars T, López-Siles M, et al. Fecal microbiota in pediatric inflam-
matory  bowel  disease  and  its  relation  to  inflammation.