This 
chapter reviews the natural trajectory of the composition 
of  the  microbiota  during  pregnancy  and  early  life  and 
outlines  the  current  knowledge  on  the  interaction  be-
tween the microbiota and neurodevelopment. Administration of probiot-

19

Microbiota and Neurodevelopmental Trajectories Ann Nutr Metab 2019;74(suppl 2):16–27DOI: 10.1159/000499144Table 3. Mode of Nutritional Provision in Early Life
The stability and composition of the early-life gut mi-
crobiota community is also dependent on diet [115]. Ac-
cumulating evidence suggests that breastfeeding and for-
mula-based nutrition leave a distinctive fingerprint in the 
intestinal  microbiota  (Table  2). T.G.D. has been an invited 
speaker at meetings organized by Servier, Lundbeck, Janssen and 
AstraZeneca and has received research funding from Mead John-
son, Cremo, Suntory Wellness, Nutricia and 4D Pharma. Gut-brain 
axis: how the microbiome influences anxiety 
and depression. Mind-altering microor-
ganisms: the impact of the gut microbiota on 
brain and behaviour. The developmental origins of adult 
disease. Microbes & neu-
rodevelopment—absence of microbiota dur-
ing  early  life  increases  activity-related  tran-
scriptional  pathways  in  the  amygdala. 24  Braniste V, Al-Asmakh M, Kowal C, Anuar F, 
Abbaspour A, Tóth M, et al. 26  Hoban AE, Stilling RM, Moloney G, Shana-
han F, Dinan TG, Clarke G, et al. Mech-
anisms 
underlying  microbial-mediated 
changes in social behavior in mouse models 
of  autism  spectrum  disorder. Alterations in the Vaginal Microbiome by 
Maternal Stress Are Associated with Metabol-
ic Reprogramming of the Offspring Gut and 
Brain. 46  Steegenga  WT,  Mischke  M,  Lute  C,  Boek-
schoten MV, Lendvai A, Pruis MG, et al. 48  Perani CV, Neumann ID, Reber SO, Slattery 
DA. 58  Jarde  A,  Lewis-Mikhael  AM,  Moayyedi  P, 
Stearns JC, Collins SM, Beyene J, et al. Prebiotics  for  the  prevention  of  allergies:  A 
systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  of  ran-
domized  controlled  trials. 83  Jiménez  E,  Marín  ML,  Martín  R,  Odriozola 
JM,  Olivares  M,  Xaus  J,  et  al. As-
sociation of Cesarean Delivery and Formula 
Supplementation With the Intestinal Micro-
biome of 6-Week-Old Infants. Canadian 
Healthy  Infant  Longitudinal  Development 
(CHILD) Study Investigators. The Neo-
natal Microbiome and Its Partial Role in Me-
diating the Association between Birth by Ce-
sarean  Section  and  Adverse  Pediatric  Out-
comes. 110  Chiesa M, Guimond D, Tyzio R, Pons-Ben-
naceur A, Lozovaya N, Burnashev N, et al. 117  Deoni S, Dean D 3rd, Joelson S, O’Regan J, 
Schneider N. Early nutrition influences de-
velopmental  myelination  and  cognition  in 
infants  and  young  children. 132  Weizman Z, Asli G, Alsheikh A. Effect of a 
probiotic  infant  formula  on  infections  in 
child care centers: comparison of two probi-
otic agents. 138  Cowan CS, Callaghan BL, Richardson R. The 
effects of a probiotic formulation (Lactoba-
cillus rhamnosus and L. helveticus) on de-
velopmental trajectories of emotional learn-
ing in stressed infant rats. 139  Desbonnet L, Garrett L, Clarke G, Kiely B, 
Cryan JF, Dinan TG. Natural 
history of the infant gut microbiome and im-
pact  of  antibiotic  treatment  on  bacterial 
strain diversity and stability.