1 Comparison between 16S rRNA gene sequencing and shotgun metagenomic sequencing

Two primary methods for taxonomic proﬁling of microbial communities exist: 16S gene sequencing and whole genome shotgun sequencing (WGS). This is a result of diﬀerences in PCR primer binding to certain
16S rRNA gene sequences, which may cause entire groups of bacteria to be underrepresented in the sample [5]. In addition to PCR ampliﬁcation
biases, over estimation of α diversity and proﬁling pipeline can also introduce biases in the 16S rRNA data [14]. WGS is a comparatively
unbiased method for taxonomic proﬁling. Precision
and recall are deﬁned as:

P recision =

T rueP ositive
T rueP ositive + F alseP ositive

, Recall =

T rueP ositive
T rueP ositive + F alseN egative

,

F1 score (0 ≤ F 1 ≤ 1) is the harmonic average of the precision and recall maintaining a balance between both precision and recall:

F1 =

2
1
recall +

1
precision

2

2.2 Micro versus Macro averaged metrics

In the evaluation, we distinguish between micro and macro metrics. 3 Visualization Methods

Principal component analysis (PCA): is one of the most widely used techniques for dimensionality reduction. Finally, PCA is a linear transformation with
several constraints, and thus cannot address the non-linearity in the data [18, 1].

t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE): is a dimensionality reduction technique which has been successfully applied to
visualization problems, since it attempts to preserve pairwise distance distribution of points in lower dimensions [19]. Since projection to lower
dimensions involves the distribution of relative distances, it requires large amounts of data points in order to ﬁnd a meaningful representation. 4 Body-site classiﬁcation results

4.1 Confusion matrix for body-site classiﬁcation using diﬀerent sampling sizes

As shown in the Figure 1, increase in the sampling size from 100 reads per sample helps in discrimination between similar body-sites (mid-vagina and
urogenital). For each k, the interval that ¯DS and ¯DR converge to their minimum values show a propoer
range for picking a sampling size resulting in self-consistent and representative representations. Each point presents the average of
100 resamples belonging to 10 randomly selected 16S rRNA samples. ViSNE enables visualization of high dimensional single-cell data and reveals phenotypic heterogeneity of leukemia. Nature Biotechnology, 31(6):545–552, 2013. [3] Ehsaneddin Asgari and Mohammad R.K. Mofrad. Continuous distributed representation of biological sequences for deep proteomics and genomics. Representation learning: A review and new perspectives. A Microbiome Foundation for the Study of Crohn’s Disease, 2017. Structure, function and diversity of the healthy human microbiome. URL http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3564958&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract. [9] Michael D. Kappelman, Sheryl L. Rifas-Shiman, Ken Kleinman, Dan Ollendorf, Athos Bousvaros, Richard J. Grand, and Jonathan A. Finkelstein. doi:

graphic Distribution of Crohn’s Disease and Ulcerative Colitis in the United States. Multiplexed quantiﬁcation of proteins and transcripts in single cells. The madness of microbiome: Attempting to ﬁnd consensus best practice for 16S microbiome studies. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, pages AEM.02627–17, 2018. URL http://aem.asm.org/lookup/doi/10.1128/AEM.02627-17. [15] Rachel Poretsky, Luis M. Rodriguez-R, Chengwei Luo, Despina Tsementzi, and Konstantinos T. Konstantinidis. Strengths and limitations of 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing

in revealing temporal microbial community dynamics. Learning representations by back-propagating errors. A tutorial on principal component analysis.