Human 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

SPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms (2015) doi:10.1242/dmm.017400

Table 1. The morphology of mouse and human colons also
differs: the human colon is divided into haustra, whereas the mouse
colon is rather smooth. (E) Cross-section of a human colon, which has a thicker muscular wall and
mucosa compared with the mouse colon (D). deeper  taxonomic  classifications,  Ley  et  al. A reduced ratio
of Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes was also found in a study linking gut
microbiota composition and metabolic adaptations in mice on high-
fat diets (Serino et al., The obese gut microbiome was
shown to produce a higher level of monosaccharides and SCFAs,

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms (2015) doi:10.1242/dmm.017400

which  supply  the  host  with  extra  energy  from  indigestible  food
components,  as  compared  with 
lean  animals. C, intestinal crypts; G, goblet cells; L, lamina
propria; ME, muscularis externa; MM, muscularis mucosae; MT: muscularis tunics; SM: submucosa; V: villi. Mouse studies have also detected changes in abundance of bacterial
phylotypes that solely happen in mice, such as of Tenericutes and
Deferribacteriaceae (Nagalingam et al., Furthermore, in closed
housing conditions, where mice are confined in a limited space,
stress related to human handling, noise and social contacts with
cage mates is considered to affect gut microbiota composition (Ma
et al., In fact, changes in gut microbiota
composition  have  been  found  to  follow  changes  in  the  estrogen

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms (2015) doi:10.1242/dmm.017400

Box 2. content in diets of both humans and mice (Akaza, 2012; Menon et
al., Despite  the  numerous
mouse  models  developed  for  IBD  and  their  contributions  to  our
knowledge of the underlying mechanisms of the disease, none of them
fully  mimic  the  pathophysiology  of  human  IBD  (Peloquin  and
Nguyen, 2013; Wirtz and Neurath, 2007) (Table 2). This study shows that the gut
microbiota  composition  of  humanized  mice  in  general  does  not
differ significantly from that of the initial human donors, except for
the absence of many low-abundance Firmicutes, but these mice fail
to recapitulate a comprehensive response to infections. Similarly,  although  the  gap  between  humanized
mouse models and the human gut microbiota within its original host
needs to be acknowledged, these models provide unique possibilities
to manipulate the human microbiota and potentially assess causality
in the role of the gut microbiota in health and disease. Furthermore,  it  was  hypothesized  that  the
differences  between  mice  and  rats  in  recapitulating  the  human
donors’  microbiota  is  due  to  the  intrinsic  differences  in  genetic
backgrounds of the recipient models, which might control for the
establishment of the transferred microbiota (Wos-Oxley et al., More  recently,  another  study  employed  metagenomic
approaches to compare the gut microbiota composition of humans
and guinea pigs (Hildebrand et al., By contrast, studies investigating the gut microbiota
composition  of  macaques  showed  that  the  community  of  gut
bacteria in these primates is quite different to that of humans or mice
(McKenna et al., Funding
T.L.A.N. is supported by VIB international PhD program. Andoh, A., Kuzuoka, H., Tsujikawa, T., Nakamura, S., Hirai, F., Suzuki, Y., Matsui,
T., Fujiyama, Y. and Matsumoto, T. (2012). Bercik, P., Collins, S.  M. and Verdu, E.  F. (2012). Gut  microbiota  affects  sensitivity  to  acute  DSS-induced
colitis independently of host genotype. Elinav, E., Strowig, T., Kau, A.  L., Henao-Mejia, J., Thaiss, C.  A., Booth, C.  J.,
Peaper, D.  R., Bertin, J., Eisenbarth, S.  C., Gordon, J.  I. et  al. ( Predicting a human

gut microbiota’s response to diet in gnotobiotic mice. 13

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms (2015) doi:10.1242/dmm.017400

Farooqi, I. S., Jebb, S. A., Langmack, G., Lawrence, E., Cheetham, C. H., Prentice,
A.  M.,  Hughes,  I.  A.,  McCamish,  M.  A.  and  O’Rahilly,  S. (1999). The Interleukin 10 Inflammatory Bowel Disease Cooperative Study
Group. Kim, H. B., Borewicz, K., White, B. A., Singer, R. S., Sreevatsan, S., Tu, Z. J. and
Isaacson, R.  E. (2012). Microbial  ecology:

human gut microbes associated with obesity. Linnenbrink, M., Wang, J., Hardouin, E. A., Künzel, S., Metzler, D. and Baines, J.
F. (2013). Pharmacogenetics,  pharmacogenomics,  and

individualized medicine. Los  Angeles,  CA:  The  UCLA  Center  for  Health  Policy
Research. Composition
and energy harvesting capacity of the gut microbiota: relationship to diet, obesity and
time in mouse models. Reduced  diversity  and  imbalance  of
fecal microbiota in patients with ulcerative colitis. Paneth cell defensins: endogenous peptide

components of intestinal host defense. Pritchett-Corning, K.  R., Cosentino, J. and Clifford, C.  B. (2009). Safety  and
efficacy  of  recombinant  human  interleukin  10  in  chronic  active  Crohn’s  disease. Phylogenetic  and  gene-centric  metagenomics  of  the  canine  intestinal
microbiome reveals similarities with humans and mice. Gram-negative bacteria account for main differences between faecal microbiota from
patients with ulcerative colitis and healthy controls. High-throughput clone library analysis of the mucosa-associated microbiota reveals
dysbiosis  and  differences  between  inflamed  and  non-inflamed  regions  of  the
intestine in inflammatory bowel disease. Increased  abundance  of  Sutterella  spp. Mouse  models  of  inflammatory  bowel  disease. Behaviour and the standardization fallacy.