Human 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

SPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms (2015) doi:10.1242/dmm.017400

Table 1. The morphology of mouse and human colons also
differs: the human colon is divided into haustra, whereas the mouse
colon is rather smooth. On the other hand, a study by the MetaHIT consortium
investigating metagenomes from 124 European individuals discovered
that 90% of the individuals of the cohort share a common core of nine
genera, at a 10% sequence coverage threshold (i.e. species being only
considered  present  if  a  minimum  of  10%  of  their  genome  was
recovered in the sequenced metagenome) (Qin et al., low 

the 

Overall,  these  observations  show  that  clear  differences  can  be
observed at the level of specific genus/species abundances between

5

Disease Models & MechanismsSPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms (2015) doi:10.1242/dmm.017400

the murine and human gut microbiota. C, intestinal crypts; G, goblet cells; L, lamina
propria; ME, muscularis externa; MM, muscularis mucosae; MT: muscularis tunics; SM: submucosa; V: villi. content in diets of both humans and mice (Akaza, 2012; Menon et
al., Despite  the  numerous
mouse  models  developed  for  IBD  and  their  contributions  to  our
knowledge of the underlying mechanisms of the disease, none of them
fully  mimic  the  pathophysiology  of  human  IBD  (Peloquin  and
Nguyen, 2013; Wirtz and Neurath, 2007) (Table 2). This study shows that the gut
microbiota  composition  of  humanized  mice  in  general  does  not
differ significantly from that of the initial human donors, except for
the absence of many low-abundance Firmicutes, but these mice fail
to recapitulate a comprehensive response to infections. Similarly,  although  the  gap  between  humanized
mouse models and the human gut microbiota within its original host
needs to be acknowledged, these models provide unique possibilities
to manipulate the human microbiota and potentially assess causality
in the role of the gut microbiota in health and disease. Furthermore,  it  was  hypothesized  that  the
differences  between  mice  and  rats  in  recapitulating  the  human
donors’  microbiota  is  due  to  the  intrinsic  differences  in  genetic
backgrounds of the recipient models, which might control for the
establishment of the transferred microbiota (Wos-Oxley et al., More  recently,  another  study  employed  metagenomic
approaches to compare the gut microbiota composition of humans
and guinea pigs (Hildebrand et al., At the
genus level, the swine gut microbiota harbors more Spirochaetes and
Prevotella than 
Interestingly,
Anaerovibrio and  Treptonema are  genera  exclusive  to  pig  fecal
metagenomes  (Lamendella  et  al., By contrast, studies investigating the gut microbiota
composition  of  macaques  showed  that  the  community  of  gut
bacteria in these primates is quite different to that of humans or mice
(McKenna et al., In  addition,  even  well-controlled  gut  microbiota
experiments  using  mouse  models  show  important  inter-study
variations due to confounding factors in the experimental setup, such
as mouse house origin, maternal effects, environmental conditions
(food composition, light, stress factors, pathogen infection), genetic
backgrounds  and  in  the  downstream  analysis  methods  applied. S.V.-S. is funded by Marie
Curie Actions FP7 People COFUND – Proposal 267139 (acronym OMICS@VIB). Andoh, A., Kuzuoka, H., Tsujikawa, T., Nakamura, S., Hirai, F., Suzuki, Y., Matsui,
T., Fujiyama, Y. and Matsumoto, T. (2012). Antibiotics in early life alter the murine colonic
microbiome and adiposity. Elinav, E., Strowig, T., Kau, A.  L., Henao-Mejia, J., Thaiss, C.  A., Booth, C.  J.,
Peaper, D.  R., Bertin, J., Eisenbarth, S.  C., Gordon, J.  I. et  al. ( Structure, function and diversity of

induced  by  dextran  sulfate 

the healthy human microbiome. Kim, H. B., Borewicz, K., White, B. A., Singer, R. S., Sreevatsan, S., Tu, Z. J. and
Isaacson, R.  E. (2012). Ley, R. E., Bäckhed, F., Turnbaugh, P., Lozupone, C. A., Knight, R. D. and Gordon,
J.  I. (2005). Linnenbrink, M., Wang, J., Hardouin, E. A., Künzel, S., Metzler, D. and Baines, J.
F. (2013). Composition
and energy harvesting capacity of the gut microbiota: relationship to diet, obesity and
time in mouse models. Microbial  ecology  of  the
murine  gut  associated  with  the  development  of  dextran  sodium  sulfate-induced
colitis. Qin, J., Li, Y., Cai, Z., Li, S., Zhu, J., Zhang, F., Liang, S., Zhang, W., Guan, Y.,
Shen, D. et  al. ( Faecalibacterium  prausnitzii  is  an  anti-inflammatory  commensal  bacterium
identified by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients.