This vast array of data has contributed
to a deeper understanding of the role of the gut microbiome in health and disease, the factors which
shape it, and the potential to harness its therapeutic potential for optimal health. A 15 kDa protein
produced by F. prausnitzii, a commensal microbe deﬁcient in Crohn’s disease patients, was shown to
have anti-inﬂammatory properties, decreasing activation of the NF-κB pathway and also prevented
colitis in an animal model [150]. M-cells are speciﬁc phagocytic epithelial cells which sample particulate
antigens [151]. Rios et al. [ Furthermore, faecal SCFA concentrations tend to be higher in obese
individuals [230–233]. The obese gut microbiota has also been characterised by reduced diversity and
altered representation of bacterial genes and metabolic pathways [229]. More recently, a systematic
review investigated the link between the gut microbiota and low-grade inﬂammation, a hallmark of
obesity which plays a major role in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in humans [234]. Fourteen,
mostly observational studies were included with n = 10 to 471 participants. There was also an increase in spermine
which has been shown to be extremely toxic in rats [340]. The following bacteria, which are generally
regarded as being beneﬁcial, decreased in abundance on the high protein diet, including the butyrate
producer F. prausnitzii (by 3.5 fold), Ruminococcus (by 8.04 fold) which contains butyrate producers,
and the mucin degrader Akkermansia (not detected in high protein diet group). Principal component
analysis revealed distinct microbiota on days 7 and 14, whereby the soy protein group was separate
from the meat and casein groups [347]. In another similar study, soy protein was associated with
increased faecal SCFAs in rats compared to rats fed white meat, red meat or casein [348]. The soy group
also had a higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which are the major propionate and
other SCFA producers [349]. Lactobacillus, a genus known for its beneﬁcial eﬀects was increased in the
gut microbiota by ingestion of meat proteins. Interestingly in humans, a three-week isocaloric supplementation with casein, soy protein or
maltodextrin, which served as control, had no impact on the gut microbiota but altered bacterial
metabolite production [361]. Compared to maltodextrin, both soy protein and casein caused a decrease
in faecal butyrate which the authors suggest may be due to the combination of an increase in protein
intake and a decrease in indigestible carbohydrate intake. This interindividual variation was also reported by Venkataraman et al. [ In Part II of this review, we
also look at speciﬁc examples of how the microbiota is already being used as a biomarker to predict
responsiveness to speciﬁc dietary constituents and highlight further research which is necessary to
make precision nutrition through the microbiome a reality. Yatsunenko, T.; Rey, F.E.; Manary, M.J.; Trehan, I.; Dominguez-Bello, M.G.; Conteras, M.; Magris, M.;
Hidalgo, G.; Baldassano, R.N.; Anokhin, A.P.; et al. Nishijima, S.; Suda, W.; Oshima, K.; Kim, S.-W.; Hirose, Y.; Morita, H.; Hattori, M. The gut microbiome of
healthy Japanese and its microbial and functional uniqueness. Heiman, M.L.; Greenway, F.L. A healthy gastrointestinal microbiome is dependent on dietary diversity. Wikoﬀ, W.R.; Anfora, A.T.; Liu, J.; Schultz, P.G.; Lesley, S.A.; Peters, E.C.; Siuzdak, G. Metabolomics analysis
reveals large eﬀects of gut microﬂora on mammalian blood metabolites. CARD9 impacts colitis by altering gut microbiota metabolism of
tryptophan into aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligands. Gao, J.; Xu, K.; Liu, H.; Liu, G.; Bai, M.; Peng, C.; Li, T.; Yin, Y. Impact of the gut microbiota on intestinal

immunity mediated by tryptophan metabolism. Dominant and diet-responsive groups of bacteria within the human colonic microbiota. CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

39 of 45

248. Newgard, C.B.; An, J.; Bain, J.R.; Muehlbauer, M.J.; Stevens, R.D.; Lien, L.F.; Haqq, A.M.; Shah, S.H.;
Arlotto, M.; Slentz, C.A.; et al. Bonder, M.J.; Tigchelaar, E.F.; Cai, X.; Trynka, G.; Cenit, M.C.; Hrdlickova, B.; Zhong, H.; Vatanen, T.;
Gevers, D.; Wijmenga, C.; et al. Composition and energy harvesting capacity of the gut microbiota:
Relationship to diet, obesity and time in mouse models. Huang, E.Y.; Leone, V.A.; Devkota, S.; Wang, Y.; Brady, M.J.; Chang, E.B. Composition of dietary fat source
shapes gut microbiota architecture and alters host inﬂammatory mediators in mouse adipose tissue. Kovatcheva-Datchary, P.; Nilsson, A.; Akrami, R.; Lee, Y.S.; De Vadder, F.; Arora, T.; Hallen, A.; Martens, E.;
Björck, I.; Bäckhed, F. Dietary ﬁbre-induced improvement in glucose metabolism is associated with increased
abundance of Prevotella. Shen, W.; Wolf, P.G.; Carbonero, D.F.; Zhong, W.; Reid, T.; Gaskins, H.R.; McIntosh, M.K. Intestinal
and systemic inﬂammatory responses are positively associated with sulﬁdogenic bacteria abundance in
high-fat-fed male C57BL/6J mice. Carvalho, G.C.B.C.; Moura, C.S.; Roquetto, A.R.; Barrera-Arellano, D.; Yamada, Á.T.; Dos Santos, A.;
Saad, M.J.A.; Amaya-Farfán, J. Impact of trans-fats on heat-shock protein expression and the gut microbiota
proﬁle of mice. Ketogenic diet enhances neurovascular function with altered gut microbiome in young
healthy mice. Academic Press: New York, NY, USA, 1988; pp. Spencer, M.D.; Hamp, T.J.; Reid, R.W.; Fischer, L.M.; Zeisel, S.H.; Fodor, A.A. Association between
composition of the human gastrointestinal microbiome and development of fatty liver with choline deﬁciency.