This vast array of data has contributed
to a deeper understanding of the role of the gut microbiome in health and disease, the factors which
shape it, and the potential to harness its therapeutic potential for optimal health. The gut microbiota serves the host by interacting directly or indirectly with host cells, the latter of
which comes about through microbially-produced bioactive molecules, thus the microbiota is capable
of regulating numerous biological pathways involved in immunity and energy homeostasis, while also
protecting the host against pathogens through colonisation resistance. A 15 kDa protein
produced by F. prausnitzii, a commensal microbe deﬁcient in Crohn’s disease patients, was shown to
have anti-inﬂammatory properties, decreasing activation of the NF-κB pathway and also prevented
colitis in an animal model [150]. M-cells are speciﬁc phagocytic epithelial cells which sample particulate
antigens [151]. Rios et al. [ Furthermore, SCFAs were signiﬁcantly more abundant in the African children. These changes were associated with receipt of broad-spectrum antibiotics. The Winning the War on Antibiotic Resistance (WARRIOR) project which is being undertaken by
researchers from the University of Wisconsin aims to investigate the relationship between dietary ﬁbre
intake, the gut microbiota and colonisation by multi-drug resistant microorganisms using 600 randomly
selected Wisconsin residents over the age of 18 of which the main results will be published in a
peer-reviewed journal [215]. The results of this study should help us to further delineate the role of
diet and the microbiota in protecting against pathogen invasion. 228] reported a decrease in the relative proportion of Bacteriodetes in obese
people relative to their lean counterparts and which was found to increase on calorie-restricted diets. Indoxyl sulfate is another uremic toxin derived from gut microbial metabolism of the essential
amino acid, tryptophan [266]. In this case, bacterial trytophanases generate indole from tryptophan
which is transported to the liver where it is hydroxylated and O-sulfated to produce the uremic
toxin. Indeed, we have already seen that an animal-based diet high in
fat and protein alters the gut microbiota resulting in an increase in the abundance of bile-tolerant
microorganisms, such as Bilophila, Alistipes and Bacteroides [178] and long-term consumption selects for
a Bacteroides enterotype [33]. Recently, Agans et al. [ However, dietary fat is not a homogenous macronutrient, since the structure and function of
diﬀerent fatty acids can vary greatly depending on chain length (6 to 24 carbons) and absence or
presence of carbon-carbon double bonds [295]. Saturated fatty acids (SFAs) have no double bond,
monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) contain a single double bond, while polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFAs) have two or more double bonds. Additionally, in a mouse model of glioma, mice fed
the ketogenic diet had slightly increased survival compared to mice fed the control diet and showed
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in several key microorganisms [333]. The ketogenic diet generally includes fats

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

22 of 45

of all chain lengths [334] thus increases in blood ketone levels could be responsible for the observed
gut microbiota changes [331].

7.2. There was also an increase in spermine
which has been shown to be extremely toxic in rats [340]. The following bacteria, which are generally
regarded as being beneﬁcial, decreased in abundance on the high protein diet, including the butyrate
producer F. prausnitzii (by 3.5 fold), Ruminococcus (by 8.04 fold) which contains butyrate producers,
and the mucin degrader Akkermansia (not detected in high protein diet group). Principal component
analysis revealed distinct microbiota on days 7 and 14, whereby the soy protein group was separate
from the meat and casein groups [347]. In another similar study, soy protein was associated with
increased faecal SCFAs in rats compared to rats fed white meat, red meat or casein [348]. The soy group
also had a higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which are the major propionate and
other SCFA producers [349]. Lactobacillus, a genus known for its beneﬁcial eﬀects was increased in the
gut microbiota by ingestion of meat proteins. Interestingly in humans, a three-week isocaloric supplementation with casein, soy protein or
maltodextrin, which served as control, had no impact on the gut microbiota but altered bacterial
metabolite production [361]. Compared to maltodextrin, both soy protein and casein caused a decrease
in faecal butyrate which the authors suggest may be due to the combination of an increase in protein
intake and a decrease in indigestible carbohydrate intake. A position paper by the MyNewGut Study group analysed
PubMed-referenced publications involving human intervention studies to clarify beneﬁcial versus
deleterious eﬀects of high protein diets on metabolic and gut related health parameters, including
interactions with the gut microbiota [363]. The study concluded that high protein diets are generally
associated with decreased body weight and improvement in blood metabolic parameters but they also
modify various bacterial metabolites and co-metabolites in faecal and urinary contents. This interindividual variation was also reported by Venkataraman et al. [ 379] compared
the impact of diﬀerent oligo- and polysaccharides (galacto- and fructooligosaccharides, resistant starch,
levan, inulin, arabinogalactan, xylan, pectin and chitin), as well as a glycoprotein mucin, representing
an indigenous substrate, on the growth and metabolism of the faecal microbiota. Thus, modiﬁcation of the gut microbiota through diet, probiotics and
prebiotics may oﬀer viable opportunities for preventing many of these ‘Western-associated’ diseases,
particularly in the case of metabolic-related diseases for which microbiota quality and quantity can
be an essential aspect. Yatsunenko, T.; Rey, F.E.; Manary, M.J.; Trehan, I.; Dominguez-Bello, M.G.; Conteras, M.; Magris, M.;
Hidalgo, G.; Baldassano, R.N.; Anokhin, A.P.; et al. Nishijima, S.; Suda, W.; Oshima, K.; Kim, S.-W.; Hirose, Y.; Morita, H.; Hattori, M. The gut microbiome of
healthy Japanese and its microbial and functional uniqueness. Heiman, M.L.; Greenway, F.L. A healthy gastrointestinal microbiome is dependent on dietary diversity. El Kaoutari, A.; Armougom, F.; Gordon, J.I.; Raoult, D.; Henrissat, B. The abundance and variety of
carbohydrate-active enzymes in the human gut microbiota. Gao, J.; Xu, K.; Liu, H.; Liu, G.; Bai, M.; Peng, C.; Li, T.; Yin, Y. Impact of the gut microbiota on intestinal

immunity mediated by tryptophan metabolism. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii inﬂuence the production of mucus glycans and the development of goblet cells in the colonic
epithelium of a gnotobiotic model rodent. Morrin, S.T.; Lane, J.A.; Marotta, M.; Bode, L.; Carrington, S.D.; Irwin, J.A.; Hickey, R.M. Bovine
intestinal epithelial cells for increased commensal colonisation. Sha, S.; Xu, B.; Wang, X.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, H.; Kong, X.; Zhu, H.; Wu, K. The biodiversity and composition of
the dominant faecal microbiota in patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease. Alterations

of the human gut microbiome in liver cirrhosis. Dominant and diet-responsive groups of bacteria within the human colonic microbiota. A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins. Van den Munckhof, I.C.L.; Kurilshikov, A.; Ter Horst, R.; Riksen, N.P.; Joosten, L.A.B.; Zhernakova, A.; Fu, J.;
Keating, S.T.; Netea, M.G.; de Graaf, J.; et al. CrossRef]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

39 of 45

248. A branched-chain amino acid-related metabolic signature that diﬀerentiates
obese and lean humans and contributes to insulin resistance. Composition and energy harvesting capacity of the gut microbiota:
Relationship to diet, obesity and time in mouse models. Prieto, I.; Hidalgo, M.; Segarra, A.B.; Martínez-Rodríguez, A.M.; Cobo, A.; Ramírez, M.; Abriouel, H.;
Gálvez, A.; Martínez-Canamero, M. Inﬂuence of a diet enriched with virgin olive oil or butter on mouse gut
microbiota and its correlation to physiological and biochemical parameters related to metabolic syndrome. Kovatcheva-Datchary, P.; Nilsson, A.; Akrami, R.; Lee, Y.S.; De Vadder, F.; Arora, T.; Hallen, A.; Martens, E.;
Björck, I.; Bäckhed, F. Dietary ﬁbre-induced improvement in glucose metabolism is associated with increased
abundance of Prevotella. Carvalho, G.C.B.C.; Moura, C.S.; Roquetto, A.R.; Barrera-Arellano, D.; Yamada, Á.T.; Dos Santos, A.;
Saad, M.J.A.; Amaya-Farfán, J. Impact of trans-fats on heat-shock protein expression and the gut microbiota
proﬁle of mice. Henao-Mejia, J.; Elinav, E.; Jin, C.; Hao, L.; Mehal, W.Z.; Strowig, T.; Thaiss, C.A.; Kau, A.L.; Eisenbarth, S.C.;
Jurczak, M.J.; et al. Ma, D.; Wang, A.C.; Parikh, I.; Green, S.J.; Hoﬀman, J.D.; Chlipala, G.; Murphy, M.P.; Sokola, B.S.; Bauer, B.;
Hartz, A.M.S.; et al. Ketogenic diet enhances neurovascular function with altered gut microbiome in young
healthy mice. Academic Press: New York, NY, USA, 1988; pp. Spencer, M.D.; Hamp, T.J.; Reid, R.W.; Fischer, L.M.; Zeisel, S.H.; Fodor, A.A. Association between
composition of the human gastrointestinal microbiome and development of fatty liver with choline deﬁciency.