Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

2 of 49

is diet, an element which we can control. Long-term consumption of this diet not only improved
the microbial proﬁle and actions of the gut inhabitants in obese men but also generated physiological
improvements in terms of metabolism [4,5]. In terms of feeding our gut microbiota “long-term” healthy
dietary patterns appear to be the key since short term dietary interventions of this nature have minimal,
if any, impact on microbiota diversity levels [6,7].

Interventions involving probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and dietary ﬁbre also oﬀer opportunities
to “fertilize” our microbiota. It is speculated that the increase in
butyrate-producing microorganisms in T1 could increase immunoregulatory T regulatory (T-reg) cells
which may be involved in reducing maternal rejection of the foetal allograft [22]. Interestingly, no
correlations were found between the speciﬁc OTU abundance and the use of antibiotics, probiotics,
diet, previous pregnancies or health markers [21]. The results revealed that T1 microbial diversity is
similar to the microbial diversity observed in non-pregnant women while T3 microbial diversity is
aberrant and persists for one month postpartum. Despite the
apparent success of synbiotics in this small number of studies, a drawback of synbiotics is the diﬃculty
predicting selectivity and speciﬁcity and the subsequent mechanisms of action; thus, future studies
should focus on unravelling how each component in the mixture, and the mixture as a whole, exerts its
(cooperative) eﬀects [79].

Caesarean section has been shown to inﬂuence the development and composition of the gut
microbiota. However, we now know that quality of diet, speciﬁc dietary components and
supplements can aid in the treatment or prevention of depression, anxiety and stress symptoms [175].
Opie et al. [ lactis

Overweight and obese
adults

6 months

— Lowered fat mass
— Improved some blood

parameters related to liver
function and inﬂammation

— Lowered body fat mass and

percent body fat

— Decreased triglyceride levels
and improved bHDL
cholesterol from baseline

— Controlled body fat mass and
reduced weight circumference
and food intake
— Lowered circulating
zonulin levels

[201]

[202]

[203]

[204]

L. gasseri
BNR17

Systematic review of
human studies

-

— Reduced weight gain

aBMI, body mass index; bHDL, high density lipoprotein. 212] used a
combination of culturomics and metagenomics to analyse the stool samples of healthy children and
kwashiorkor patients to identify potential probiotics to treat SAM. However, twelve weeks of oligofructose consumption at the same quantity
in obese and overweight children, aged 7–11 years (8 g prebiotic/day) and aged 12–18 years (15 g/day)
in a double-blind placebo-controlled trial had no impact on body weight and body fat [215].

Consumption of inulin-type fructans by obese women at 16 g/day for 3 months led to gut
microbiota changes which included an increase in Biﬁdobacterium and F. prausnitzii, both of which
negatively correlated with serum lipopolysaccharides [216] The prebiotic also decreased Bacteroides
intestinalis, Bac. The studies discussed in this section are summarized in
Table 3. 240] reported that baseline microbiota of non-responders (in terms
of gut microbiota changes) was characterised by average abundances of two Firmicutes species,
Eubacterium ruminantium and Clostridium felsineum, which were present at very low or very high
baseline abundances in responders. Company (Website)

Method (as Indicated on
Website)

Output for Consumer

Biohm
(biohmhealth.com)

Sequences genes of
bacteria and fungi at
genus and species level

Consumer receives a grade of microbiome diversity, a comparison of all six major
bacterial communities and four major fungal communities to normal levels and a
strain by strain analysis of bacterial and fungal communities. Guidelines for Evaluating the Scientiﬁc Validity of Evidence for Providing Personalised
Microbiome-Based Dietary Advice

As noted in the previous section, there are risks associated with the rapid commercialisation of
microbiome testing including inconsistencies in results between laboratories as well as over-extrapolation of

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

32 of 49

results on the side of the service provider and over-interpretation of results on the side of the consumer. The requirements for clinical utility, on the other hand, may be harder to fulﬁl as it has strict criteria
in the medical sense, demanding strong evidence that a given therapy ‘will lead to an improved health
outcome’ [264,265]. A caveat is that deﬁning an ‘improved health outcome’ due to microbiome-based
advice in a generally healthy person is very hard. Zeevi, D.; Korem, T.; Zmora, N.; Israeli, D.; Rothschild, D.; Weinberger, A.; Ben-Yacov, O.; Lador, D.;
Avnit-Sagi, T.; Lotan-Pompan, M.; et al. Dotterud, C.K.; Avershina, E.; Sekelja, M.; Simpson, M.R.; Knut, R.; Storrø, O.; Johnsen, R.; Øien, T.
Does maternal perinatal probiotic supplementation alter the intestinal microbiota of mother and child? The Propre-Save study: Eﬀects of probiotics and prebiotics alone or combined on necrotizing
enterocolitis in very low birth weight infants. Liu, Y.; Qin, S.; Song, Y.; Feng, Y.; Lv, N.; Xue, Y.; Liu, F.; Wang, S.; Zhu, B.; Ma, J.; et al. Cruz-Jentoft, A.J.; Baeyens, J.P.; Bauer, J.M.; Boirie, Y.; Cederholm, T.; Landi, F.; Martin, F.C.; Michel, J.P.;
Rolland, Y.; Schneider, S.M.; et al. Siddharth, J.; Chakrabarti, A.; Pannerec, A.; Karaz, S.; Morin-Rivron, D.; Masoodi, M.; Feige, J.N.;
Parkinson, S.J. Aging and sarcopenia associate with speciﬁc interactions between gut microbes, serum
biomarkers and host physiology in rats. Biﬁdobacterium biﬁdum G9-1, and Bifdobacterium longum
MM-2 ingestion induces a less inﬂammatory cytokine proﬁle and a potentially beneﬁcial shift in gut
J. Am. Salazar, N.; Arboleya, S.; Valdes, L.; Stanton, C.; Ross, P.; Ruiz, L.; Gueimonde, M.; de los Reyes-Gavilan, C.G.
The human intestinal microbiome at extreme ages of life. Kato-Kataoka, A.; Nishida, K.; Takada, M.; Suda, K.; Kawai, M.; Shimizu, K.; Kushiro, A.; Hoshi, R.;
Watanabe, O.; Igarashi, T.; et al. Available online: http:
//www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight (accessed on 15 December 2019). CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

47 of 49

229. Gut microbiota richness promotes its stability upon increased dietary ﬁbre intake in
healthy adults. Kopf, J.C.; Suhr, M.J.; Clarke, J.; Eyun, S.; Riethoven, J.-J.M.; Ramer-Tait, A.E.; Rose, D.J. Role of whole grains
versus fruits and vegetables in reducing subclinical inﬂammation and promoting gastrointestinal health
in individuals aﬀected by overweight and obesity: A randomized controlled trial.