Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

2 of 49

is diet, an element which we can control. It is speculated that the increase in
butyrate-producing microorganisms in T1 could increase immunoregulatory T regulatory (T-reg) cells
which may be involved in reducing maternal rejection of the foetal allograft [22]. Interestingly, no
correlations were found between the speciﬁc OTU abundance and the use of antibiotics, probiotics,
diet, previous pregnancies or health markers [21]. The results revealed that T1 microbial diversity is
similar to the microbial diversity observed in non-pregnant women while T3 microbial diversity is
aberrant and persists for one month postpartum. More recently, probiotic supplementation (L. rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium animalis ssp. However, in the case of both observations, causality
could not be established. In order to gain widespread acceptance, Aceti et al. [ However, in order to incite greater conﬁdence
in both the medical profession and the public in general there is a need for large cohort, possibly
multi-centre randomized controlled trials that focus on speciﬁc prebiotics, probiotics and synbiotics
which assess their impacts and modes of action on the gut microbiota, infant health and wellness and
the long-term outcomes for these parameters. Sarcopenia is described as depletion of muscle mass and reduction of muscle
performance which both result from anabolic resistance or boosted protein catabolism [101]. It is
distinct from frailty although the two may overlap [102]. To date, there have been no studies in humans
investigating the microbiome of sarcopenic individuals; however, Siddharth et al. [ Probiotic consumption in the elderly cohort has been shown to improve certain immune parameters
as well as beneﬁcially modulating the intestinal microbiota. A multi-strain probiotic/
prebiotic antioxidant intervention for 12 weeks in recreational athletes prior to a long-distance
triathlon was shown to reduce plasma endotoxin unit levels and maintain intestinal permeability [167].
Gastrointestinal symptoms such as cramping, diarrhoea, nausea and abdominal pain etc. Since some of
the participants in this trial were receiving medication for diabetes, hypertension or hyperlipidemia,
another randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was recently performed with B-3 involving
80 pre-obese adults (25 ≤ BMI < 30) without any disorders [202]. While fat area signiﬁcantly increased
in the placebo group at weeks 4 and 8, no changes were observed in the B-3 group. However, twelve weeks of oligofructose consumption at the same quantity
in obese and overweight children, aged 7–11 years (8 g prebiotic/day) and aged 12–18 years (15 g/day)
in a double-blind placebo-controlled trial had no impact on body weight and body fat [215].

Consumption of inulin-type fructans by obese women at 16 g/day for 3 months led to gut
microbiota changes which included an increase in Biﬁdobacterium and F. prausnitzii, both of which
negatively correlated with serum lipopolysaccharides [216] The prebiotic also decreased Bacteroides
intestinalis, Bac. The studies discussed in this section are summarized in
Table 3. 240] reported that baseline microbiota of non-responders (in terms
of gut microbiota changes) was characterised by average abundances of two Firmicutes species,
Eubacterium ruminantium and Clostridium felsineum, which were present at very low or very high
baseline abundances in responders. In a randomized controlled
trial investigating the impact of increased intake of whole grains versus fruits and vegetables on the
gut microbiota in obese and overweight individuals, Kopf et al. [ Placing the AMER communities into a model

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

26 of 49

meta-community composed of several CRON communities resulted in the dispersal of microorganisms
between the coprophagic animals which enhanced the reconﬁguration of the AMER microbiota in
response to the CRON diet and resulted in changes in host metabolic features, all driven by an inﬂux of
CRON dietary practice-associated taxa. Many companies provide easy-to-understand, detailed reports regarding gut microbiota diversity,
microbial members including beneﬁcial and pathogenic microorganisms which inﬂuence health and
disease, a comparison of the individual’s gut microbiome to other participants, and personalised dietary,
supplemental and lifestyle advice. Consumer receives
personalized dietary, lifestyle and supplemental recommendations. While the analysis is capable of providing an insight
into the necessary dietary recommendations to achieve a ‘healthy’ gut microbiome, one must question
the utility of this information at present given that we have yet to deﬁne a universal ‘healthy’ gut
microbiome, which may not be possible given the suspected level of speciﬁcity that can be associated
with an individual’s ‘healthy’ gut. For more detail on the deﬁnition and use of each probability

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

33 of 49

term, study design and quality, biological plausibility as well as examples of the type criteria that can
be used to assess gene/microbiome x diet interactions, please refer to Grimaldi et al. [ (i) Study Design and Quality
Considerations:
Type of microbe/diet/outcome interaction
•

•

A relatively “simple” interaction with a single strain of bacteria, measuring the outcome (e.g., glucose
response) over a number of weeks can give more conﬁdence of “cause and eﬀect.” Funding: This research received no external funding. Callaway, L.K.; McIntyre, H.D.; Barrett, H.L.; Foxcroft, K.; Tremellen, A.; Lingwood, B.E.; Tobin, J.M.;
Wilkinson, S.; Kothari, A.; Morrison, M.; et al. Dotterud, C.K.; Avershina, E.; Sekelja, M.; Simpson, M.R.; Knut, R.; Storrø, O.; Johnsen, R.; Øien, T.
Does maternal perinatal probiotic supplementation alter the intestinal microbiota of mother and child? Taghipour, S.; Nikniaz, L.; Mahavi, R.; Ostadrahimi, A.; Nikniaz, Z. Synbiotic supplementation is not eﬀective
on breast milk selemium concentrations and growth of exclusively breast fed infants: A pilot study. Arboleya, S.; Sánchez, B.; Milani, C.; Duranti, S.; Solís, G.; Fernández, N.; Clara, G.; Ventura, M.; Margolles, A.;
Gueimonde, M. Intestinal microbiota development in preterm neonates and eﬀect of perinatal antibiotics. Intestinal dysbiosis in preterm infants preceding necrotizing enterocolitis: A systematic
review and metaanalysis. Liu, Y.; Qin, S.; Song, Y.; Feng, Y.; Lv, N.; Xue, Y.; Liu, F.; Wang, S.; Zhu, B.; Ma, J.; et al. Siddharth, J.; Chakrabarti, A.; Pannerec, A.; Karaz, S.; Morin-Rivron, D.; Masoodi, M.; Feige, J.N.;
Parkinson, S.J. Aging and sarcopenia associate with speciﬁc interactions between gut microbes, serum
biomarkers and host physiology in rats. Providing Healthy and Safe Foods as We Age: Workshop Summary; National Academies
Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2010. Biﬁdobacterium biﬁdum G9-1, and Bifdobacterium longum
MM-2 ingestion induces a less inﬂammatory cytokine proﬁle and a potentially beneﬁcial shift in gut
J. Am. microbiota in older adults: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover, study. Mental Health Foundation: London, UK, 2018. Taylor, A.M.; Thompson, S.V.; Edwards, C.G.; Musaad, S.M.A.; Khan, N.A.; Holscher, H.D. Associations
among diet, the gastrointestinal microbiota, and negative emotional states in adults. Galley, J.D.; Yu, Z.; Kumar, P.; Dowd, S.E.; Lyte, M.; Bailey, M.T. The structures of the colonic mucosa-associated
and luminal microbial communities are distinct and diﬀerentially aﬀected by a prolonged murine stressor. Kato-Kataoka, A.; Nishida, K.; Takada, M.; Suda, K.; Kawai, M.; Shimizu, K.; Kushiro, A.; Hoshi, R.;
Watanabe, O.; Igarashi, T.; et al. World Health Organisation Fact Sheet on Obesity and Overweight. Available online: http:
//www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight (accessed on 15 December 2019). Gomez-Arango, L.F.; Barrett, H.L.; Wilkinson, S.A.; Callaway, L.K.; McIntyre, H.D.; Morrison, M.; Dekker
Nitert, M. Low dietary ﬁbre intake increase Collinsella abundance in the gut microbiota of overweight and
obese pregnant women. CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

47 of 49

229. Tap, J.; Furet, J.-P.; Bensaada, M.; Philippe, C.; Roth, H.; Rabot, S.; Lakhdari, O.; Lombard, V.; Henrissat, B.;
Corthier, G.; et al. Gut microbiota richness promotes its stability upon increased dietary ﬁbre intake in
healthy adults.