The gut microbiota serves the host by interacting directly or indirectly with host cells, the latter of
which comes about through microbially-produced bioactive molecules, thus the microbiota is capable
of regulating numerous biological pathways involved in immunity and energy homeostasis, while also
protecting the host against pathogens through colonisation resistance. Increasing age was also associated with a decrease in the abundance of microbiome-encoded genes
and pathways associated with vitamin B, a nitrogenous base and essential amino acid production..

Interestingly, the centenarian microbiota has been shown to signiﬁcantly diﬀer from
that of young adults  being
characterised by an enrichment in facultative anaerobes, mainly pathobionts, and a rearrangement in the
Firmicutes population with a marked decrease in symbiotic species associated with anti-inﬂammatory
properties e.g., F. prausnitzii and relatives. also
reported a rearrangement in Firmicutes in Italian centenarians  which was not observed
in 70-year-old subjects. Indeed, we have already seen that an animal-based diet high in
fat and protein alters the gut microbiota resulting in an increase in the abundance of bile-tolerant
microorganisms, such as Bilophila, Alistipes and Bacteroides and long-term consumption selects for
a Bacteroides enterotype directly investigated if typically consumed
dietary fatty acids alone could sustain the growth of the human gut microbiota using an in vitro
multi-vessel simulator system of the human small intestine. In a more recent study, the same group investigated
the eﬀect of extra virgin olive oil on mouse gut microbiota compared to butter using more in-depth
analysis  Highest levels of systolic blood pressure were recorded for mice fed butter which
correlated positively with Desulfovibrio sequences in faeces, which were signiﬁcantly higher in mice fed
butter compared to olive oil. The gut microbiota changes
observed by Olson et al. Principal component
analysis revealed distinct microbiota on days 7 and 14, whereby the soy protein group was separate
from the meat and casein groups  In another similar study, soy protein was associated with
increased faecal SCFAs in rats compared to rats fed white meat, red meat or casein  The soy group
also had a higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which are the major propionate and
other SCFA producers  Lactobacillus, a genus known for its beneﬁcial eﬀects was increased in the
gut microbiota by ingestion of meat proteins. At the species level, resistant starch
type 4 increased Bif. This interindividual variation was also reported by Venkataraman et al.