it

Introduction
Asthma is a common chronic disorder during pregnancy, affecting between 8% and 13% of pregnant
women [1];
is often a comorbid condition with food and environmental allergies [2]. Asthma
exacerbation rates during pregnancy are high [3], and more severe asthma or poor symptom control have
been associated with low birthweight [4–7]. A greater risk for childhood asthma following uncontrolled
versus controlled maternal asthma during pregnancy has been reported [8]. These variations in risk to the
offspring point to a potential in utero influence of maternal asthma. Written informed
consent was obtained from all mothers. Hospital birth records
provided data on mode of delivery, sex and infant exposures during birth. Any
treatment for asthma, as indicated by hospitalisation, a physician’s visit or medication use, has been
validated as a measure for asthma morbidity during pregnancy [22]. The 12-month assessment period of
included the time just prior to conception. Faecal samples were
then transported to the laboratory in a cooler, where they were divided into aliquots and stored at −80°C
prior to DNA extraction and sequencing. The sequences were then quality filtered by removing reads having more than 10 sites with
a Phred quality score less than 20. The metrics of OTU (microbial) relative
abundance and diversity (Shannon and Simpson diversity indices, Chao1 species richness index) were
generated in QIIME to profile infant gut microbiota in individual faecal samples. With the
exception of Firmicutes being less abundant in female infants born to women with asthma ( p=0.03), no
other differences were evident in phylum abundance, microbial richness or diversity between infants born
to women with versus those without prenatal asthma (supplementary figure S1, supplementary table S1). Comparisons were performed
using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. The false discovery rate (FDR) was used to adjust p-values for multiple
testing and crude p-values <FDR p-values are indicated by “#”. The p-values <0.1 are reported and
p-values <0.05 are indicated in bold. ¶: The p-value for the sex interaction term for differences in Megasphera
abundance related to maternal atopic asthma was 0.14 (ART test). https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00280-2017

5

ASTHMA | P.T. KOLEVA ET AL. Unclassified Megasphera species (LDA score 3.34, p=0.003) were
comparatively less abundant and Bacteroides fragilis (LDA 3.29, p=0.02) were more abundant in female
Caucasian infants born to mothers with atopic asthma. Infants of mothers with asthma harboured fewer lactobacilli in their gut microbiota, especially if

https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00280-2017

6

ASTHMA | P.T. KOLEVA ET AL. restricted to Caucasian infants; +: comparison of Lactobacillus was the
primary hypothesis. OR: odds ratio; aOR: adjusted odds ratio; CI: confidence interval. While no prior evidence exists for maternal prenatal asthma,
these findings are compatible with the reduced Lactobacillales abundance observed in the meconium of
newborns of mothers with eczema, and lower faecal colonisation with Lactobacillus species in infants of
atopic parents [14, 28]. In our study, male infants born to mothers with prenatal asthma were one-third
(aOR 0.26, 95% CI: 0.07–0.89) as likely to be colonised with high levels of lactobacilli, independent of
maternal overweight or atopy status, birth mode or infant diet. These associations were not present in
female offspring. Further,
amniotic fluid are capable of modulating expression of toll-like receptor genes in the fetal gut [37]. In our
study, the reduction in Lactobacillus abundance was most apparent among infants whose mothers had
asthma and overweight or a history of allergies. Both
Megasphaera and Bacteroidaceae microbes produce propionate, but under opposing conditions. A.L. Kozyrskyj conceived the study and obtained funding, designed the analyses and wrote the final
version of the manuscript. Under the supervision of J.A. Scott, T. Konya
conducted DNA extraction and sample preparation for sequencing in the laboratory of D. Guttman. Pali-Scholl I, Motala C, Jensen-Jarolim E. Asthma and allergic diseases in pregnancy: a review. Maternal and neonatal outcomes of pregnancies complicated by asthma in an
Australian population. Stensballe LG, Simonsen J, Jensen SM, et al. Use of antibiotics during pregnancy increases the risk of asthma in
early childhood. Koren O, Goodrich JK, Cullender TC, et al. Host remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes
during pregnancy. Neonatal adiposity increases the risk of atopic dermatitis

during the first year of life. The Canadian Healthy Infant Longitudinal Development (CHILD) birth
cohort study: assessment of environmental exposures. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003; 112: 283–288. Bokulich NA, Subramanian S, Faith JJ, et al. Quality-filtering vastly improves diversity estimates from Illumina
amplicon sequencing. Banjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple
testing. Novel developmental analyses identify longitudinal patterns of early gut

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

microbiota that affect infant growth. Rautava S, Collado MC, Salminen S, et al. Gut microbiota and allergic disease in children. Lactate-utilizing bacteria, isolated from human feces, that produce butyrate as a

major fermentation product. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2014; 59: 78–88. Intestinal microbiota of 6-week-old infants across Europe: geographic influence
beyond delivery mode, breast-feeding, and antibiotics.