it

Introduction
Asthma is a common chronic disorder during pregnancy, affecting between 8% and 13% of pregnant
women [1];
is often a comorbid condition with food and environmental allergies [2]. Asthma
exacerbation rates during pregnancy are high [3], and more severe asthma or poor symptom control have
been associated with low birthweight [4–7]. A greater risk for childhood asthma following uncontrolled
versus controlled maternal asthma during pregnancy has been reported [8]. These variations in risk to the
offspring point to a potential in utero influence of maternal asthma. Written informed
consent was obtained from all mothers. Parents were instructed to refrigerate
soiled diapers prior to retrieval by a CHILD research assistant during a home visit. Although the hypothesis regarding lactobacilli was a priori, the
Benjamini–Hochberg method to adjust p-values for the false discovery rate (FDR, where p<FDR p) was
applied to analyses for all bacterial taxa with the SAS multi-test procedure [25]. As gut microbiome
differences have been reported between European/North American and Asian populations [26], analyses
were restricted to mothers of Caucasian ethnicity. Prenatal
maternal asthma was not differentially distributed by infant sex or ethnicity, birth mode, early term birth,
birthweight, breastfeeding status, maternal pre-pregnancy weight and maternal
intrapartum antibiotic
treatment (table 1); it tended to be higher in both the lowest and highest infant weight gain tertiles. No differences in gut

https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00280-2017

3

ASTHMA | P.T. KOLEVA ET AL. Comparisons were performed
using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. The p-values <0.1 are reported and
p-values <0.05 are indicated in bold. ¶: The p-value for the sex interaction term for differences in Megasphera
abundance related to maternal atopic asthma was 0.14 (ART test). Unclassified Megasphera species (LDA score 3.34, p=0.003) were
comparatively less abundant and Bacteroides fragilis (LDA 3.29, p=0.02) were more abundant in female
Caucasian infants born to mothers with atopic asthma. OR: odds ratio; aOR: adjusted odds ratio; CI: confidence interval. While no prior evidence exists for maternal prenatal asthma,
these findings are compatible with the reduced Lactobacillales abundance observed in the meconium of
newborns of mothers with eczema, and lower faecal colonisation with Lactobacillus species in infants of
atopic parents [14, 28]. In our study, male infants born to mothers with prenatal asthma were one-third
(aOR 0.26, 95% CI: 0.07–0.89) as likely to be colonised with high levels of lactobacilli, independent of
maternal overweight or atopy status, birth mode or infant diet. We thank Sarah Bridgman for her assistance in formatting the final version of the manuscript and Konstantin
Shestopaloff for completing the ART tests. Maternal and neonatal outcomes of pregnancies complicated by asthma in an
Australian population. Stensballe LG, Simonsen J, Jensen SM, et al. Koren O, Goodrich JK, Cullender TC, et al. Host remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes
during pregnancy. Meconium microbiota types dominated by lactic acid or enteric bacteria are
differentially associated with maternal eczema and respiratory problems in infants. The Canadian Healthy Infant Longitudinal Development (CHILD) birth
cohort study: assessment of environmental exposures. Bokulich NA, Subramanian S, Faith JJ, et al. Role of Lactobacillus species in the intermediate vaginal flora in early
pregnancy: a retrospective cohort study. Rautava S, Collado MC, Salminen S, et al. Ann Allergy Asthma
Immunol 2016; 116: 99–105. Maternal obesity in pregnancy, gestational weight gain, and risk of
childhood asthma. Regulation of short-chain fatty acid production. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2005; 71: 3692–3700.