Step 1: Study design and experimental protocol, the importance of this step is 
often  underestimated  in  metagenomics. The steps involved in the design of hypothesis-based studies are outlined in Supplementary Figure 1 with 
specific  recommendations  summarized  in  Supplementary  Box  1. Controls are also important but it can be difficult to obtain representative samples from a suitable control 
group,  particularly  when  studying  environments  such  as  humans,  in  which  the  resident  microbial 
communities  are  influenced,  to  a  different  extent,  by  factors  such  as  host  genotype  19,  age,  diet  and 
environmental  surroundings  20. Exclusion of  samples that may be  confounded by an 
unwanted  variable  is  also  prudent. Indeed variations in sample processing protocols can also be important 
confounders in meta-analyses  of  datasets from different studies  (Supplementary  Box  1).  Places genomic data within its correct phylogenetic context.  Expensive equipment, requiring specialist operators. the reference sequences used to design the probes 

 Genome  coverage  of  targeted  organisms  can  be  uneven, 

affecting assemblies 

 Requires intact cells.  Functional data can improve metagenomics annotations. Immunomagnetic 
separation  127 

as 
diagnostics 

 By  focusing  only  on  species  of  interest,  higher sensitivity  can  be 
achieved particularly when large amounts of host contamination 
are present 

 Targeted approach - can enrich specific taxa, including those that 
might be comparatively rare members of the microbial community 
less  expensive  than  many  other  targeted  enrichment 

 Far 

techniques such as single cell genomics or flow sorting. The raw data is available at http://metagexample.s3.climb.ac.uk/Reads.tar.gz. The diversity of reference genomes available for some sample types, such as 
from the human gut 73, is now extensive enough to make assembly-free taxonomic profiling efficient and 
successful, including for comparatively low abundance microbes that lack sufficient sequence coverage and 
depth to enable the assembly of their genome. Profiling of the functional classes present in a metagenome is hindered by the lack of validated annotations for most genes, an issue 
that  can  be  mitigated  only  by  expensive  and  low-throughput  gene-specific  functional  studies. The simple brute force mapping of reads to genomes 
can  result  in  profiles  with  many  false  positives  but,  nonetheless,  this  approach  has  been  proven  to  be 
effective  when  the  output  is  post-processed  based  on  lowest  common  ancestor  (LCA)  strategies  81  or 
coupled with compositional interpolated Markov models  82. Taxonomic profiling by selecting representative or discriminative genes (markers) from available reference 
sequences is another fast and accurate assembly-free approach that has been implemented with several 
variations. By looking at co-abundant markers from pre-assembled environment specific gene catalogs 84,85, 
for example, the MetaHIT consortium was able to characterize known and novel organisms in the human 
gut 5,75. Metagenomic  assembly  is  the  preferred  theoretical 
solution if there is sufficient genome coverage (i.e. >20x), but this level of coverage is difficult to obtain for 
most  of  the  members  of  the  microbiome  (Table  4)  and  assembly-free  methods  have  other  advantages 

including the possibility to perform large-scale strain-level analyses. Mixtures of strains from the same species in a single 
sample cannot be resolved by consensus approaches, but if the same strains are present in multiple samples 
there will  be characteristic signatures in single nucleotide variations. NS  is  supported  by  the 
European  Research  Council  (ERC-STG  project  MetaPG),  European  Union  FP7  Marie-Curie  grant  (PCIG13-
618833), MIUR grant FIR RBFR13EWWI, Fondazione Caritro grant Rif. Solution: 
Current best practice is to collect as much metadata about each of the study groups as possible and factor these into the subsequent analyses 
when comparing groups. Structure  and  function  of  the  global  ocean 
microbiome. Complete  nitrification  by  a  single  microorganism. Unlocking the potential of metagenomics through replicated experimental 
design. Probst, A. J., Weinmaier, T., DeSantis, T. Z., Santo Domingo, J. W. & Ashbolt, N. New 
perspectives on microbial community distortion after whole-genome amplification. 33 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

40 

41 

42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

47 

Tanner,  M.  A.,  Goebel,  B.  M.,  Dojka,  M.  A.  &  Pace,  N.  R.  Specific  ribosomal  DNA 
sequences from diverse environmental settings correlate with experimental contaminants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109, 
13272-13277 (2012). Li, D., Liu, C. M., Luo, R., Sadakane, K. & Lam, T. W. MEGAHIT: an ultra-fast single-node 
solution  for  large  and  complex  metagenomics  assembly  via  succinct  de  Bruijn  graph. Kelley,  D.  R.  &  Salzberg,  S.  L.  Clustering  metagenomic  sequences  with  interpolated 
Markov models. Growth dynamics of gut microbiota in health and disease inferred from 
single  metagenomic  samples. Computational meta'omics for microbial community studies. Identification  and  assembly  of  genomes  and  genetic  elements  in 
complex  metagenomic  samples  without  using  reference  genomes. Nat Biotechnol 33, 1103-1108, 
doi:10.1038/nbt.3353 (2015). Metagenomic species profiling using universal phylogenetic marker 
genes. An integrated catalog of reference genes in the human gut microbiome. Data,  information,  knowledge  and  principle:  back  to  metabolism  in 
KEGG. PLoS 
computational biology 8, e1002606 (2012). 107  White,  J.  R.,  Nagarajan,  N.  &  Pop,  M.  Statistical  methods  for  detecting  differentially 
abundant  features  in  clinical  metagenomic  samples. Nat Methods, doi:10.1038/nmeth.3802 (2016). Generating whole bacterial genome sequences of low-abundance 

species from complex samples with IMS-MDA. Journal  of  visualized  experiments:  JoVE 
(2014). The  effect  of  DNA  extraction  methodology  on  gut  microbiota 
research  applications.