Round and Mazmanian

Page 2

and anti-inflammatory responses, and balances in the community structure of gut bacteria
may be intimately linked to the proper function of the immune system. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14. FOXP3 is a transcription factor believed to be the ‘master
regulator’ of TReg cells, and its absence results in massive multi-organ lymphoproliferative
disease34. Additionally, animals in which the
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 has been specifically ablated from CD4+FOXP3+ T cells
succumb to inflammatory disease of the intestine (as well as skin and lung), but show no
signs of autoimmunity. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 5

Recent evidence has begun to reveal mechanisms of intestinal immune modulation by the
microbiota. Supporting this, another study reported lower expression of the Foxp3 transcript in
CD4+CD62L− T cells from germfree mice.43. The only
organism reported to be strongly associated with Crohn's disease is adherent-invasive E.coli
(AIEC)61. More recently, in a model of
pathogen-induced inflammation, treatment of mice with Bifidobacteria infantis led to a
downregulation of intestinal inflammation and increases in the number of CD4+CD25+ TReg
cells78. The specific molecules made by these
particular bacterial species that guide immune responses remain unknown; however current
data support the idea that symbiotic organisms actively communicate with the host immune
system to modulate anti-inflammatory processes. These data have identified a single molecule made by a
symbiotic microorganism that stimulates CD4+ T cells to make IL-10, required for the
suppression of the inflammatory process during colitis, and suggest that other beneficial
bacteria may produce factors that can positively shape the host immune response during
IBD. As symbiotic bacteria seem to have
evolved mechanisms to promote protection from pathobionts found in the same microbiota,
does disease result from the absence of specific organisms and their beneficial molecules? It has been shown in
animal models and some human studies that deficiencies in TReg-cell populations or
function underlie asthma, IBD, rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes and multiple sclerosis89. After millions of years of
co-evolution with our microbial partners, have societal advances paradoxically affected
human health adversely by reducing our exposure to health-promoting bacteria? Work in the laboratory of the authors is supported by funding from the National Institutes of Health,
Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation and the Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America to S.K.M.

Sarkis K. Mazmanian: Sarkis K. Mazmanian is an assistant professor in the Division of
Biology at the California Institute of Technology. From the Latin, com mensa, meaning to ‘share a table’. Lymphoid structures and aggregates associated with the intestinal
mucosa, specifically the tonsils, Peyer's patches, lymphoid follicles,
appendix or cecal patch and mesenteric lymph nodes. They occur massed together on the intestinal wall,
opposite the line of attachment of the mesentery. A chronic disease characterized by inflammation of the mucosa and
sub-mucosa of the large intestine

(TReg cell). A mixture of bacteria consisting of four strains of Lactobacillus (L.
casei, L. plantarum, L. acidophilus, and L. delbrueckii subsp. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 1998;
62:1157–70. [ Abrams GD, Bauer H, Sprinz H. Influence of the normal flora on mucosal morphology and cellular

renewal in the ileum. I. Antagonism by
human normal flora components in gnotobiotic mice. The current future understanding of inflammatory bowel disease. Microbial influences in inflammatory bowel diseases. Influence of intestinal bacteria on induction of regulatory T cells: lessons from a

transfer model of colitis. Kent TH, Summers RW, DenBesten L, Swaner JC, Hrouda M. Effect of antibiotics on bacterial
flora of rats with intestinal blind loops. Role of intestinal microflora in chronic inflammation and ulceration of the rat

colon. Culture-independent analyses of temporal
variation of the dominant fecal microbiota and targeted bacterial subgroups in Crohn's disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;
105:16731–6. [ PubMed: 18936492] [These authors identify that the bacterium F. prausnitzii is
specifically reduced within the intestine of Crohns patients. Generation of antigen-specific, Foxp3-expressing CD4+ regulatory T cells by

inhibition of APC proteosome function. Bjorksten B. The environmental influence on childhood asthma. TGF-beta-induced Foxp3 inhibits T(H)17 cell differentiation by antagonizing

RORgammat function. Palmer C, Bik EM, Digiulio DB, Relman DA, Brown PO. Development of the Human Infant

Intestinal Microbiota. Peterson DA, McNulty NP, Guruge JL, Gordon JI. The discovery that symbiotic bacteria direct the function of a specialized
mucosal DC population that induces IgA class switching also implicates the microbiota
in having evolved defined mechanisms to direct immune responses103. Further, IgA
responses were recently shown to be involved in maintaining host-bacterial mutualism by
limiting innate immune responses to a model gut symbiont104. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 21

Figure 1. IL-10 is required
to suppress the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (such as IL-17, IL-23 and tumour-
necrosis factor (TNF) induced by H. hepaticus during experimental colitis. Studies have demonstrated the
ability of inflammation alone to influence the composition of the microbiota, potentially in
favor of pathobionts.