Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

and react to form a response, and understanding how these
responses combine to affect human health. The USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. Identifying the appropriate con-
trol is challenging with diet interventions that are designed
with whole foods, as a true placebo diet is not possible. Choetal.(2017)

ornormalization)andNR(nochange)
Changeincalprotectin:R(decrease∼10-fold

Calprotectin

Intervention

controls;32receivedmedication)
Humans(68childrenwithIBDand26

anti-TNF-αmedication

Kolhoetal.(2015)

meaningfulimprovement)andNR<50. 2018) (20)

Microbiota composition and function

Association

(metagenomics)

Kovatcheva-Datchary
et al. ( 2015) (65) Microbiota composition (16S, metagenomics) and

Association

Paired t-tests

Veiga et al. ( 2011) (61)

Microbiome composition (T-RFLP 16S, qPCR)

Association

Student’s t-test

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

Association and prediction studies share the above
methods of conducting the study and preparing the gut
microbiome data. It is important
to note that these goals (association and prediction) are
not mutually exclusive and several methods may be utilized
within the same study to address different scientific goals
and analyze different parts of the data set. Additional
references are given as needed. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test is used
to determine if the median of the differences between paired
responses is different from zero (e.g. within individuals). When a study moves towards the analysis phase of bringing
together microbiome, diet, and metabolic response, there
are 2 steps in the process towards development of preci-
sion nutrition recommendations: 1) identifying associations
between microbiome features and dietary responsiveness
and 2) predicting and validating individuals’ response to
dietary interventions and/or advice (Figure 4). Gut microbiome and precision nutrition: Part I 17

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

when data are highly skewed. Dimension reduction and clustering methods in associa-
tion studies. RDA extends multiple linear
regression by summarizing the linear relations between mul-
tiple dependent variables and multiple independent variables
in a matrix, which is then incorporated into PCA. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) (125, 126) is similar
to PCA/PCoA. However, in LDA, the groups of interest
are known a priori and the axes represent
the linear
combinations of the measurements that best describe the
separation between the groups. This
strategy has been utilized to investigate gut microbiome
communities from humans (9, 59) and isolated strains (10)
to determine the effect that differences in these taxa or
communities have on the production of metabolites and
fermentation of compounds. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2018;6(5):416–26. Kong LC, Wuillemin PH, Bastard JP, Sokolovska N, Gougis S, Fellahi S,
Darakhshan F, Bonnefont-Rousselot D, Bittar R, Dore J, et al. Prior dietary practices and connections
to a human gut microbial metacommunity alter responses to diet
interventions. Impact of
diet and individual variation on intestinal microbiota composition and
fermentation products in obese men. The capacity of nondigestible carbohydrates
to stimulate fecal bifidobacteria in healthy humans: a double-
blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, dose-response
relation study. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2004;54(3):919–24. Larsen MV, Cosentino S, Rasmussen S, Friis C, Hasman H, Marvig
RL, Jelsbak L, Pontén TS, Ussery DW, Aarestrup FM. Liu Z, Hsiao W, Cantarel BL, Drábek EF, Fraser-Liggett C. Sparse
distance-based learning for simultaneous multiclass classification
and feature
selection of metagenomic data. Morgan XC, Tickle TL, Sokol H, Gevers D, Devaney KL, Ward DV,
Reyes JA, Shah SA, LeLeiko N, Snapper SB. MacQueen J. Some methods for classification and analysis of
multivariate observations.