+34-958-246187
† All the authors are the members of SAMID Network. Vaginal Microbiota

The composition of the vaginal microbiota is dynamic, corresponding with hormonal ﬂuctuations
throughout the woman’s reproductive life, and also during pregnancy. In fact, low risk pregnant women have
more stable vaginal ﬂora throughout the pregnancy than non-pregnant women. Therefore, early pregnancy may be an important environment,
modulating preterm delivery. These authors concluded that there
is more evidence supporting a sterile womb environment. It is important to highlight that emergency C-section and vaginal delivery
labor are frequently accompanied by rupture of fetal membranes, and exposing the fetus to maternal
vaginal bacteria [65].

Importantly, C-section may decrease the colonization of milk-digested bacteria including the
genus Lactobacillus in newborns during the ﬁrst months of life [58]. In addition, the mode of delivery
has a relevant impact on the microbiota composition of colostrums and milk [69,70], which also may
be inﬂuenced by antibiotics administrated during C-section. In addition, DHM favors an intestinal microbiome
more similar to MOM despite the diﬀerences between MOM and DHM [81]. Preterm infants are
prone to develop free radical-associated conditions [82] that may be inﬂuenced by the microbiota. Speciﬁcally, preterm subjects with
severe chorioamnionitis had higher abundance of Ureaplasma parvum, Fusobacterium nucleatum,
and Streptococcus agalactiae [16]. The placental microbiome varies as a consequence of an excess
of gestational weight gain, but is not related to obesity among women with spontaneous preterm
birth. Microbiome in Critical Ill Children

Critical illness itself or its treatment can inﬂuence the composition of microbiota [107,108].
Although broad-spectrum antibiotics are probably the factor which further alters its composition,
other factors can alter the ecosystem in which develops the microbiota, such as enteral or parenteral
feeding, drugs administration, disease co-morbidities, central venous catheters, or intubation and
mechanical ventilation. Funding: This research was funded by the PN I+D+I 2008–2011 (Spain), ISCIII- Sub-Directorate General for
Research Assessment and Promotion and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), RETICS Maternal
and Child Health and Development Network, SAMID Network, Ref. Translational Research Network for Pediatric
Infectious Diseases (RITIP), Madrid, Spain. Host remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes during
pregnancy. CrossRef]
Santacruz, A.; Collado, M.C.; Garcia-Valdes, L.; Segura, M.T.; Martin-Lagos, J.A.; Anjos, T.; Martí-Romero, M.;
Lopez, R.M.; Florido, J.; Campoy, C.; et al. CrossRef]
Shi, Y.C.; Guo, H.; Chen, J.; Sun, G.; Ren, R.R.; Guo, M.Z.; Peng, L.H.; Yang, Y.S. Initial meconium microbiome
in Chinese neonates delivered naturally or by C-section. Gut microbiota of healthy Canadian infants: Proﬁles by mode of delivery
and infant diet at 4 months. CrossRef]

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

17 of 21

77. Parra-Llorca, A.; Gormaz, M.; Lorente-Pozo, S.; Cernada, M.; García-Robles, A.; Torres-Cuevas, I.;
Kuligowski, J.; Collado, M.C.; Serna, E.; Vento, M. Impact of donor human milk in the preterm very
low birth weight gut transcriptome proﬁle by use of exfoliated intestinal cells. Madore, L.S.; Bora, S.; Erdei, C.; Jumani, T.; Dengos, A.R.; Sen, S. Eﬀects of donor breastmilk feeding on
growth and early neurodevelopmental outcomes in preterm infants: An observational study. Toemen, L.; Gishti, O.; van Osch-Gevers, L.; Steegers, E.A.; Helbing, W.A.; Felix, J.F.; Reiss, I.K.; Duijts, L.;
Gaillard, R.; Jaddoe, V.W. Maternal obesity, gestational weight gain and childhood cardiac outcomes: Role of
childhood body mass index. Stewart, C.J.; Embleton, N.D.; Marrs, E.C.L.; Smith, D.P.; Fofanova, T.; Nelson, A. Longitudinal development
of the gut microbiome and metabolome in preterm neonates with late onset sepsis and healthy controls. Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA) 2008 update (in
collaboration with the World Health Organization, GA(2)LEN and AllerGen). Johansson, S.G.; Bieber, T.; Dahl, R.; Friedmann, P.S.; Lanier, B.Q.; Lockey, R.F.; Motala, C.; Ortega Martell, J.A.;
Platts-Mills, T.A.; Ring, J.; et al. Exposure to household furry pets inﬂuences the gut microbiota of infant at 3–4 months
following various birth scenarios. Pettigrew, M.M.; Gent, J.F.; Kong, Y.; Wade, M.; Gansebom, S.; Bramley, A.M.; Jain, S.; Arnold, S.L.;
McCullers, J.A. Association of sputum microbiota proﬁles with severity of community-acquired pneumonia
in children. CrossRef] [PubMed]

© 2020 by the authors.