Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

and react to form a response, and understanding how these
responses combine to affect human health. The USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. Randomized, controlled clinical trials with a standardized
diet are generally considered the “gold standard” (14) in
dietary intervention trials because the potential for con-
founding is minimized and the estimated intervention effect
can be interpreted causally. Identifying the appropriate con-
trol is challenging with diet interventions that are designed
with whole foods, as a true placebo diet is not possible. Choetal.(2017)

ornormalization)andNR(nochange)
Changeincalprotectin:R(decrease∼10-fold

Calprotectin

Intervention

controls;32receivedmedication)
Humans(68childrenwithIBDand26

anti-TNF-αmedication

Kolhoetal.(2015)

meaningfulimprovement)andNR<50. However, although
these methods can be useful for checking the stability of
dominant members and clustering communities according
to these dominant members, they do not provide direct
phylogenetic identification and it is difficult to relate banding
patterns to changes in particular species (83, 84). 2010)

Microbiome composition (16S, DGGE, Bif.-speciﬁc

Association

1-way ANOVA

Martinez et al. ( 2017) (62)

Microbiota composition (16S)

Association

ANOVA

Suez et al. ( 2015) (65) Microbiota composition (16S, metagenomics) and

Association

Paired t-tests

Veiga et al. ( For a more comprehensive

review of such tools, please refer to Mallick et al. ( Log transformation is another commonly used method,
but as it cannot be applied to zeros, this method also
requires that zeros be replaced with small values (i.e. pseu-
docounts). 2016) (64) Microbiota composition (qRT-PCR, 16S)

Association

TABLE 3 (Continued)

Citation

Microbiome measures

Association or
prediction

Statistical methods

Li et al. ( The Wilcoxon signed-rank test is used
to determine if the median of the differences between paired
responses is different from zero (e.g. within individuals). The identification of the Ruminococcus
enterotype is more dependent on clustering and modeling
approaches (97). When a study moves towards the analysis phase of bringing
together microbiome, diet, and metabolic response, there
are 2 steps in the process towards development of preci-
sion nutrition recommendations: 1) identifying associations
between microbiome features and dietary responsiveness
and 2) predicting and validating individuals’ response to
dietary interventions and/or advice (Figure 4). ANOVA analyzes the
differences between group means and can examine the effects
of multiple (categorical) independent variables on a single
(univariate) or multiple (multivariate) dependent variables
(i.e. 2-way, 3-way). Dimension reduction and clustering methods in associa-
tion studies. An important point to remember is that correlation, as
opposed to regression, makes no distinction between the
2 variables being used, meaning that it does not identify one
as the independent/predictor variable and the other as the
dependent/outcome variable. Procrustes analysis, originally developed for
comparing shapes, computes the distances between pairs of
high-dimensional samples after centering and scaling. Generalized linear

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

models extend this idea to other types of dependent variables
such as binary (logistic regression) or count (log regression)
variables. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing. Stochastic gradient boosting regression (122) uses deci-
sion trees on random samples of the data, similar to random
forests. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) (125, 126) is similar
to PCA/PCoA. However, in LDA, the groups of interest
are known a priori and the axes represent
the linear
combinations of the measurements that best describe the
separation between the groups. The use of these methods, as with the methods used in the
association phase, depends on the nature and complexity of
the data as well as the desired format of prediction (i.e. group,
continuous value, etc.). This study also investigated the effect of monocolonization
by taxa, overrepresented in responders (Prevotella copri) and
nonresponders (Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron), and found
differential gene expression in the colonized mice that
altered hepatic glycogen storage, allowing for a mechanistic
understanding of observed differences in glucose metabolism
phenotypes. This
strategy has been utilized to investigate gut microbiome
communities from humans (9, 59) and isolated strains (10)
to determine the effect that differences in these taxa or
communities have on the production of metabolites and
fermentation of compounds. As discussed above, studies investigating the contribution of
the gut microbiota to personalized health and metabolism
differ in what features of the microbiome are highlighted. Cotillard A, Kennedy SP, Kong LC, Prifti E, Pons N, Le Chatelier
E, Almeida M, Quinquis B, Levenez F, Galleron N, et al. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2009;17(10):
1906–15. Akkermansia muciniphila and improved metabolic health during a
dietary intervention in obesity: relationship with gut microbiome
richness and ecology. de Preter V, Vanhoutte T, Huys G, Swings J, Rutgeerts P, Verbeke K.
Baseline microbiota activity and initial bifidobacteria counts influence
responses to prebiotic dosing in healthy subjects. Aliment Pharmacol
Ther 2008;27(6):504–13. Larsen MV, Cosentino S, Rasmussen S, Friis C, Hasman H, Marvig
RL, Jelsbak L, Pontén TS, Ussery DW, Aarestrup FM. Chumpitazi BP, Cope JL, Hollister EB, Tsai CM, McMeans AR,
Luna RA, Versalovic J, Shulman RJ. Kang C, Zhang Y, Zhu X, Liu K, Wang X, Chen M, Wang J, Chen H,
Hui S, Huang L, et al. Trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO)
response to animal source foods varies among healthy young men
and is influenced by their gut microbiota composition: a randomized
controlled trial. Geriatric respondents and
non-respondents to probiotic intervention can be differentiated by
inherent gut microbiome composition. Liu Z, Hsiao W, Cantarel BL, Drábek EF, Fraser-Liggett C. Sparse
distance-based learning for simultaneous multiclass classification
and feature
selection of metagenomic data. Finding groups in data: an introduction to cluster analysis, New
York: John Wiley; 1990. Radiology
characteristic

receiver operating

(ROC)

1978;6(2):461–4. Gut microbiome and precision nutrition: Part I 25

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/advances/nmz022/5521427 by LIU Libraries user on 21 October 2019

138.