378

Turk J Urol 2018; 44(5): 377-83
DOI:10.5152/tud.2018.48742

Among  these  treatment  approaches,  probiotic  applications  are 
among the promising alternatives. The reason for this was that until recently 
urine has been thought to be sterile in healthy individuals. UM reported in healthy women is summarized in 
Table 1.[12-15] 

Thanks  to  16S  rRNA  sequencing  and  advanced  quantitative 
urine  culture  (EQUC)  techniques  developed  in  recent  years, 
aerobic and anaerobic bacteria colonized in normal flora in the 
urinary system have been detected.[11,12] Bacterial isolation can 
be performed using EQUC method in 80% of the cases reported 
as  ‘no  growth’  in  standard  cultures  of  urine  samples.[13] These 
bacteria  in  the  urinary  system  have  an  important  role  in  the 
health and balance of the urinary system. The role of probiotics in women with recurrent urinary tract infections

379

Table 2. Properties which should be possessed by a healthy probiotic 

They should be able to adhere to the cells

They should be able to prevent or decrease adherence of pathogenic microorganisms

They should be able to secrete acids, hydrogen peroxide, and bacteriocins so as to prevent growth of pathogens

It should be safe, and should not be invasive, carcinogenic, and pathogenic

They should be able to form clusters so as to produce normal-balanced flora 

microorganisms that will not harm them. Are the host and the 
bacteria  developing  all  together? UTI and probiotics
Most of the recurrent UTIs in women occur in the presence of 
uropathogenic E. coli. In these studies the authors reported that probiotic 
capsules administered orally may regulate the vaginal flora and 
may be effective on recurrent UTIs. In 
fact, the risk factors in premenopausal women are different from 
those of the postmenopausal women. These risk factors include 
recent  sexual  intercourse,  use  of  spiral  or  condom  containing 
spermicide, history of UTI, and recent antibiotic use. Vaginal ovule containing 
L. crispatus, and placebo 
were applied for 10 weeks in 
patients who did not receive 
UTI treatment within the 
previous 12, and a significant 
decrease in disease was 
observed in the probiotic group 

Akgül and Karakan. in UTIs devel-
oped as a result of changes in the balance of vaginal flora in sexu-
ally active women have been reported in the literature, studies with 
postmenopausal women have not seem to be at an adequate level. Researchers noted that 
the combination was well tolerated and effective. In clinical practice, an integrality should be established between 
scientific  evidence,  clinical  experience  and  patients’  desire. Author Contributions: Concept - T.A.; Design - T.A., T.K.; Supervision - 
T.A.; Resources - T.A.; Materials - T.A.; Data Collection and/or Processing 
- T.A., T.K.; Analysis and/or Interpretation - T.A., T.K.; Literature Search 
- T.A., T.K.; Writing Manuscript - T.A.; Critical Review - T.A., T.K. 

Conflict of Interest: Authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. Financial  Disclosure:  The  authors  declared  that  this  study  has 
received no financial support. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2004;CD001209. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2009;34:407-13. [ Trends  in  antimicrobial  resistance  among  urinary  tract  infection 
isolates  of  Escherichia  coli  from  female  outpatients  in  the  United 
States. The gut microbiome in health and 
in disease. Evidence of uncultivated bacteria in the adult female bladder. Siddiqui  H,  Nederbragt  AJ,  Lagesen  K,  Jeansson  SL,  Jakobsen 
KS. Pearce  MM,  Hilt  EE,  Rosenfeld AB,  Zilliox  MJ, Thomas-White 
K,  Fok  C,  et  al. Incontinence medication response relates to the fe-
male urinary microbiota. Urine is not sterile: use of enhanced urine cul-
ture techniques to detect resident bacterial flora in the adult female 
bladder. Probiotics prevent IgE-associated allergy 
until age 5 years in cesarean-delivered children but not in the total 
cohort. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;123:335-41. [ The  Urinary Tract  Micro-
biome  in  Health  and  Disease. Barrons  R,  Tassone  D.  Use  of  Lactobacillus  probiotics  for  bac-
terial  genitourinary  infections  in  women:  a  review. Probiotics: potential to 
prevent  HIV  and  sexually  transmitted  infections  in  women. Microscopy  of  the  bacterial  flora  on  fresh  vaginal 
smears. [CrossRef]

tubular atrophy documented in early surveillance biopsies. Zuccotti  GV,  Meneghin  F,  Raimondi  C,  Dilillo  D,  Agostoni  C, 
Riva E, et al. Probiotics in clinical practise: an overview. FEMS 
Immunol Med Microbiol 2003;35:131-4. [ Hanson  L,  VandeVusse  L,  Jerm´e  M, Abad  CL,  Safdar  N.  Pro-
biotics  for  Treatment  and  Prevention  of  Urogenital  Infections 
in  Women:  A  Systematic  Review. J  Midwifery  Womens  Health 
2016;61:339-55. [ Clin Microbiol 
Infect 2015;21:344.e1-11. Modena  BD,  Milam  R,  Harrison  F,  Cheeseman  JA,  Abecassis 
MM, Friedewald JJ, et al. Lactobacilli versus antibiotics to prevent 
urinary tract infections: a randomized, double-blind, noninferiority 
trial in postmenopausal women. Risk  factors  for  recurrent  urinary  tract  infection  in 
young women.