+34-958-246187
† All the authors are the members of SAMID Network. Keywords: microbiome; pregnancy; fetus; placenta; newborn; infancy; critical illness; sepsis; allergy

1. In addition, changes in speciﬁc pathological infancy situations have also been revised. These bacteria protect against vaginal dysbiosis and inhibit opportunistic infections through
the direct and indirect protective eﬀects of Lactobacillus products, such as lactic acid and bacteriocin
among others. In fact, low risk pregnant women have
more stable vaginal ﬂora throughout the pregnancy than non-pregnant women. In addition, they reported that
Lactobacillus communities vary depending on the ethnicity of the women [33]. Stout et al. [ Therefore, early pregnancy may be an important environment,
modulating preterm delivery. 66] performed antibiotic-free C-section delivery in mice and determined that these mice
did not have the dynamic developmental gut microbiota changes observed in control natural born
mice, evidencing the involvement of maternal vaginal bacteria in a proper metabolic development
even in absence of antibiotics supporting the hypothesis of the antibiotic-modulated dysbiosis. It is important to highlight that emergency C-section and vaginal delivery
labor are frequently accompanied by rupture of fetal membranes, and exposing the fetus to maternal
vaginal bacteria [65].

Importantly, C-section may decrease the colonization of milk-digested bacteria including the
genus Lactobacillus in newborns during the ﬁrst months of life [58]. In addition, the mode of delivery
has a relevant impact on the microbiota composition of colostrums and milk [69,70], which also may
be inﬂuenced by antibiotics administrated during C-section. In addition, DHM favors an intestinal microbiome
more similar to MOM despite the diﬀerences between MOM and DHM [81]. Preterm infants are
prone to develop free radical-associated conditions [82] that may be inﬂuenced by the microbiota. Speciﬁcally, preterm subjects with
severe chorioamnionitis had higher abundance of Ureaplasma parvum, Fusobacterium nucleatum,
and Streptococcus agalactiae [16]. The placental microbiome varies as a consequence of an excess
of gestational weight gain, but is not related to obesity among women with spontaneous preterm
birth. Microbiome in Critical Ill Children

Critical illness itself or its treatment can inﬂuence the composition of microbiota [107,108].
Although broad-spectrum antibiotics are probably the factor which further alters its composition,
other factors can alter the ecosystem in which develops the microbiota, such as enteral or parenteral
feeding, drugs administration, disease co-morbidities, central venous catheters, or intubation and
mechanical ventilation. Funding: This research was funded by the PN I+D+I 2008–2011 (Spain), ISCIII- Sub-Directorate General for
Research Assessment and Promotion and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), RETICS Maternal
and Child Health and Development Network, SAMID Network, Ref. The composition of the gut microbiota throughout life, with an emphasis on early life. Temporal and spatial variation of the human microbiota during
pregnancy. Lynch, S.V. Gut Microbiota and Allergic Disease. Disruption of maternal gut microbiota during gestation alters
oﬀspring microbiota and immunity. Ecological Shifts of
Supragingival Microbiota in Association with Pregnancy. CrossRef]

Nutrients 2020, 12, 133

15 of 21

37. Prevalence and diversity of microbes in the amniotic ﬂuid, the fetal
inﬂammatory response, and pregnancy outcome in women with preterm pre-labor rupture of membranes. Does the maternal vaginal microbiota play a role in seeding the microbiota
of neonatal gut and nose? BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2017, 17, 247. [ Gut microbiota of healthy Canadian infants: Proﬁles by mode of delivery
and infant diet at 4 months. C-section and gastrointestinal symptoms, atopic dermatitis, and sensitisation during the
ﬁrst year of life. Humana
Press: New York, NY, USA, 2014; pp. Parra-Llorca, A.; Gormaz, M.; Sánchez-Illana, A.; Piñeiro-Ramos, J.D.; Collado, M.C.; Serna, E.; Cernada, M.;
Nuñez-Ramiro, A.; Ramón-Beltrán, A.; Oger, C.; et al. Parra-Llorca, A.; Gormaz, M.; Lorente-Pozo, S.; Cernada, M.; García-Robles, A.; Torres-Cuevas, I.;
Kuligowski, J.; Collado, M.C.; Serna, E.; Vento, M. Impact of donor human milk in the preterm very
low birth weight gut transcriptome proﬁle by use of exfoliated intestinal cells. CrossRef]
Sousa, S.G.; Santos, M.D.; Fidalgo, L.G.; Delgadillo, I.; Saraiva, J.A. Eﬀect of thermal pasteurisation and
high-pressure processing on immunoglobulin content and lysozyme and lactoperoxidase activity in human
colostrum. National, regional, and global trends in adult overweight and obesity
prevalences. Toemen, L.; Gishti, O.; van Osch-Gevers, L.; Steegers, E.A.; Helbing, W.A.; Felix, J.F.; Reiss, I.K.; Duijts, L.;
Gaillard, R.; Jaddoe, V.W. Maternal obesity, gestational weight gain and childhood cardiac outcomes: Role of
childhood body mass index. Stewart, C.J.; Embleton, N.D.; Marrs, E.C.L.; Smith, D.P.; Fofanova, T.; Nelson, A. Longitudinal development
of the gut microbiome and metabolome in preterm neonates with late onset sepsis and healthy controls. Global Surveillance, Prevention and Control of Chronic
Respiratory Diseases: A Comprehensive Approach. Johansson, S.G.; Bieber, T.; Dahl, R.; Friedmann, P.S.; Lanier, B.Q.; Lockey, R.F.; Motala, C.; Ortega Martell, J.A.;
Platts-Mills, T.A.; Ring, J.; et al. Revised nomenclature for allergy for global use: Report of the Nomenclature
Review Committee of the World Allergy Organization, October 2003. Stefka, A.T.; Feehley, T.; Tripathi, P.; Qiu, J.; McCoy, K.; Mazmanian, S.K.; Tjota, M.Y.; Seo, G.Y.; Cao, S.;
Theriault, B.R.; et al. Commensal bacteria protect against food allergen sensitization. Chen, C.C.; Chen, K.J.; Kong, M.S.; Chang, H.J.; Huang, J.L. Alterations in the gut microbiotas of children

with food sensitization in early life. Pettigrew, M.M.; Gent, J.F.; Kong, Y.; Wade, M.; Gansebom, S.; Bramley, A.M.; Jain, S.; Arnold, S.L.;
McCullers, J.A. Association of sputum microbiota proﬁles with severity of community-acquired pneumonia
in children. Multicenter Trial of a Combination Probiotic for Children with
Gastroenteritis. CrossRef] [PubMed]

© 2020 by the authors.