H.E.  Blum  /  Advances  in  Medical  Sciences  62  (2017)  414–420 

415

thousands  or  ten  thousands  of  single-stranded  DNA  species,
reverse  transcribed  RNA  (cDNA)  or  oligonucleotides  of  known
sequence  can  provide  a  global  gene  (genomics),  gene  expression
(transcriptomics,  proteomics)  or  metabolite 
(metabolomics)
proﬁle  (‘signature’)  that 
for  the  disease  of
individual  patients,  including  its  natural  course/prognosis  and
response  to  therapy. Clinically,  this  may
eventually  translate  into  clinical  advances  in  disease  prevention,
early  diagnosis  and  therapy. (A)  Different  microbiomes  in  humans;  (B)  The  intestinal  microbiome  in  healthy  individuals  and  patients  [7].

416 

H.E.  Blum  /  Advances  in  Medical  Sciences  62  (2017)  414–420

identiﬁed  bacterial  species 

consisting  of  trillion  microbial  cells  with  an  aggregate  9.9  million
microbial  genes  across  the  fecal  microbiome  [14].  While  until
recently,  the  environment  in  utero  has  been  considered  sterile,
DNA-based  analyses 
in  maternal
ﬂuid  and  meconium. In  the  following,  a  few  examples  will
be  discussed  in  more  detail. Inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases  and  colon  cancer

The  inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases  (IBD)  in  humans  include
ulcerative  colitis 
(CD). While
the  pathogenesis  of  IBD  is  not  fully  understood  [25],  it  is  clear  that
its  pathology  depends  among  others  on  the  intestinal  microbial
‘IBD-
community  [26,27].  Further,  a  case-control  study  identiﬁed 

involvement  of 

in  UC  and 

transmural 

the 

Table  1
Functions  of  the  intestinal  microbial  community  in  human  health  (examples). The  three
components 
  environment,  host  genetics  and  the  microbial
community 
  interact  to  maintain  homeostasis  in  the  intestine  [7].
The  disruption  of  the  stability  of  this  interaction  may  be  a  trigger
for  disease  development  (Fig. (cid:1)

the 
to 

Helminth 

community 

2.2.1.1. It  is  produced  by  various  cell
types,  including  epithelial  cells,  and  acts  as  an  antimicrobial
defense  mediator  by  binding  to  a  subset  of  bacterial  siderophores,
thereby  preventing  bacterial 
iron  acquisition  and  growth  of

H.E.  Blum  /  Advances  in  Medical  Sciences  62  (2017)  414–420 

417

siderophore-dependent  strains. in  choline,
this  context, 
phosphatidylcholine  and  carnitine  such  as  meat,  egg  yolk  and
high-fat  dairy  products,  serve  as  precursors  of  trimethylamine
(TMA)  and  TMA  N-oxide  (TMAO)  that  accelerates  atherosclero-
sis  [46]  and  elevated  TMAO  blood  levels  are  associated  with  an
increased  risk  for  atherosclerotic  heart  disease  and 
incident
major  adverse  cardiac  events. An  impressive  example  for  a  pathogenic  role  of  the  intestinal
microbial  community  is  Parkinson’s  disease  (PD). Financial  disclosure

The  author  has  no 

ﬁnancing  to  disclose. Achnowledgement

The  excellent  secretarial  assistance  of  Mrs.  K.  Bigot  and  Mrs.  M.

Gutgsell  is  gratefully  acknowledged. References

[1]  Lander  ES,  Linton  LM,  Birren  B,  Nusbaum  C,  Zody  MC,  Baldwin  J,  et  al. Initial
sequencing  and  analysis  of  the  human  genome. A  HapMap  harvest  of  insights  into  the

genetics  of  common  disease. The  human  microbiome  project  in  2011  and  beyond. [8]  Human  Microbiome  Project  C.  Structure,  function  and  diversity  of  the  healthy

human  microbiome. [11]  Morgan  XC,  Segata  N,  Huttenhower  C.  Biodiversity  and  functional  genomics  in

the  human  microbiome. [12]  Rossen  NG,  Fuentes  S,  van  der  Spek  MJ,  Tijssen  JG,  Hartman  JH,  et  al. Findings
from  a  randomized  controlled  trial  of  fecal  transplantation  for  patients  with
ulcerative  colitis. Population-based  metagenomics  analysis  reveals  markers  for  gut
microbiome  composition  and  diversity. Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A
2010;107:14691–6. Gut  microbiota  metabolism  of  dietary 
disease  and  hematopoiesis. Diagn  Microbiol  Infect  Dis  2013;75:245–51. Molecular-phylogenetic  characterization  of  microbial  community  imbalances
in  human  inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases. Lipocalin
2  protects  from  inﬂammation  and  tumorigenesis  associated  with  gut
microbiota  alterations. Inherited
determinants  of  Crohn's  disease  and  ulcerative  colitis  phenotypes:  a  genetic
association  study. Duodenal
infusion  of  donor  feces  for  recurrent  Clostridium  difﬁcile. [40]  Konishi  H,  Fujiya  M,  Tanaka  H,  Ueno  N,  Moriichi  K,  Sasajima  J,  et  al. [41]  Ridaura  VK,  Faith  JJ,  Rey  FE,  Cheng  J,  Duncan  AE,  Kau  AL,  et  al. Gut  microbiota
from  twins  discordant  for  obesity  modulate  metabolism  in  mice. Alpha-synuclein  in  colonic  submucosa  in  early  untreated  Parkinson’s  disease. Gut
microbiota  regulate  motor  deﬁcits  and  neuroinﬂammation  in  a  model  of
Parkinson’s  disease. [56]  Edmonds-Wilson  SL,  Nurinova  NI,  Zapka  CA,  Fierer  N,  Wilson  M.  Review  of

human  hand  microbiome  research. [61]  Ijssennagger  N,  Belzer  C,  Hooiveld  GJ,  Dekker  J,  van  Mil  SW,  Muller  M,  et  al. Tissue  factor  and  PAR1  promote  microbiota-induced
intestinal  vascular  remodelling. Effects  of  early-life  exposure  to  allergens  and  bacteria  on  recurrent  wheeze
and  atopy  in  urban  children. [73]  Qin  J,  Li  Y,  Cai  Z,  Li  S,  Zhu  J,  Zhang  F,  et  al. Best  Pract  Res  Clin

Gastroenterol  2016;30:133–42. [82]  Turnbaugh  PJ,  Hamady  M,  Yatsunenko  T,  Cantarel  BL,  Duncan  A,  Ley  RE,  et  al.