Round and Mazmanian

Page 2

and anti-inflammatory responses, and balances in the community structure of gut bacteria
may be intimately linked to the proper function of the immune system. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14. When challenged with the Gram-negative enteric pathogen Shigella flexneri,
germ-free animals showed decreased immune resistance to infection and increased mortality
compared with conventionally colonized animals17. Therefore, the equilibrium between

Nat Rev Immunol. As the microbiota of
all mammals contains these potentially harmful species, known as pathobionts (commensals
with pathogenic potential), the reason why inflammation ensues only in subjects affected by
IBD is not entirely known. Some have predicted that IBD, at least in
part, results from an imbalance in the normal microbiota (termed dysbiosis) without
acquisition of an infectious agent64. More recently, in a model of
pathogen-induced inflammation, treatment of mice with Bifidobacteria infantis led to a
downregulation of intestinal inflammation and increases in the number of CD4+CD25+ TReg
cells78. Moreover, depletion of the CD4+CD25+ T-cell subset
abolished the ability of the probiotic-treated DCs to protect from disease, suggesting that L.
rhamnosus-treated DCs can initiate TReg-cell activity79. The specific molecules made by these
particular bacterial species that guide immune responses remain unknown; however current
data support the idea that symbiotic organisms actively communicate with the host immune
system to modulate anti-inflammatory processes. However, it appears that certain beneficial bacteria have evolved molecules
(known as symbiosis factors) that induce protective intestinal immune responses. As symbiotic bacteria seem to have
evolved mechanisms to promote protection from pathobionts found in the same microbiota,
does disease result from the absence of specific organisms and their beneficial molecules? NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 11

animals have numerous other immunological defects that may lead to disease, which
implicates a role for the microbiota in actively supporting health. Small lymphoid aggregates located in the anti-mesenteric wall of the
small intestine and containing B cells, dendritic cells, stromal cells
and some T cells. A mixture of bacteria consisting of four strains of Lactobacillus (L.
casei, L. plantarum, L. acidophilus, and L. delbrueckii subsp. PubMed: 17132046] [Using
B.thetaiotaomicron (a symbiont) co-colonization with Bifidobacterium longum,(a probiotic) in
germfree mice, this study demonstrates that B.longum can increase the diversity of polysaccarides
that can be degraded by B.thetaiotaomicron, Thus, demonstrating another layer of complexity in
host microbial interactions; that intestinal bacterial species can impact the function of one
another.] Nardi RM, Silva ME, Vieira EC, Bambirra EA, Nicoli JR. Simpson SJ, de Jong YP, Comiskey M, Terhorst C. Pathways of T cell pathology in models of
chronic intestinal inflammation. Resident enteric bacteria are necessary for development of spontaneous colitis

and immune system activation in interleukin-10-deficient mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:15830–5. [ Kim SC, Tonkonogy SL, Karrasch T, Jobin C, Sartor RB. PubMed: 17923086] [This study demonstrates that mice
deficient in the transcription factor T-bet within the innate immune system develop spontaneous
colitis. Molecular-phylogenetic characterization of microbial community imbalances in
human inflammatory bowel diseases. Commensal-induced regulatory T cells mediate protection against pathogen-
stimulated NF-kappaB activation. Peterson DA, McNulty NP, Guruge JL, Gordon JI. However, pioneering discoveries initially by Macpherson
and colleagues are revealing a mechanistic role for symbiotic bacteria in actively shaping
the production of sIgA. Dendritic cells (DCs) that have acquired gut commensal bacteria
migrate to MLNs where they induce the production of IgA from naïve B cells99. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 21

Figure 1.