H.E.  Blum  /  Advances  in  Medical  Sciences  62  (2017)  414–420 

415

thousands  or  ten  thousands  of  single-stranded  DNA  species,
reverse  transcribed  RNA  (cDNA)  or  oligonucleotides  of  known
sequence  can  provide  a  global  gene  (genomics),  gene  expression
(transcriptomics,  proteomics)  or  metabolite 
(metabolomics)
proﬁle  (‘signature’)  that 
for  the  disease  of
individual  patients,  including  its  natural  course/prognosis  and
response  to  therapy. In  the  following,  a  few  examples  will
be  discussed  in  more  detail. While
the  pathogenesis  of  IBD  is  not  fully  understood  [25],  it  is  clear  that
its  pathology  depends  among  others  on  the  intestinal  microbial
‘IBD-
community  [26,27].  Further,  a  case-control  study  identiﬁed 

involvement  of 

in  UC  and 

transmural 

the 

Table  1
Functions  of  the  intestinal  microbial  community  in  human  health  (examples). inﬂammatory 
of 

reduced  Clostridiales  and 

Bacteroides 
a 

establishment 

species 

the 

2.2.1.2. Lipocalin-
2  (Lcn2)  is  an  antimicrobial  peptide  with  high  mucosal  and  fecal
concentrations  in  patients  with  IBD. The  intestinal  microbial  metabolite  trimethylamine  (TMA)  and  the  atherosclerosis/thrombosis  risk  [47].

418 

H.E.  Blum  /  Advances  in  Medical  Sciences  62  (2017)  414–420

  that 

involves  a 

hypothesis’
leaky  mucosa  caused  by  various
endogenous  or  exogenous  factors,  the  expansion  of  opportunistic
microbes  (dysbiotic  pathobionts)  with  the  generation  of  patho-
genic  microbial  gene  products  which  can  be  transferred  to
genetically  susceptible  individuals  [13].

2.2.3. The  HapMap  and  genome-wide  association  studies  in

diagnosis  and  therapy. [8]  Human  Microbiome  Project  C.  Structure,  function  and  diversity  of  the  healthy

human  microbiome. [11]  Morgan  XC,  Segata  N,  Huttenhower  C.  Biodiversity  and  functional  genomics  in

the  human  microbiome. Findings
from  a  randomized  controlled  trial  of  fecal  transplantation  for  patients  with
ulcerative  colitis. Population-based  metagenomics  analysis  reveals  markers  for  gut
microbiome  composition  and  diversity. Impact  of  diet  in  shaping  gut  microbiota  revealed  by  a  comparative  study  in
children  from  Europe  and  rural  Africa. House
dust  exposure  mediates  gut  microbiome  Lactobacillus  enrichment  and  airway
immune  defense  against  allergens  and  virus  infection. Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A
2014;111:805–10. [23]  Fujimura  KE,  Sitarik  AR,  Havstad  S,  Lin  DL,  Levan  S,  Fadrosh  D,  et  al. Lipocalin
2  protects  from  inﬂammation  and  tumorigenesis  associated  with  gut
microbiota  alterations. [40]  Konishi  H,  Fujiya  M,  Tanaka  H,  Ueno  N,  Moriichi  K,  Sasajima  J,  et  al. Probiotic-
derived  ferrichrome  inhibits  colon  cancer  progression  via  JNK-mediated
apoptosis. [45]  Vrieze  A,  Van  Nood  E,  Holleman  F,  Salojarvi  J,  Kootte  RS,  Bartelsman  JF,  et  al. [46]  Koeth  RA,  Wang  Z,  Levison  BS,  Buffa  JA,  Org  E,  Sheehy  BT,  et  al. Alpha-synuclein  in  colonic  submucosa  in  early  untreated  Parkinson’s  disease. [62]  Reinhardt  C,  Bergentall  M,  Greiner  TU,  Schaffner  F,  Ostergren-Lunden  G,
Petersen  LC,  et  al. Intestinal
microbial  metabolism  of  phosphatidylcholine  and  cardiovascular  risk. [73]  Qin  J,  Li  Y,  Cai  Z,  Li  S,  Zhu  J,  Zhang  F,  et  al. Alterations  of  the

human  gut  microbiome  in  multiple  sclerosis. [89]  Scheperjans  F,  Aho  V,  Pereira  PA,  Koskinen  K,  Paulin  L,  Pekkonen  E,  et  al.