Microbiome profiling was based on sequen-
cing of the cpn60 universal target, which provides higher
resolution than 16S rRNA variable regions [33] and al-
lows the resolution of Gardnerella vaginalis subgroups,
a hallmark bacteria in the disturbed microbiota [34].

Methods
Study population and sampling
This retrospective cohort study analysed the vaginal
microbiota of women who experienced spontaneous pre-
term birth (sPTB) and compared the resulting microbial
profiles to those of pregnant women who delivered at
term. Total bacterial DNA (qPCR) and detection of Mollicutes (PCR)
Quantitative PCR (qPCR)
Total bacterial DNA quantity in each sample was esti-
mated using a SYBR Green assay based on amplification
of the V3 region of the 16S rRNA gene. PCR products from U. parvum and U. urealyticum can
be differentiated by size [40].

cpn60 universal target (UT) PCR and pyrosequencing
Universal primer PCR targeting the 549–567 bp cpn60
UT region was performed using a mixture of cpn60
primers consisting of a 1:3 M ratio of primers H279/
H280:H1612/H1613, as described previously [41–43]. To
allow multiplexing of samples in a single sequencing
run, primers were modified at the 5′ end with one of 24
unique decamer multiplexing identification (MID) se-
quences, as per the manufacturer’s recommendations
(Roche, Brandford, CT, USA). The OTU reference set was generated originally by de
novo assembly of cpn60 sequence reads from 546 vaginal
microbiomes using the microbial Profiling Using Meta-
genomic Assembly pipeline (mPUMA, http://mpuma. Hierarchical clustering of vaginal microbiota profiles
resulted in seven community state types
I
(CST):
(Lactobacillus crispatus dominated),
(Lactobacillus
gasseri dominated), III (Lactobacillus iners dominated),
IVA (Gardnerella vaginalis subgroup B or mix of differ-
ent species), IVC (G. vaginalis subgroup A dominated),
IVD (G. vaginalis
subgroup C dominated) and V
(Lactobacillus jensenii dominated) (Fig. The ALDEx2 analysis

assessed the relative abundance of each taxa (at the
OTU and species level) in term and preterm groups. This
observation is consistent with the results presented by
others [29, 30]. CST assignments are largely driven by
the dominance of a single species, which may mask dif-
ferences in rare taxa that would differentiate term and
preterm groups, and indeed, further analysis revealed
that the vaginal microbiota of women who experienced
preterm birth was richer and more diverse than those of
women who delivered at
term. Bacteroides coagulans

Corynebacterium accolens

Porphyromonas uenonis

Peptoniphilus harei

Lactobacillus fermentum

Facklamia hominis

Prevotella bivia

Prevotella corporis

Actinomyces neuii subsp. It is also important to note that the number of bacterial
species with greater prevalence in the preterm (49/60) was
higher than in the term (11/60) cohort (Table 3), which is

consistent with our results of increased microbial richness
and diversity in the samples from women who experi-
enced preterm birth. Our results also confirmed previous reports of an as-
sociation between Mycoplasma and preterm birth [68].
Mollicutes were detected significantly more often in
women in the preterm group compared to women in the
term group, but no differences were observed in
Ureaplasma prevalence between groups indicating that
the difference in Mollicutes prevalence is primarily
driven by the presence of Mycoplasma spp. Funding
Financial support was provided by a joint Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) Emerging Team Grant and a Genome British Columbia (GBC) grant
awarded to DMM, AB and JEH (grant reference #108030) as well as a CIHR
grant MOP-82799 to AB. All participants provided written consent at enrolment. 2Departments of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology and Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1L4,
Canada. Received: 19 October 2017 Accepted: 18 May 2018

4. WHO, March of Dimes, PMNCH, Save the Children. Washington, D.C.: National
Academies Press; 2007. Gardella C, Riley DE, Hitti J, Agnew K, Krieger JN, Eschenbach DA. The association of occult

amniotic fluid infection with gestational age and neonatal outcome among
women in preterm labor. Microbiome  (2018) 6:117 

Page 14 of 15

19. Romero R, Hassan SS, Gajer P, Tarca AL, Fadrosh DW, Nikita L, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2017;114:9966–71. Schellenberg JJ, Links MG, Hill JE, Dumonceaux TJ, Kimani J, Jaoko W, et al. Thinkhamrop J, Hofmeyr GJ, Adetoro O, Lumbiganon P, Ota E. Antibiotic
prophylaxis during the second and third trimester to reduce adverse
pregnancy outcomes and morbidity. Characterization of the vaginal microbiota of healthy Canadian women
through the menstrual cycle. Brown RG, Marchesi JR, Lee YS, Smith A, Lehne B, Kindinger LM, Terzidou V,
Holmes E, Nicholson JK, Bennett PR, et al. Predictive value for preterm birth of abnormal vaginal
flora, bacterial vaginosis and aerobic vaginitis during the first trimester of
pregnancy.