Microbiome profiling was based on sequen-
cing of the cpn60 universal target, which provides higher
resolution than 16S rRNA variable regions [33] and al-
lows the resolution of Gardnerella vaginalis subgroups,
a hallmark bacteria in the disturbed microbiota [34].

Methods
Study population and sampling
This retrospective cohort study analysed the vaginal
microbiota of women who experienced spontaneous pre-
term birth (sPTB) and compared the resulting microbial
profiles to those of pregnant women who delivered at
term. Specimens from all
cohorts were processed similarly in terms of sample col-
lection, storage, DNA extraction, library preparation and
sequencing. Total bacterial DNA (qPCR) and detection of Mollicutes (PCR)
Quantitative PCR (qPCR)
Total bacterial DNA quantity in each sample was esti-
mated using a SYBR Green assay based on amplification
of the V3 region of the 16S rRNA gene. Experimental controls were
not sequenced as they did not yield any amplification. Analysis of operational taxonomic units (OTU)
Raw sequence data was processed by using the default
on-rig procedures from 454/Roche. MID-partitioned sequences were
mapped using Bowtie 2 (http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge. The function aldex.clr from the ALDEx2 package in R
was used to compare the differential relative abundance
of individual taxa in term and preterm groups [51]. Sig-
nificant differences were determined based on the false
discovery rate (FDR), which is the result of a Benjamini–
Hochberg corrected p value from a Welch’s t test calcu-
lated within ALDEx2. Seventeen percent
(8/46) had a
including migraine headaches,
neurological condition,

Freitas et al. Twenty-four percent of
women (11/46) presented one of the following condi-
tions: maternal elevated liver enzymes, short cervix and
incompetent cervix; fetal ascites, fetal distress and large
foetus for gestational age; and placental findings of mar-
ginal cord insertion, two-vessel umbilical cord, placenta
previa and low-lying placenta. Hierarchical clustering of vaginal microbiota profiles
resulted in seven community state types
I
(CST):
(Lactobacillus crispatus dominated),
(Lactobacillus
gasseri dominated), III (Lactobacillus iners dominated),
IVA (Gardnerella vaginalis subgroup B or mix of differ-
ent species), IVC (G. vaginalis subgroup A dominated),
IVD (G. vaginalis
subgroup C dominated) and V
(Lactobacillus jensenii dominated) (Fig. Ecological analysis and total bacterial load
Assessment of alpha diversity revealed that microbiomes
of women who delivered preterm were richer (Chao1
richness 46.3 ± 24.1) and more diverse (Shannon diver-
sity index 1.8 ± 1.1) when compared to those of women
in the term group (36.2 ± 14.8; 1.2 ± 0.8) (t test, p < 0.01)
(Table 1). The ALDEx2 analysis

assessed the relative abundance of each taxa (at the
OTU and species level) in term and preterm groups. Ureaplasma species were detected by
genus-specific PCR in samples of 14/46 (30%) women
who had PTB, with all women testing positive for U.
parvum and none for U. urealyticum. Bacteroides coagulans

Corynebacterium accolens

Porphyromonas uenonis

Peptoniphilus harei

Lactobacillus fermentum

Facklamia hominis

Prevotella bivia

Prevotella corporis

Actinomyces neuii subsp. anitratus

Corynebacterium timonense

Corynebacterium genitalium

Tepidanaerobacter sp. It is also important to note that the number of bacterial
species with greater prevalence in the preterm (49/60) was
higher than in the term (11/60) cohort (Table 3), which is

consistent with our results of increased microbial richness
and diversity in the samples from women who experi-
enced preterm birth. Hyman and colleagues [30] described
the vaginal microbiota of 83 pregnant women (term n =
66, preterm n = 17) based on Sanger sequencing of
cloned 16S rRNA genes. These results are
consistent with our findings of bacterial abundance based
on the ALDEx analysis since we only found significant dif-
ferences in relative abundance for eight rare bacteria. study described themselves
as African American. Microbiome  (2018) 6:117 

Page 13 of 15

confirm previous reports of an association between
Mollicutes and preterm birth, and further suggest that a
diverse bacterial community may contribute to the
microbiome’s role in sPTB. TXT 336 kb)

Additional file 2: Summary of OTU analysed in this study. Funding
Financial support was provided by a joint Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) Emerging Team Grant and a Genome British Columbia (GBC) grant
awarded to DMM, AB and JEH (grant reference #108030) as well as a CIHR
grant MOP-82799 to AB. Ethics approval and consent to participate
This study received ethical approval from the University of British Columbia
Children’s and Women’s Research Ethics Board (Approval Number H14-01954),
and Mount Sinai Hospital Research Ethics Board (Approval Number 15-0184-E). Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 2Departments of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology and Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1L4,
Canada. Received: 19 October 2017 Accepted: 18 May 2018

4. National, regional, and worldwide estimates of preterm birth rates in the
year 2010 with time trends since 1990 for selected countries: a systematic
analysis and implications. Preterm birth:
causes, consequences, and prevention. Gardella C, Riley DE, Hitti J, Agnew K, Krieger JN, Eschenbach DA. Identification and sequencing of bacterial rDNAs in culture-negative
amniotic fluid from women in premature labor. Krohn MA, Hillier SL, Nugent RP, Cotch MF, Carey JC, Gibbs RS, et al. The association of occult

amniotic fluid infection with gestational age and neonatal outcome among
women in preterm labor. Microbiome  (2018) 6:117 

Page 14 of 15

19. Romero R, Hassan SS, Gajer P, Tarca AL, Fadrosh DW, Nikita L, et al. The vaginal microbiome during pregnancy and the postpartum
period in a European population. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;112:11060–5. Kindinger LM, Bennett PR, Lee YS, Marchesi JR, Smith A, Cacciatore S, et al. Thinkhamrop J, Hofmeyr GJ, Adetoro O, Lumbiganon P, Ota E. Antibiotic
prophylaxis during the second and third trimester to reduce adverse
pregnancy outcomes and morbidity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;1:
CD002250. Correlates of cervical
Mycoplasma genitalium and risk of preterm birth among Peruvian women.