riage patterns far exceeded what was initially
suspected (Aagaard et al. 2014b Colon, anus,

Next-Gen

V3V5

stool

sequencing

Nonhuman
primate

necrotizing colitis had
predominantly one
bacteria dominating

microbiome in VLBW
infants

neonatal microbiome
from birth to 4 mo
while examining mode
of delivery and feeding

Examined the role of
maternal IgA on
intestinal microbiome

Examined the role of
maternal diet on
juvenile microbiome

16S-Based Metagenomics

Sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene using Next-
Gen technology has recently been widely ex-
ploited to characterize the human microbiome
(Jonasson et al. Comparison of the vaginal microbiome
data from the HMP reveals that V1V3 will
distinguish communities primarily by the rela-
tive predominant Lactobacillus species present
whereas, V3V5 amplicons will reveal either lac-
tobacilli-dominant or lactobacilli-diminished
groups. Given the complexity of assembly and
low efﬁciency, taxonomy classiﬁcation can also
be achieved by alignment of sequence reads
to clade-speciﬁc markers identiﬁed from inte-
grated microbial genomes (IMG) without prior
assembly (Segata et al. Multi’omics Data Integration

To truly understand how the microbiome im-
pacts human health, metabolomic and meta-
transcriptomic approaches will be required to
characterize their precise roles as symbionts
(reviewed in Morgan and Huttenhower 2014). An additional method that may be use-
ful to examine microbiome communities across
ethnicities is to use single nucleotide poly-
morphisms (SNPs) in mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), which provides more precision in
analysis (Ruiz-Pesini et al. When the
stability of the vaginal microbiome was exam-
ined during pregnancy, the authors noted that
the vaginal microbiome of gravid subjects shift-
ed between CSTs dominated by lactobacilli but
rarely shifted to CST IV, which is marked by a
diminished abundance of Lactobacillus species
(Romero et al. Even more concerning are the ﬁndings of two
studies that found an increase in preterm de-
livery (,34 wk) among women who tested
negative for BV but were treated (Hauth et al. Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

11

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al. VARIANCE OF THE HUMAN MICROBIOME
IN PREGNANCY: BEYOND THE VAGINAL
COMMUNITY

In addition to changes described in the vaginal
microbiome during pregnancy, Koren et al. (2012) investigated the intestinal microbiome
during pregnancy using a prospective cohort
study and found that as pregnancy progressed,
the intestinal microbiome was altered. This study
shows that the maternal microbiome at birth
and postpartum may be critical in the establish-
ment and development of the neonatal micro-
biome via horizontal transmission. This study also found that infants with
the highest species richness and diversity of
their intestinal microbiome were born by emer-
gency cesarean section rather than by an elective
cesarean section or vaginally (Azad et al. Acid production by vaginal ﬂora in vitro is consis-
tent with the rate, extent of vaginal acidiﬁcation. Amniotic ﬂuid infection, inﬂammation, and colo-
nization in preterm labor with intact membranes. Gevers D, Knight R, Petrosino JF, Huang K, McGuire AL,
Birren BW, Nelson KE, White O, Methe´ BA, Huttenhower
C. 2012. Metatranscriptomic approach to analyze the functional
human gut microbiota. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 23: 463–470. Hillier SL, Krohn MA, Cassen E, Easterling TR, Rabe LK,
Eschenbach DA. Hillier SL, Nugent RP, Eschenbach DA, Krohn MA, Gibbs
RS, Martin DH, Cotch MF, Edelman R, Pastorek JG, Rao
AV. Localiza-
tion of P. gingivalis in preterm delivery placenta. Martin HL, Richardson BA, Nyange PM, Lavreys L, Hillier
SL, Chohan B, Mandaliya K, Ndinya-Achola JO, Bwayo
J, Kreiss J. 1999. Relationships of vaginal Lactoba-
cillus species, cervical Chlamydia trachomatis, and bacte-
rial vaginosis to preterm birth. Qin J, Li Y, Cai Z, Li S, Zhu J, Zhang F, Liang S, Zhang W,
Guan Y, Shen D, et al. Segata N, Waldron L, Ballarini A, Narasimhan V, Jousson O,
Huttenhower C. 2012. The
association of occult amniotic ﬂuid infection with gesta-
tional age and neonatal outcome among women in pre-
term labor.