riage patterns far exceeded what was initially
suspected (Aagaard et al. Our laboratory and others have shown that
the vaginal microbiota vary in association with
normal pregnancy, thus providing a unique
“signature” in pregnancy with relative alter-
ed abundance of multiple taxa (Aagaard et al. 2012b

posterior
fornix, and
mid-vagina

Romero et al. 2014

cervix

sequencing

Beyond the Vagina: Intestinal Microbiome
Koren et al. Stool

Sequencing,

Longitudinal Characterized healthy

Microarray, PCR

neonatal microbiome

Strain-

Longitudinal Vertical transmission

from mother to infant

speciﬁc
Universal
16S
rRNA

Oral, vagina,
skin, rectal

Next-Gen

sequencing

V2

Cross-

sectional

2004

2007

Dominguez-
Bello et al. 2014b Colon, anus,

Next-Gen

V3V5

stool

sequencing

Nonhuman
primate

necrotizing colitis had
predominantly one
bacteria dominating

microbiome in VLBW
infants

neonatal microbiome
from birth to 4 mo
while examining mode
of delivery and feeding

Examined the role of
maternal IgA on
intestinal microbiome

Examined the role of
maternal diet on
juvenile microbiome

16S-Based Metagenomics

Sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene using Next-
Gen technology has recently been widely ex-
ploited to characterize the human microbiome
(Jonasson et al. Furthermore, the number of Lactobacil-
lus species detected (and thus relative abun-
dance) will vary depending on the 16S region
sequenced, with V1V3 revealing more unique
Lactobacillus operational
taxonomic units
(OTUs) as compared with V3V5 (Huse et al. Given the complexity of assembly and
low efﬁciency, taxonomy classiﬁcation can also
be achieved by alignment of sequence reads
to clade-speciﬁc markers identiﬁed from inte-
grated microbial genomes (IMG) without prior
assembly (Segata et al. Despite the multiplicity of
causative agents, one common ﬁnding is that
women experiencing clinically symptomatic
BV tend to be deﬁcient in lactic acid producing
species of bacteria that also convert oxygen to
H2O2 (Eschenbach et al. An additional method that may be use-
ful to examine microbiome communities across
ethnicities is to use single nucleotide poly-
morphisms (SNPs) in mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), which provides more precision in
analysis (Ruiz-Pesini et al. THE VAGINAL MICROBIOME IN
PREGNANCY

With the demonstration that the vaginal micro-
biome ﬂuctuates based on the menstrual cycle,
with intercourse, and (to a much more limited
degree) with clinical symptoms of BV, we and
others sought to characterize the vaginal micro-
biome during pregnancy. The utilization of Next-Gen sequencing tech-
niques to study the vaginal microbiome further
showed the presence of Lactobacillus species in
the vagina during pregnancy. However, direct asso-
ciations between speciﬁc species of Lactobacillus
and estrogen levels are lacking and warrant fur-
ther investigation. On the other hand, 56.5% of gravi-
dae with a lactobacilli-diminished vaginal
microbiome during the ﬁrst trimester gained
prevalence of this genus. Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

11

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al. Moreover,
although two subjects in the Hyman et al. Also, Bacteroides spe-
cies were found to increase on the introduction
of vegetables (Koenig et al. Although the vag-
inal microbiome may be implicated in these
neonatal diseases, signiﬁcant differences in
the abundance of placental bacteria have been
found when comparing preterm and term pla-
centas (Jones et al. Bacterial vaginosis
assessed by gram stain and diminished colonization re-
sistance to incident gonococcal, chlamydial, and tricho-
monal genital infection. Buhimschi CS, Dulay AT, Abdel-Razeq S, Zhao G, Lee S,
Hodgson EJ, Bhandari V, Buhimschi IA. Prevalence of hydrogen peroxide-producing Lactobacillus
species in normal women and women with bacterial vag-
inosis. Fortner KB, Grotegut CA, Ransom CE, Bentley RC, Feng L,
Lan L, Heine RP, Seed PC, Murtha AP. Gevers D, Knight R, Petrosino JF, Huang K, McGuire AL,
Birren BW, Nelson KE, White O, Methe´ BA, Huttenhower
C. 2012. Uncultivated bacteria as etiologic agents of intra-
amniotic inﬂammation leading to preterm birth. Hillier SL, Krohn MA, Rabe LK, Klebanoff SJ, Eschenbach
DA. Structure, function and
diversity of the healthy human microbiome. Dysbiosis of
the faecal microbiota in patients with Crohn’s disease and
their unaffected relatives. New in-
sights in gut microbiota establishment in healthy breast
fed neonates. A guide to
enterotypes across the human body: Meta-analysis of mi-
crobial community structures in human microbiome da-
tasets. Target-
ing and crossing of the human maternofetal barrier by
Listeria monocytogenes: Role of internalin interaction
with trophoblast E-cadherin. Dysfunction of the intestinal microbiome in
inﬂammatory bowel disease and treatment. Penders J, Thijs C, Vink C, Stelma FF, Snijders B, Kummel-
ing I, van den Brandt PA, Stobberingh EE. SILVA: A comprehensive online
resource for quality checked and aligned ribosomal
RNA sequence data compatible with ARB. Qin J, Li Y, Cai Z, Li S, Zhu J, Zhang F, Liang S, Zhang W,
Guan Y, Shen D, et al. Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, Cheng J, Duncan AE, Kau AL,
Grifﬁn NW, Lombard V, Henrissat B, Bain JR, et al. The Genboree Microbiome Toolset and the analysis
of 16S rRNA microbial sequences. Romero R, Sirtori M, Oyarzun E, Avila C, Mazor M, Call-
ahan R, Sabo V, Athanassiadis AP, Hobbins JC. The vaginal microbiota of pregnant women who
subsequently have spontaneous preterm labor and deliv-
ery and those with a normal delivery at term. Segata N, Waldron L, Ballarini A, Narasimhan V, Jousson O,
Huttenhower C. 2012. Sobhani I, Tap J, Roudot-Thoraval F, Roperch JP, Letulle S,
Langella P, Corthier G, Van Nhieu JT, Furet JP. The
association of occult amniotic ﬂuid infection with gesta-
tional age and neonatal outcome among women in pre-
term labor.