bioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. We obtained a stool sample at participation enrollment, as well as 
a comprehensive questionnaire describing their lifestyle, preferences, 
and health history. Provided meals 

accounted for 66% of all meals and free meals 34%. Both  provided  and  free  meals  were  recorded  by  all  participants 
during  the  entire  study  period,  using  a  smartphone  app  (Bitesnap). The  distribution  of  macronutrients  (Figure  2C)  shows  the  coverage 
of the provided meals within the space of macronutrient proportions. A total of 9 distinct meals shown in Figure 2D were repeated 
over the course of the 14 day diet schedules (omnivore and vegetar-
ian/gluten-free)  to  collect  information  regarding  intra-person  vari-
ability; each repeat meal was consumed twice by study participants. In either of these cases, we dis-
carded the respective meal data. Meal  data  was  pre-processed  as  follows. For the samples provided by the 550 
participants in this study, 6587 unique microbial KOs were detected, a 
mean of 2941.9 per sample (s.d. All predictors were significant by likelihood-ratio test at p<.05, except 
for  glutamine  production  pathways  (p=.08)  and  the  interaction  be-
tween tyrosine metabolizers and carbs (p=.06) which are kept in this 
model as suggestive, and do not substantially affect the estimation of 
other coefficients. The fucose metabolism pathways activity score considers expres-
sion levels of all the genes that encode enzymes known to carry out 

5

biochemical reactions that result in processing and catabolic conver-
sions of fucose – a glycan that microbes may obtain from the host’s 
gut lining mucosal layer, or food components. Figure  4D  (right) 
illustrates the extent of modeled individual differences in this relation-
ship, taking into account all predictors. Two hypothetical meals A and 
B (similar to repeat meals from Figure 2D with carbs approximately 
25g and 50g respectively) are shown to illustrate that two users (blue 
and red lines) have the opposite glycemic responses (iAUC of 14 & 20 
vs iAUC of 37 & 27 respectively) due to the crossover of their iAUC 
response  lines  between  the  two  meals  —  this  effect  was  shown  in 
Figure 3D using the raw data. This is a 
gradient boosting machine [Chen 2016] built on the same predictors 
already discussed as well as a number of additional features. Following [Zeevi 
2015] we also add two further predictors encoding prior blood glucose 
levels: the CGM reading immediately before the meal, and the slope 
of the linear change in CGM readings over the previous 90 minutes. Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 3E. Relationships between anthropometric characteristics and per-participant average iAUC across all meals (provided and free). Performance on training and test 
data is shown in Figure 5. The relationship between iAUC and BMI / waist-to-hip ratio 
(Figure 3E second and third panels) is the opposite of that previously 
reported  in  studies  such  as  [Zeevi  2015].  We  hypothesize  that  this 
may  reflect  the  self-reported  good  health  and  high  exercise  rate 
within this study population. This process is often carried out by microbes known as mucin 
degraders,  such  as  certain  species  of  genus  Ruminococcus  [Crost 
2016].  We  therefore  hypothesize  that  higher  fucose  consumption 
activity,  as  reflected  by  the  microbiome  pathway  score,  may  be  as-
sociated with microbiomes of those individuals who are either more 
likely  to  fast  or  whose  internal  ecosystem  and  overall  body  state 
resembles the conditions of fasting or calorie deprivation. Error bars show standard error of 
the estimate. Glutamine  production  pathways  score,  when  “Low,”  showed  a 
direct relationship with higher PPGR. Inflammation  and  stress  response  may 
be  implicated  in  elevation  of  blood  glucose  (either  due  to  cortisol 
pathway  or  other  mechanisms). We seek to confirm and validate these mechanisms. •  Demonstrates  the  statistical  significance  of  all  features  using  a 
multilevel  mixed-effects  regression  model  where  fixed  effects 
represent  measured  properties  and  random  effects  account  for 
further variation. Use  of 
Metatranscriptomics  in  Microbiome  Research. Data analysis using regression and 
hierarchical/multilevel models." Jiménez-
Hernández  N.,  Pérez-Cobas  AE., Journal of the American College of Nutrition 17.6 (1998): 
595-600. Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Experimental  Biology  and 
Medicine 180, no. [Krishnan 2018] Krishnan S, Ding Y, Saedi N, Choi M, Sridharan GV, Sherr DH, Yarmush 
ML,  Alaniz  RC,  Jayaraman  A,  Lee  K.”  Derived  Tryptophan  Metabolites  Modulate 
Inflammatory  Response  in  Hepatocytes  and  Macrophages”  Cell  Rep.  2018  Apr 
24;23(4):1099-1111

[Larsen  2010]  Larsen,  N.,  Vogensen,  F.  K.,  van  den  Berg,  F.  W.,  Nielsen,  D.  S., 
Andreasen,A. S., Pedersen, B.K., Al-Soud, W. A., Sørensen, S.J., Hansen, L.H., Jakobsen, 
M.  “Gut  microbiota  in  human  adults  with  type  2  diabetes  differs  from  non-diabetic 
adults.” "Dietary  carbohydrates:  Role  of  quality  and  quantity  in  chronic  disease." DOI: 10.1136/bmj.k2340 

[Mendes-Soares 2019] Mendes-Soares H, Raveh-Sadka T, Azulay S, et al. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2018.8102

[Mirsky 1956] Mirsky, I. Arthur, and Daniel Diengott. " [Silverstein  1966]  Silverstein,  Murray  N.,  Khalil  G.  Wakim,  Robert  C.  Bahn,  and 
Richard H. Decker. " yclnex.2016.01.001

[Tuomainen 2018] Tuomainen M, Lindström J, Lehtonen M, Auriola S, Pihlajamäki J, 
Peltonen M, Tuomilehto J, Uusitupa M, Mello V and Hanhineva K. “ Associations of 
serum  indolepropionic  acid,  a  gut  microbiota  metabolite,  with  type  2  diabetes  and 
low-grade inflammation in high-risk individuals” Nutrition & Diabetes 35 (2018)

 [Van Cauter 1997] Van Cauter, Eve, Kenneth S. Polonsky, and André J. Scheen. " Deutsche  medizinische 
Wochenschrift (1946) 109, no. [Whitfield-Cargile  2016]  Whitfield-Cargile,  Canaan  M.,  Noah  D.  Cohen,  Robert  S. 
Chapkin, Brad R. Weeks, Laurie A. Davidson, Jennifer S. Goldsby, Carrie L. Hunt et 
al. [KEGG]  KEGG:  Kyoto  Encyclopedia  of  Genes  and  Genomes. http://www.kegg.jp/  or 
http://www.genome.jp/kegg/

[Wolever 1986] Wolever, T.M., and Jenkins, D.J. (1986).