bioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. We obtained a stool sample at participation enrollment, as well as 
a comprehensive questionnaire describing their lifestyle, preferences, 
and health history. Provided meals 

accounted for 66% of all meals and free meals 34%. Both  provided  and  free  meals  were  recorded  by  all  participants 
during  the  entire  study  period,  using  a  smartphone  app  (Bitesnap). A total of 9 distinct meals shown in Figure 2D were repeated 
over the course of the 14 day diet schedules (omnivore and vegetar-
ian/gluten-free)  to  collect  information  regarding  intra-person  vari-
ability; each repeat meal was consumed twice by study participants. Metabolic  and  signaling  pathway  activities  are  scored  using  ex-
pression levels of genes encoding specific protein functions (KEGG 
mappings  are  used  primarily),  compared  with  a  reference  cohort  of 
samples supplied by Viome customers. The fucose metabolism pathways activity score considers expres-
sion levels of all the genes that encode enzymes known to carry out 

5

biochemical reactions that result in processing and catabolic conver-
sions of fucose – a glycan that microbes may obtain from the host’s 
gut lining mucosal layer, or food components. This binary score, when “High,” showed a 
negative association with glycemic response. Figure  4D  (right) 
illustrates the extent of modeled individual differences in this relation-
ship, taking into account all predictors. Two hypothetical meals A and 
B (similar to repeat meals from Figure 2D with carbs approximately 
25g and 50g respectively) are shown to illustrate that two users (blue 
and red lines) have the opposite glycemic responses (iAUC of 14 & 20 
vs iAUC of 37 & 27 respectively) due to the crossover of their iAUC 
response  lines  between  the  two  meals  —  this  effect  was  shown  in 
Figure 3D using the raw data. Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. The two meals where intra-person 
variability  is  close  to  inter-person  variability  are  meals  that  contain 
little to no carbohydrates. Relationships between iAUC and phenotype and food features
We see the expected relationship between age and iAUC in Figure 3E, 
first panel. The relationship between iAUC and BMI / waist-to-hip ratio 
(Figure 3E second and third panels) is the opposite of that previously 
reported  in  studies  such  as  [Zeevi  2015].  We  hypothesize  that  this 
may  reflect  the  self-reported  good  health  and  high  exercise  rate 
within this study population. This process is often carried out by microbes known as mucin 
degraders,  such  as  certain  species  of  genus  Ruminococcus  [Crost 
2016].  We  therefore  hypothesize  that  higher  fucose  consumption 
activity,  as  reflected  by  the  microbiome  pathway  score,  may  be  as-
sociated with microbiomes of those individuals who are either more 
likely  to  fast  or  whose  internal  ecosystem  and  overall  body  state 
resembles the conditions of fasting or calorie deprivation. 4D. (left) Model predictions as a function of carbs and age, 
holding all other predictors at the baseline. ( Although it is challenging 
to  delineate  causal  mechanisms,  there  may  be  functional  patterns 

9

that connect the significant scores with gut health, intestinal barrier 
integrity,  and  inflammation. We also present a gradient boosting machine for 
maximizing predictive accuracy. Use  of 
Metatranscriptomics  in  Microbiome  Research. "Dietary  carbohydrates:  Role  of  quality  and  quantity  in  chronic  disease." doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2018.8102

[Mirsky 1956] Mirsky, I. Arthur, and Daniel Diengott. " Proceedings of the Society 
for Experimental Biology and Medicine 93, no. "Major 
phenylpropanoid-derived  metabolites  in  the  human  gut  can  arise  from  microbial 
fermentation of protein." yclnex.2016.01.001

[Tuomainen 2018] Tuomainen M, Lindström J, Lehtonen M, Auriola S, Pihlajamäki J, 
Peltonen M, Tuomilehto J, Uusitupa M, Mello V and Hanhineva K. “ Associations of 
serum  indolepropionic  acid,  a  gut  microbiota  metabolite,  with  type  2  diabetes  and 
low-grade inflammation in high-risk individuals” Nutrition & Diabetes 35 (2018)

 [Van Cauter 1997] Van Cauter, Eve, Kenneth S. Polonsky, and André J. Scheen. " Deutsche  medizinische 
Wochenschrift (1946) 109, no.