Downloaded from 

http://jid.oxfordjournals.org/

 at Yeshiva Univ Libraries AECOM Cardozo YU on October 19, 2016

the commonality that relates both BV and vaginal pH to HPV
infection (independent of HIV) is the RA of certain Lactobacil-
lus species, most notably L. crispatus. Therefore, in the current investigation, we combined data
from 2 independently conducted ancillary studies in the Wom-
en’s Interagency HIV Study (WIHS) cohort: a study involving
serial microbiota and vaginal pH testing and a longitudinal
study of cervicovaginal HPV detection. Matching was con-
ducted using MatchIt, based in the R programming language
and statistical software [17, 18]. The matching criteria included
age (<40 years, 40–49, and >50 years), cigarette smoking, sexual
activity (frequency and number of partners), and male condom
use. Microbial DNA was isolated using the FastDNA Spin Kit for
Soil (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH). Pyrosequencing of barcoded
16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene V1-V2 region amplicons was

Downloaded from 

http://jid.oxfordjournals.org/

 at Yeshiva Univ Libraries AECOM Cardozo YU on October 19, 2016

Figure 1. Distribution of relative abundance (RA) of Lactobacillus species. concurrent multitype infection by HPV, while accounting for
the intraindividual correlation of the repeated observations. Taxonomic
assignments were performed using the Ribosomal Database
Project (RDP) Classiﬁer trained on version 10 of the RDP da-
tabase [24, 25]. The presence of ampliﬁcation in subject samples
was conﬁrmed by gel electrophoresis, while negative controls
(no template) were also subjected to PCR and showed no am-
pliﬁcation. of participants or median value (interquartile range). See “Methods” section for details (substudy population). L. crispatus dominated CST I, CST II was dominated by
Lactobacillus gasseri, both CST III and IV-A were dominated
by Lactobacillus iners, and CST V was dominated by Lactobacil-
lus jensenii. Cervicovaginal Microbiota and HPV (cid:129) JID 2016:214 (1 November) (cid:129) 1365

Downloaded from 

http://jid.oxfordjournals.org/

 at Yeshiva Univ Libraries AECOM Cardozo YU on October 19, 2016

Figure 2. A, Heat map of the relative percent abundance of bacterial taxa, by community state
type (CST) and the presence of oncogenic human papillomavirus (oncHPV). Reference
0.29 (.08–1.05)
0.55 (.06–5.13)
1.19 (.69–2.04)
1.65 (.72–3.78)
0.84 (.33–2.17)

. . . Those with an STI on the day of the index visit were
excluded from this substudy. Abbreviations: BV, bacterial vaginosis; CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio. b A pH of ≤ 4.5 (the cut point used in the Amsel criteria for the diagnosis of BV) was considered low, a pH of 4.5–5.8 was considered medium, and a pH of >5.8 (where a pH of 5.8 was the
median of all pH values >4.5) was considered high. While production of H2O2 has been observed in the major-
ity of L. crispatus isolates, prior data from our group suggest
that the levels of H2O2 produced are likely too limited to great-
ly affect the risk of STIs [7], especially HPV infection, since
HPV is a nonenveloped virus and, therefore, likely to be resis-
tant to H2O2. In summary, our results suggest a beneﬁcial effect of L. crisp-
atus on the burden of HPV in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected
women that is unrelated to pH. Further research to better un-
derstand these relationships is strongly warranted, including
large prospective cohort studies and laboratory research to un-
derstand the mechanisms that underlie the relation of the cer-
vicovaginal microbiota with HPV infection. H. D. S. reports leading a study involving
free blinded testing using HPV E6/E7 protein assays by Arbor Vita, p16/
Ki67 cytology by MTM Laboratories/Ventura–Roche, and MCM-2/
TOP2A cytology by BD Diagnostics; no ﬁnancial payments to H. D. S. or
his home institution were received. Cervicovaginal human papillomavirus
infection in human immunodeﬁciency virus-1 (HIV)-positive and high-risk
HIV-negative women. Mirmonsef P, Hotton AL, Gilbert D, et al. Lyon, France: World Health Organization, 2007. Diversity and evenness: a unifying notation and its consequences. Mooij SH, Boot HJ, Speksnijder AG, et al. Petrova MI, van den Broek M, Balzarini J, Vanderleyden J, Lebeer S. Vaginal mi-
crobiota and its role in HIV transmission and infection.