35_PARAGRAPHS

The etiology and pathogenesis of PCOS remain unclear and may be multi-factorial, involv-
ing genetic, neuroendocrine and metabolic causes  Some researchers believe that PCOS
may be not an ovarian disease but a metabolic disorder disease  Till now, there is not any
unified theory for the pathophysiology of PCOS. What is consistent in PCOS is the production
of excess androgens by the ovaries. Further studies are required to investigate the primary
pathophysiology mechanisms underlying this syndrome..

ever, in the past, the commensal microbiota was largely neglected and mostly inaccessible to
investigation. Until recently, researchers realize that these residents in human gut form a sym-
biotic relationship with the host and provide many benefits to the host. For example, commen-
sal microbes consistently provide a set of services to the host such as modulation of immune
system, inhibition of pathogen colonization, liberating nutrients from food  Mean-
while, dysbiosis of gut microbiota has been implicated in many disease states, including diabe-
tes, obesity and cardiovascular disease .

action roles between the sex hormones and gut microbiota has emerged  It has been
reported that the composition of commensal microbes of male and female animals diverged at
the time of puberty, which implied that sex hormone levels exerted specific influences on the
composition of the microbiota. Removal of gut microbiota increased the testosterone concen-
tration in female mice but decreased the concentration in male mice. Thus, the commensal gut
microbiota also had effects on the production of male sex hormone  It is interesting to
explore the role of gut microbiota in PCOS, as the androgen level in PCOS women always ele-
vated. Tremellen and Pearce suggest that dysbiosis of gut microbiota (DOGMA) brought by a
high fat-sugar diet in PCOS patients leads to an increase in the intestinal permeability. Lipo-
polysaccharide produced by gram negative bacteria traverses the “leaky gut” wall into the circu-
lation, leading to a chronic state of low grade inflammation. The activation of immune system
interferes with insulin receptor, driving up insulin level, which boosts testosterone production
in the ovary leading to PCOS. The DOGMA theory can account for the role of gut microbiota
in the pathogenesis of PCOS .

the dysbiosis of host gut microbiota and modulating of gut microbiota may be beneficial for
PCOS treatment. In this study, in order to verify our hypotheses, PCOS rat model was estab-
lished using letrozole induction. Microbiota interventions through Lactobacillus transplanta-
tion and fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) from healthy rats were used for the
treatments of PCOS rats. Administration of probiotics such as Lactobacillus is an attractive
concept in combating various diseases. L rhamnosus GR-1 attenuated lipopolysaccharide-
induced inflammation in pregnant CD-1 mice  Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM main-
tained insulin sensitivity in a metabolically heterogeneous group  Lactobacillus rhamnosus
GG and Lactobacillus casei DN-114-001 protected epithelial barrier function against Escheri-
chia coli-induced redistribution of the tight-junction proteins  Fecal microbiota trans-
plantation (FMT) was introduction of fecal suspension derived from a healthy donor into the
gastrointestinal tract of a diseased individual. It has been proposed as a novel therapeutic
approach to modulate gut microbiota dysbiosis. Patients with metabolic syndrome increased
insulin sensitivity after infusion of microbiota from lean donors  Our previous study
showed that FMT promoted the re-establishment of intestinal microbial communities and
mucosal barriers in mice with antibiotic-induced dysbiosis  Thus, the available animal and
human evidences suggested that Lactobacillus transplantation and FMT could serve as new
therapies for treating diseases. In the present study, after microbiota interventions through Lac-
tobacillus transplantation and FMT, the estrous cycles, sex hormonal levels, ovarian.

Six-week-old specific-pathogen free (SPF) level inbred female Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (mean
body weight, 180 g) were purchased from Animal Facility of Dalian Medical University. All
animal experiments were approved by the Animal Care Committee of Dalian Medical Univer-
sity, China (SCXK-2013-0003). All animals were feed with commercial diet (51% nitrogen-free
extract, 24.9% crude protein, 4.6% crud fat, 6.6% crud ash, 4.1% crud fiber and 8.9% moisture),
and tap water ad libitum. In this experiment, 32 female SD rats were randomly assigned into 4
groups of 8 rats each, including a control group that received a gavage of normal saline, and
three treatment groups (PCOS, PCOS FMT and PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation groups)
administered a gavage of letrozole (Novartis Pharma Schweiz AG, Switzerland) at a concentra-
tion of 1 mg/kg once daily for 21 consecutive days. The establishment of PCOS rat model was
similar to that of Kalafi. et al  On day 21, all rat fecal samples were collected. Control rat
fecal samples and PCOS rat fecal samples were used for DGGE analysis to evaluate the gut
microbiota shift in PCOS rats. In order to quantify the differences of microbita for all rats on
day 21, real-time PCR analysis was applied. Twenty four hours after the last dose of letrozole
(on day 22), PCOS FMT rats were administered a gavage of fecal supernatant with 2×109 fecal
microbiota, PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation rats were administered a gavage of 2×109 Lac-
tobacillus, the control rats and PCOS rats were administered a gavage of normal saline for 14
consecutive days. On day 36, all rat fecal samples were collected for real-time PCR analysis.
Then all rats were sacrificed by decapitation. Trunk blood samples and ovarian tissue samples
were obtained for the subsequent experiments. The treatments of the animals and sample col-
lections were showed in Fig 1..

Fig 1. Time lines of the animal experiments. To establish the PCOS rat model, SD rats were treated with
letrozole at a concentration of 1 mg/kg once daily for 21 days. After that, PCOS FMT group was treated with
2×109 fecal microbiota once daily, PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation group was treated with 2×109
Lactobacillus once daily, PCOS group and control group were treated with normal saline for 14 days. On day
21, all rat fecal samples were collected. On day 36, all rat blood samples, ovarian tissue samples and fecal
samples were collected..

Gut microbiota differences between PCOS rats and control rats were analyzed using DGGE
analysis on day 21. The metagenomic DNA was extracted from rat fecal samples with QIAamp
DNA stool mini kit (Qiagen, Germany). PCR amplification was conducted using the universal
bacterial primers F338+GC clamp and R518 targeting the hyper variable V3 regions of 16S
rRNA genes. The PCR products were analyzed using the DCode system (Bio-Rad, USA)
according to descriptions of Joossens. et al.  DGGE profiles were digitally processed with
Quantity One software version 462 in a multistep procedure following the manufacturer’s
instructions..

Ten gram fresh fecal samples from the control group were collected using sterile tubes every
morning. Fecal samples were blended with 20 mL sterile warm normal saline for 1 min-
ute using a conventional blender. This blended fecal mixture was then centrifuged at 1000 g for
5 min, the supernatant was collected and OD value was tested at 620 nm. This supernatant was
prepared for FMT. Twenty four hours after the last dose of letrozole, each rat of the PCOS
FMT group was administered a gavage of fecal supernatant with 2×109 fecal microbiota for 14
consecutive days. Meanwhile, each rat of the control group and PCOS group was administered
a gavage of normal saline..

On day 36  all rats were sacri-
ficed. The ovarian morphological changes were determined as previously described  Ovar-
ian tissue samples were obtained and fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin, embedded in
paraffin and sectioned at 4 μm. Every 10th section (n = 8) was mounted on a glass slide, stained
with hematoxylin/eosinand and analyzed using an Olympus DP73 microscope (Olympus,.

Tokyo, Japan) by two persons blinded to the origin of sections. Cystic follicles were defined
according to criteria proposed previously as those follicles devoid of oocytes, displaying a
large antral cavity, an enlarged thecal cell layer, and a thin granulosa cell compartment contain-
ing apparently healthy cells..

To characterize gut microbiota shift in PCOS rats, we performed a global survey of the micro-
biota in fecal samples. Genetic fingerprints of the gut bacterial communities generated by
DGGE analysis showed shifts of the bacterial composition and diversity in feces. It could be
observed that some bands became more intense, such as band 3 (Fig 2A). However, the changes
of the DGGE band profiles were difficult to be quantified by observation. Therefore, we utilized
similarity and Unweighted Pair Group Method with Arithmetic Mean (UPGMA) as a cluster
method to demonstrate band pattern similarity. The similarity matrix indicated a 60.1% and
66.9% similarity within the control group and PCOS group, respectively, but only a 58.3% simi-
larity between the two groups (data not shown). Clustering analysis based on the similarity
indices showed that PCOS group and the control group clustered in a different branch (Fig
2B). Though two PCOS rats were clustered in the control group, they were in different
branches. Principal component analysis (PCA) of DGGE fingerprints further confirmed the
differences of gut microbiota between PCOS group and control group. Microbiota structure of
the PCOS group showed a separation from the control group by PCA axis 1 and 2. Gut micro-
biota in PCOS group differed considerably from the control group by moving towards right of
PCA axis 1 and down of PCA axis 2 (Fig 2C). These findings indicated that PCOS resulted in a
redistribution of the relative abundances of bacterial phyla with the gut microbiota..

lanes (C2-2 and P2-3) were cut and sequenced. Band 2 and 3 were identified as Prevotella mela-
ninogenica ATCC 25845 with 93% similarity, indicating that the DGGE gel separated V3 16S
rRNA genes from different bacteria effectively. As shown in DGGE profiles, the separated and
strong bands in PCOS group were identified as Pseudomonas monteilii SB3101, Roseburia
intestinalis XB6B4, Prevotella melaninogenica ATCC25845 and Prevotella denticola F0289. The
weak bands in PCOS group were identified as Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC533 and Ruminococ-
cus torques L2-14 (Table 1)..

Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC 533 .

Prevotella melaninogenica ATCC 25845.

Prevotella melaninogenica ATCC 25845.

the gut; Lactobacillus, Prevotella and Ruminococcus genus were selected because of the results
of DGGE analysis and sequence analysis. On day 21, the copy number of Lactobacillus, Rumi-
nococcus and Clostridium were lower and Prevotella was higher in PCOS group when com-
pared with the control group. There were no significant differences in the copy number of
Bifidobacterium, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus and Bacteroides in the two groups (Table 2)..

Data were reported as the average estimate of Log10 of fecal PCR target genetic amplicon copy numbers present in 1 g of feces.
* p<0.05 results which are signiﬁcantly different versus control group
# p<0.05 data are signiﬁcantly different versus PCOS group..

than that in Lactobacillus transplantation group. Though Prevotella in both groups still have
significant differences with the control, it decreased significantly when compared with the
PCOS group. There were no significant differences in the copy number of Bifidobacterium,
Escherichia coli, Enterococcus, Bacteroides and Ruminococcus in the two treated groups when
compared with PCOS group. These data indicated that PCOS resulted in a significant variation
of gut microbiota composition. Both FMT and Lactobacillus transplantation were beneficial for
restorations of normal gut residents in letrozole induced PCOS rats..

Using daily vaginal smears, estrous cycles were analyzed for all rats. All control rats had regular
estrous cycles of 4–5 days, comprising proestrus, estrus, metestrus and diestrus. The PCOS rats
were constantly in diestrus stage, exhibiting predominantly leukocytes. On the 7th day after
PCOS rats were treated with FMT, epithelial keratinocytes were observed microscopically dur-
ing estrus in the vaginal smears of 3 rats; on the 14th day epithelial keratinocytes were observed
in all of the 8 rats. The estrous cycle changes occurred twice in 5 rats, once in 3 rats. In the
PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation group, 1 of 8 rats had epithelial keratinocytes on the 7th
day; 6 of 8 rats had epithelial keratinocytes on the 14th day; the remaining 2 rats were in dies-
trus at the time of sacrifice. The estrous cycle changes occurred twice in 2 rats, once in 4 rats,
and not at all in 2 rats (Fig 3)..

Under light microscopy, the control rat ovaries exhibited follicles in various stages of develop-
ment including secondary follicles, graafian follicles, and fresh corpora lutea. The granulosa
within the follicles showed multiple layers. The PCOS rat ovaries showed small follicles in early
stage of development and atretic follicles. In addition, many large cysts with virtually no granu-
losa layer or scant granulosa were observed. The FMT and Lactobacillus transplantation rat
ovaries showed increased granulosa layers and the formation of corpora lutea (Fig 4 and
Table 3)..

and disease state. It has been reported that sex differences in the gut microbiome drived hor-
mone-dependent regulating autoimmunity. Early life exposures determined the sex hormone
level and modified progression to autoimmunity in type 1 diabetes mouse (T1D) model. Trans-
plantation of the male microbiome to immature females increased the level of testosterone and
formed a testosterone-dependent metabolite profile in the female recipients and robust T1D
protection  Besides the communication between gut microbiota and testosterone occur-
ring in immune system, gut microbiota has a direct effect over endocrine system. Clarke. et al
found that male germ free mice, unlike females, exhibited a significant high level of 5-hydroxy-
tryptamine and its metabolite in hippocampal compared with conventionally housed control
animals  Collectively, these studies indicated the bi-direction regulation of gut microbiota
and endocrine systems..

Excess androgen production and relatively insufficient estradiol are major traits for PCOS
patients and essential for follicle development  Such hormone changes in PCOS are likely
associated with dysbiosis of gut microbiota. In this study, letrozole-induced PCOS rat model
was used to evaluate the gut microbiota and sex hormone concentrations. Letrozole is a nonste-
roidal aromatase inhibitor that reduces conversion of androgens to estrogens in the ovary,
resulting in increased testosterone and decreased estrone production  Decreased aroma-
tase activity in the ovary is one of the pathophysiologic hypotheses of PCOS development [31,.

Fig 4. Morphological changes of ovarian tissues. (A) Sections of ovary from the control group had normal appearance. (B) PCOS group showed cystic
degenerating follicles with thin granulosa layers. (C) PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation group showed increased granulosa layers. (D) PCOS FMT group
showed increased granulosa layers and formation of corpora lutea. The larger boxed area in A, B, C, D was shown at higher magnification in E, F, G,
H, respectively. GLC: granular cell layer, TCL: theca cell layer, O: oocyte, L: luteum, AF: atretic follicle. Magnification  scale bar, 50 μm..

32]. In letrozole-induced PCOS rats, the serum estradiol and progesterone levels were reduced,
testosterone and luteinizing hormone (LH) levels were elevated in a dose-dependent manner
 Despite the fact that letrozole rats had a similar metabolic characteristic to the controls,
the endocrine hormone profile of this animal model in several ways was similar to human
PCOS. Recently, letrozole-induced PCOS rat model was used in several papers to evaluate
effects of new therapeutic methods for PCOS  which illustrated the recognition of this.

Number of corpora lutea (n)
Diameter of largest follicle (μm)
Thickness of granulosa cell layer
(μm).

Every 10th section of 8 rats in each group was calculated..

chronic sinusitis, periodontitis and bacterial vaginosis  Recent investigations have
revealed that males not females have greater odds of carrying Prevotella intermedia in oral cav-
ity, suggesting an association between sex hormone and carriage of Prevotella  In women
with PCOS, Prevotella intermedia serum antibody levels were higher than healthy women 
It has been hypothesized that testosterone metabolites contributed to Prevotella growth and
virulence  However, there is no evidence to support this hypothesis. Prevotella intermedia
were capable of stimulating 5α-reductase activity in human gingival fibroblasts, leading to the
synthesis of dihydrotestosterone form testosterone and androstenedione  In this study,
with the testosterone and androstenedione levels increased in PCOS group, the copy number
of Prevotella also increased, which is consistent with previous study. To further understand
effects of microbiota interventions on PCOS, PCOS rats were treated with FMT and Lactobacil-
lus transplantation. The results showed that with the copy number of Prevotella decrease the
testosterone and androstenedione levels also decreased. The relationship between Prevotella
and androgen level needs further study in letrozole-induced PCOS rat model..

the natural immunity and contributing to the balance of microbiota  A previous study
showed that postmenopausal women with a more diverse gut microbiome exhibited elevated
urinary estrogens and estrogen metabolites  In the present study, with the decrease of
estradiol and estrone levels in PCOS rats, the colonization of Lactobacillus in the gut was
decreased. When PCOS rats were treated with FMT and Lactobacillus transplantation, with the
increase of Lactobacilli, estradiol and estrone levels were increased significantly. There is a limi-
tation of our study: ELISA sensitivity can fail to detect low levels of sex steroids and could not
analyze the serum steroids in female rodents according to estrus cycle stage  However, the
available data indicated that sex steroids concentrations could be regulated by microbiota inter-
ventions in PCOS rat model..

ria” as they exert health-promoting properties. It is proposed that increase of Lactobacillus in
the gut lead to production of short chain fatty acids that improve gut health, increasing the bar-
rier function of the gut and reducing translocation of bacterial endotoxins across the gut wall
where they could produce inflammation and insulin resistance  Probiotic supplementation
(Lactobacillus casei Shirota (LcS)) could prevent high-fat, over-feeding induced insulin resis-
tance in human subjects  Considering the beneficial effect of Lactobacillus on insulin resis-
tance and the disorder is associated with PCOS, the present study used Lactobacillus
transplantation and FMT to treat PCOS rats. The results showed that after treating PCOS rats
with Lactobacillus transplantation and FMT, the serum androgens reduced, estrous cycles
improved and the ovarian functions normalized. These data suggested that FMT and Lactoba-
cillus transplantation were helpful for the treatments of PCOS rats..

11. Haag LM, Fischer A, Otto B, Plickert R, Kühl AA, Göbel UB, et al. Intestinal microbiota shifts towards
elevated commensal Escherichia coli loads abrogate colonization resistance against Campylobacter
jejuni in mice. PLOS One. 2012; 7e35988. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035988 PMID: 22563475;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3341396..

20. Yang S, Li W, Challis JR, Reid G, Kim SO, Bocking AD. Probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus GR-1 super-.

21. Andreasen AS, Larsen N, Pedersen-Skovsgaard T, Berg RM, Moller K, Svendsen KD, et al. Effects of
Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM on insulin sensitivity and the systemic inflammatory response in
human subjects. Br J Nutr. 1041831–8. Epub 2010/09/08. doi: S0007114510002874 [pii] doi: 10.
1017/S0007114510002874 PMID: 20815975..

Johnson-Henry KC, Donato KA, Shen-Tu G, Gordanpour M, Sherman PM. Lactobacillus rhamnosus
strain GG prevents enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7-induced changes in epithelial barrier
function. Infect Immun. 2008; 761340–8. Epub 2008/01/30. doi: IAI.00778-07 [pii] doi: 10.1128/IAI.
00778-07 PMID: 18227169; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2292865..

23. Parassol N, Freitas M, Thoreux K, Dalmasso G, Bourdet-Sicard R, Rampal P. Lactobacillus casei DN-
114 001 inhibits the increase in paracellular permeability of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli-infected
T84 cells. Res Microbiol. 2005; 1560263-3 [pii]
doi: 10.1016/j.resmic.2004.09.013 PMID: 15748992..

Zambon JJ, Reynolds HS, Slots J. Black-pigmented Bacteroides spp. in the human oral cavity. Infect
Immun. 1981; 32198–203. PMID: 6111541; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC350607.