43_PARAGRAPHS

It has been known for decades that intestinal bacteria make important contributions to
human metabolism and physiology. Perhaps the example best known to clinicians is the
microbial synthesis of the essential nutrient vitamin B12 — the enzymes required for B12
synthesis are possessed by bacteria but not by plants or animals  However, research from
the past decade has conclusively established that the host-microbe relationship in humans is
far more complex than previously appreciated. The implications of this research for
assessing and meeting the nutritional needs of critically ill patients are substantial..

An understanding of the complex relationship between humans and our microbes dates back
at least to Pasteur. However, until very recently, the ability of microbiologists and clinicians
to characterize and dissect this relationship was hampered by the reality that only a minority
of microbes on the planet (and in the human body) can be cultured, isolated, and
systematically studied in the laboratory  As a result, most clinical focus on bacteria and
viruses has been directed toward the statistical minority of organisms that cause clinical
disease and can be easily isolated in culture..

Over 25 years ago, microbial ecologists conclusively demonstrated that bacterial DNA can
be used to identify which organisms are present in a complex biological sample without
dependence on cultivating those organisms in the laboratory  Until recently, these
culture-independent techniques to characterize microbial diversity were relatively restricted
to studies of ocean and soil samples. Over the past decade, concerted efforts have been made
to use these techniques to undertake comprehensive molecular surveys of the organisms
associated with humans. These efforts have benefited from remarkable advances in DNA
sequencing technologies, as well as from well-funded initiatives such as the NIH Human
Microbiome Project .

Perhaps the foremost lesson of these recent efforts has been that all humans, both healthy
and critically ill, are intimately associated with a vast population of microbial organisms.
Uncertainty remains regarding the precise number of bacteria in the human body, but it is
generally agreed that there at least 10 bacterial cells for every 1 human cell  This has led
authorities in the field to describe humans as “superorganisms” composed of both human
and microbial cells  Although clinicians have not historically thought about their patients
in this way, it is easy to recognize the evolutionary logic of a symbiotic relationship between
humans and microbes. By supporting lifelong colonization by organisms that possess a
diverse set of metabolic capabilities, the host effectively augments its own genome; this is a
much more efficient arrangement than waiting for humans to evolve new metabolic
capacities on their own  In return for their contributions, microbes associated with the
body are rewarded with a relatively safe, predictable, and nutrient-rich niche for
colonization. As will be discussed in subsequent sections, the impact of critical illness on
this symbiotic relationship remains poorly understood..

All epithelial surfaces that interface with the external world harbor microbes, but the most
dense microbial communities are those in the distal intestinal tract. Recent estimates suggest
that 10 to 100 trillion microbes (including up to 1000 species) reside in this location 
Remarkably, although more than 70 bacterial divisions (deep evolutionary lineages) are
known to exist on the planet, human gut microbial communities are dominated by just four
lineages. Two dominant divisions, the Bacteroidetes and the Firmicutes, comprise over 95%
of the total community; most of these organisms are strict anaerobes such as the Bacteroides
and Clostridium species  The remainder of human gut microbes are often from two
other divisions: Actinobacteria (e.g., Bifidobacterium species) and Proteobacteria. The
phylum Proteobacteria contains the gram-negative enterics that despite being well known to
clinicians, represent only a fraction of the gut microbial community  The dominance of
these four bacterial phyla and the relative absence of all other phyla suggests that, under
normal circumstances, the human-microbe relationship is highly selective and highly stable.
Throughout most of a person’s life, this relationship is either symbiotic (mutually beneficial)
or commensal (providing benefit to one member without harming the other); pathogenic
host-microbe interactions are indeed the exception rather than the rule .

There is currently enormous interest in characterizing the clinical relevance of the human
microbiome (defined as the collective set of microbial genomes associated with the human
body). In addition to the GI tract, important sites of colonization also under study include the
skin, oropharynx, respiratory tract, and genitourinary tract. A primary objective of current
research is to better define the basic features of the human microbiome, e.g., how do
microbial communities change over time in a given individual and how much interindividual
variability is observed in various microbial communities? An equally important objective is
to identify associations between the microbiome and human health and disease .

A particularly compelling example of the importance of the gut microbiota to host
metabolism is provided by comparing the nutritional status of germ-free (GF) and
conventionally raised laboratory animals. Numerous investigators have demonstrated that
conventionally raised animals require up to 30% less caloric intake to maintain their body
weight  This remarkable observation is not only surprising; it is also counterintuitive
since one might reasonably expect that bacteria and their human host may compete for a
limited supply of ingested nutrients. In this section, we summarize what is known about how
microbes directly impact human nutrition..

The sophisticated relationship that has evolved between the human GI tract and gut
microbiota allows for efficient utilization of dietary carbohydrates. In the proximal GI tract,
simple sugars such as glucose are absorbed, and disaccharides (e.g., lactose) are hydrolyzed
into their corresponding monosaccharide components such that they too can be absorbed 
However, a significant portion of dietary carbohydrates, including complex plant-derived
polysaccharides and unhydrolyzed starch, normally passes undigested through to the distal
GI tract  Here, dense microbial populations (up to 1011 cells per gram of colonic
matter) are present that are well-equipped to hydrolyze complex carbohydrates. Many of the
enzymes required to utilize these dietary substrates are not encoded in the human genome;
by contrast, the microbiome, which contains approximately 100x more genes than the
human genome, is highly enriched in such enzymes .

Utilization of complex polysaccharides via fermentation by anaerobic bacteria in the large
intestine results in the accumulation of short chain fatty acids (SCFA)  The principal
SCFAs seen in the colon, acetate, propionate, and butyrate, have inherent nutritional value,
but also impact gut epithelial physiology in other ways. They are absorbed by passive
diffusion across the colonic epithelium, and are subsequently utilized by different organs.
Acetate, the SCFA produced in highest concentration, is used by skeletal and cardiac muscle
and can be used by adipocytes for lipogenesis. Butyrate is metabolized primarily in the gut
epithelium to yield ketone bodies or CO2  Interestingly, the colonic epithelium derives
up to 70% of its energy needs directly from butyrate. Propionate metabolism is poorly
understood but appears to involve transport to the liver by the portal circulation. It is
believed that SCFAs also impact water absorption, local blood flow, and epithelial
proliferation in the large intestine .

Genomic analysis of gut bacteria offers vivid examples of the role of microbes in nutrient
utilization. For example, in 2003, Xu, et al. published the complete genome sequence of the
gram-negative anaerobe Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, a prominent member of the normal
intestinal microbiota  Annotation and analysis of the genome revealed a sophisticated
apparatus for acquiring and digesting otherwise unusable dietary polysaccharides. This
apparatus, including a complex, multi-component, multi-enzyme complex starch utilization
system (SUS), consists of over 230 glycoside hydrolase and 15 polysaccharide lyase genes
 The genomic analysis demonstrated that B. thetaiotaomicron has evolved the
remarkable capacity to sense the availability of carbohydrates in its microenvironment, and
that it also has the ability to forage and utilize host-derived glycans (e.g., mucin and
heparin). Mechanistic studies in gnotobiotic animals further demonstrated that, when B.
thetaiotaomicron senses a scarcity of fucose in the intestinal lumen, it actually induces the
gut epithelium to upregulate expression of fucosylated glycans that can be used by the
bacteria as an energy source without harming the host  This body of work illustrates
how the remarkable host-microbe symbiosis can be teased apart by pairing genomic
sequencing efforts with creative in vivo laboratory studies..

In contrast to carbohydrates, relatively little attention has been paid to the relationship
between the intestinal microbiota and nitrogen balance in humans. This is partly because
conventional wisdom states that all essential amino acid requirements in humans must be
supplied by the diet  however, emerging evidence indicates that gut microbes can
impact nitrogen balance by de novo synthesis of amino acids and intestinal urea recycling.
These contributions are most pronounced in ruminant animals that, amazingly, can live on a
protein-free diet because their microbiota is capable of synthesizing most or all amino acids
required for survival..

Microbial synthesis of essential amino acids has been notoriously difficult to measure in
humans, but studies with radiolabelled tracers, e.g., 13C and 15N, indicate that the intestinal
microbiota makes a measurable contribution to the pool of essential amino acids. A series of
experiments involving labeled inorganic nitrogen suggests that up to 20% of circulating
lysine and threonine in nonruminant mammals, including adult humans, is synthesized by
gut microbes  Similarly, Raj, et al. demonstrated that gut microbial synthesis of
leucine in adult men was approximately 20% of the dietary amount  Interestingly,
another study demonstrated that several substrates required for microbial synthesis of
essential amino acids are derived from dietary carbohydrates  Taken together, these
studies provide compelling evidence that gut microbes contribute to the circulating pool of
essential amino acids. More work is needed to define these contributions in both healthy and
undernourished humans..

The intestinal microbiota also contributes to nitrogen balance by participating in urea
nitrogen salvaging (UNS)  Elevated urease expression in gut microbes results in
metabolism of urea in the GI tract into ammonia and carbon dioxide. Some of the ammonia
can be utilized for microbial synthesis of amino acids. Perhaps more importantly, the
nitrogen generated during this process (urea nitrogen) can re-enter the host circulation and
serve as a substrate for synthetic processes  Interestingly, reduced urea recycling has
been reported in GF animals 
Furthermore, several reports indicate that regulation of UNS is important in settings of low
N intake and high N demand (e.g., during pregnancy and during periods of rapid somatic
growth in infancy)  While still relatively preliminary, these studies underscore the
relationship between gut microbes and protein metabolism that will likely be further
described through on-going characterization of the human microbiome..

Until recently, few studies of the association between lipid metabolism and the microbiome
existed. However, important research by Jeffrey Gordon, Fredrick Backhed, and colleagues
suggests that the body’s supply of triglycerides, a prominent source of energy during critical
illness  is tightly linked to the intestinal microbiota. These findings have enormous
potential relevance for research in a wide range of disease states, including metabolic
disorders such as obesity (see below) and cardiovascular disease..

This line of inquiry began with comparisons of lipid metabolism in GF and conventionally-
raised adult mice. By use of x-ray absorptiometry and epididymal fat pad weight analysis, it
was demonstrated that wild-type (WT) animals contained 42% more total body fat than GF
animals, despite a higher metabolic rate and a reduced daily consumption of standard chow
 To mechanistically evaluate this finding, the authors transferred the microbiota of WT
animals to GF animals. A rapid increase (within 10 days) of total body fat content and
epididymal fat weight was noted despite no significant difference in total body weight.
Intriguingly, colonization of GF mice with just a single gut microbe (B. thetaiotaocmicron,
discussed above) also yielded a significant increase in total body fat content, although the
increase in fat content was less than that seen with transfer of the complete mouse
microbiota. Further work in this model suggested that the microbiota stimulates increased
hepatic triglyceride production and promotes storage of adipocyte triglycerides by
suppressing the activity of a circulating inhibitor of lipoprotein lipase .

These pioneering studies have led to a sustained effort to understand the relationship
between the microbiota and adiposity. In one interesting experiment, GF mice were
colonized with gut bacteria from humans fed with a typical Western diet (high fat, high
carbohydrate), and a similar increase in adiposity was seen in the GF mice  Other
experiments that analyzed the lipids present in the serum and adipose tissue of WT and GF
mice show that WT animals had elevated levels of 18 phosphatidylcholine species and
decreased levels of nine triglyceride species relative to GF animals  Alternatively, in the
adipose tissue the concentration of most phosphatidylcholine compounds was similar
between the two groups, but an increased concentration of triglycerides was detected in WT
animals. Even more between group differences were detected in the liver lipid profiles. For
example, in addition to numerous differences in cholesteryl ester and phosphatidylcholine
species, WT mice had a significant increase in 95 types of liver triglycerides. The
translational relevance of these findings must still be defined, but these results provide clues
to the role of microbes in lipid metabolism..

It has been known for nearly a century that ruminants have no dietary requirement for water-
soluble vitamins as a consequence of the dense microbial populations in the rumen, and that
GF laboratory animals require dietary supplements of vitamins that are not needed by their
WT counterparts  Several bacterial genera that are common in the distal intestine (e.g.,
Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, and Enterococcus) are known to synthesize vitamins.
Thiamine, folate, biotin, riboflavin, and panthothenic acid are water-soluble vitamins that
are plentiful in the diet, but that are also synthesized by gut bacteria. Likewise, it has been
estimated that up to half of the daily Vitamin K requirement is provided by gut bacteria 
Interestingly, the molecular structure of bacterially synthesized vitamins is not always
identical to the dietary forms of the vitamins. In fact, several specialized epithelial
transporters have been recognized to participate specifically in the absorption of vitamins
derived from gut bacteria  Perhaps the relative ease in replenishing vitamin stores in
ICU patients has minimized enthusiasm for aggressive investigation of how bacterial
vitamin biosynthesis is altered in hospitalized patients..

Studies of energy balance in conventional and GF animals led to the hypothesis that the
microbial ecology of the GI tract contributes to the pathogenesis of obesity  Although it
is widely acknowledged that excessive caloric intake is the root cause of obesity, it is
reasonable to question whether an individual’s metabolic response to caloric excess might
vary according to the gut microbiota. Much of the work in this area has relied upon a rodent
model of obesity in which animals homozygous for a mutation in the leptin gene (ob/ob)
harbor a fully penetrant obese phenotype  Early studies utilizing 16S ribosomal RNA
based genetic sequencing identified that obese animals have a markedly decreased
abundance of Bacteroidetes organisms (such as B. thetaiotaomicron) and a corresponding
increase in Firmicutes  Obese mice also possessed an abundance of methanogenic
organisms from the domain Archaea, and it is believed that these organisms can aid in
bacterial fermentation in the gut via removal of H2  The microbial differences observed
in these experiments were division wide, i.e., not skewed by the presence or absence of a
single species. Further, the differences could not be explained by differences in food
consumption. Of central importance, corresponding studies have shown similar features of
the gut microbes in obese humans .

Why would a microbial community enriched in Firmicutes promote obesity? Recent work
has suggested that the microbiota of obese individuals has an increased capacity to harvest
energy from the diet  Landmark papers, utilizing high-throughput metagenomic
sequencing platforms to identify as many genes as possible from all members of a mixed
population of bacteria, from Gordon, Turnbaugh, Ley and colleagues, have conclusively
demonstrated that the metabolic potential of the gut microbiome varies according to the.

microbial community composition. Molecular analysis of the microbiota of lean and obese
mice demonstrated that the obese microbiome is markedly enriched in genes enabling
breakdown of dietary polysaccharides, e.g., glucosidases, galactosidases, and amylases, and
genes encoding proteins that transport and metabolize the products of polysaccharide
metabolism  Biochemical and bomb calorimetry analyses in the same experiments
demonstrated increased concentrations of SCFA’s (indicating a higher degree of bacterial
fermentation) and significantly less energy remaining in the feces of obese mice relative to
their lean counterparts  Finally, these phenotypic traits were transmissible; colonization
of GF animals with the microbiota of obese animals led to higher weight gain than
colonization with microbiota from lean WT mice..

Turnbaugh, et al. have advanced these ideas even further by demonstrating that the
microbiome associated with diet-induced obesity (DIO) (in contrast to the ob/ob mutant
model) is also rich in Firmicutes species and is similarly efficient at extracting energy from
the diet  This set of experiments utilized a mouse model of DIO in which conversion to
a high fat/high sugar (Western) diet reliably produces increased total body weight and
increased epididymal fat content. The authors demonstrated that DIO alters gut microbial
ecology by supporting the growth of Firmicutes species, and, in this case, they detected a
specific association between obesity and the abundance of a class of organisms (Mollicutes)
from the Firmicutes division that has also been identified in humans. Transplantation of
cecal contents from DIO mice, similar to experiments with the ob/ob mice, yielded higher
increases in body weight and fat than when cecal contents were transplanted from lean, WT
animals. Here, again, metagenomic analyses were used to prove that the gut microbiome of
animals fed a Western diet is enriched in genes encoding proteins related to energy harvest,
including phosphotransferase proteins that enable the transport of simple sugars such as
glucose and fructose..

A critical lesson from this body of work is that alterations in the microbiome of obese
individuals are reversible. Early on, Ley, et al. demonstrated that the ratio of Firmicutes to
Bacteroidetes species decreases over time in humans on either a fat-restricted or
carbohydrate-restricted diet  This was subsequently supported by Turnbaugh’s findings
that the bloom in Mollicutes seen in DIO was reversible with dietary manipulation 
Additional studies monitoring changes in the microbiota after surgical and non-surgical
weight loss interventions have produced similar findings .

In 1968, Tennant, et al. demonstrated that GF mice do not survive as long as WT mice
during starvation despite similar patterns of starvation-induced weight loss. However, this
group did not characterize the microbiota of the WT animals  In 1974, Tannock and
Savage used a culture-based approach to characterize the intestinal bacteria of mice exposed
to a stress model that included deprivation of food, water, and bedding for 48 hours
They concluded that stressed animals had a reduction in Lactobacilli and total mucosal-
associated bacteria relative to control animals, but maintained a similar number of colonic
anaerobes. In 1989, Deitch, et al. similarly reported that starvation induced a decrease in
Lactobacilli in the murine GI tract, however they noted a bloom of gram-negative enteric
organisms. Subsequently, several studies have contrasted gut microbes in newborn animals.

receiving either enteral or parenteral nutrition. These studies suggest that TPN-fed animals
have an increased relative abundance of potential pathogens, such as Clostridium
perfringens, that can forage on glycans lining the gut epithelium  However, it is not
known if these findings can be extended to critically ill adults that have shifted abruptly
from the fed to the fasting state..

Two recent studies harnessed the power of high-throughput DNA sequencing to profile
changes in microbial ecology during fasting in animal models. Crawford, et al. performed a
fascinating study of myocardial ketone body metabolism by the intestinal microbiota during
nutrient deprivation  After a 24 hour fast, the authors observed a significant increase in
the abundance of Bacteroidetes species and a corresponding decrease in Firmicutes; this is
the converse of what was observed in models of caloric excess. They proceeded to provide
convincing evidence that the microbiota plays an integral role in fasting-induced hepatic
ketogenesis, an important energy source during stress and starvation. In GF animals,
ketogenesis was markedly reduced, and it was shown that myocardial metabolism was
redirected towards glucose utilization. To understand further how microbial ecology is
altered during fasting, Costello, et al. performed an innovative study in which they studied
the Burmese python, a vertebrate that consumes large meals between long intervals of
fasting  These authors also demonstrated an abundance of Bacteroidetes during fasting
that shifted towards a post-prandial abundance of Firmicutes. Species that were enriched in
the post-prandial state included Clostridium and Lactobacillus. These innovative studies
serve as a foundation to study gut microbes in hospitalized patients that are not candidates
for enteral nutrition..

To date, evaluations of the microbial ecology of the ICU have largely been restricted to
culture-based studies. Not surprisingly, studies frequently demonstrate that patients admitted
to the ICU are rapidly colonized with opportunistic pathogens  It has also been
shown that pathogens detected by routine surveillance of the airways or the GI tract can
serve as harbingers of an ensuing clinical infection by that organism  Frequently
encountered organisms in skin, oropharyngeal, endotracheal, and fecal samples from
critically ill patients include the gram-negative enterics as well as species of Candida,
Pseudomonas, and Staphylococcus. However, it is critical to emphasize that the fate of
commensal organisms, many of which serve beneficial purposes, in the ICU is poorly
understood. For this reason, a trial with prospective monitoring of the microbiome in ICU
patients with comprehensive culture-independent techniques is needed..

hypoxia, are also known to perturb the microbiota and encourage the overgrowth of
pathogens  Some of the most commonly used pharmaceutical agents in the ICU,
including acid suppression therapies, vasopressors, and opioids, are known to impact the
human microbiota  Finally, our group was the first to demonstrate that the use of
total parenteral nutrition or enteral nutrition with processed liquid diets dramatically alters
the intestinal microbiota such that bacterial translocation to extraintestinal sites is promoted.
As the effects of artificial nutrition, polypharmacy, and the selective pressures of extreme
physiologic stress and injury accumulate over the course of critical illness, their impact on
the ecologic health of the intestinal microbiota is likely to have a major untoward effect on
recovery. Clinical interventions that can preserve gut microbial communities such that a
benefit in overall recovery is realized will require more in-depth analysis of the direct
impact of these interventions on the gut flora..

If one accepts that a “healthy” intestinal microbiota serves important biological functions,
then it is reasonable to hypothesize that gut microbial communities can be manipulated or
“optimized” during critical illness to increase the chances of achieving desired clinical
outcomes. In theory, manipulation of the gut microbiota could be used to improve energy
balance and decrease the incidence of infectious complications. A fundamental problem
with clinical application of this theory has been that we lack a detailed understanding of if
and how the microbiome is altered during critical illness. As a result, interventions in this
field have been introduced with a limited scientific foundation. Nonetheless, several
strategies to optimize the microbiome have now been evaluated clinically. Some, such as the
recent description of fecal transplantation for Clostridium difficile colitis  will not be
discussed here. Others with obvious relevance to nutrition are discussed..

Over the past two decades, several clinical trials have documented that selective
decontamination of the gastrointestinal tract and/or the oropharynx improves outcomes in
critically ill patients while simultaneously promoting the growth of antibiotic resistant
bacteria  Accepted approaches to decontamination consist of administering a regimen
of broad-spectrum nonabsorbable antibiotics that theoretically spares the colonic anaerobes,
and instead targets yeast, gram-negative pathogens ( e.g., the Enterobacteriaceae and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa), and gram-positive pathogens (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus) in
the oral cavity or the GI tract. These protocols drastically alter the ICU microbiota  and
by extension decrease both mortality and the incidence of infectious complications such as
ventilator-associated pneumonia  Importantly, although these landmark studies
serve as proof of principle that the intestinal microbiota can be manipulated in the ICU to
achieve desirable outcomes, no studies utilized molecular techniques to profile the ICU
microbiome before, during, or after decontamination. As a result, a precise understanding of
how decontamination protocols work is lacking. Nevertheless, enthusiasm for
decontamination protocols has diminished due to unacceptable increases in drug-resistant
bacterial strains within the ICU..

The administration of probiotics and prebiotics represents an increasingly popular
alternative to gut decontamination protocols. Probiotics are defined as live microorganisms
that confer health benefits upon humans and animals that ingest them in adequate amounts
 prebiotics are nondigestible food ingredients that confer health benefits by selectively
inducing the growth of probiotic species  Commonly, probiotics and prebiotics are
administered together as a food or dietary supplement known as a synbiotic  Although.

trials in a wide range of clinical settings have demonstrated great promise regarding the
safety and efficacy of these supplements , many critical issues pertaining to their usage
remain unresolved. Interestingly, despite the fact that they are often used to treat patients
with disease, probiotics and prebiotics are viewed by regulatory agencies as nutritional
supplements rather than as pharmaceutical agents or biohazards. This definition has allowed
for lax oversight in the field which has resulted in the commercial use of the terms
probiotics and prebiotics even when scientific criteria for the terms have not been met .

The practice of administering live microbes with putative health benefits to unhealthy
patients dates back to the early twentieth century. Much of the early work in the field was
performed at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, where Nobel laureate Eli Metchnikoff and others
advanced the notion of a differential gut microbiota in health and disease  These
scientists hypothesized that the protective effects of specific diets in some regions of Europe
could be attributed to the diet-induced growth of beneficial microbes. Interestingly, this led
almost instantly to commercial attempts to capitalize upon these ideas, hence the
development of probiotics. The most commonly used probiotic species are nonpathogenic
yeasts and organisms from the genera Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium  The most
commonly used prebiotics are the naturally occurring oligosaccharides known as fructans
that are normally found in foods such as garlic, artichokes, and bananas  Another well-
studied class of prebiotics is resistant starches, such as those found in unripe bananas and
raw potatoes. As knowledge of the intestinal microbiome expands, it is likely that many
more potential probiotic species and prebiotic supplements will be identified..

The long list of clinical diagnoses that have been treated with probiotics and/or prebiotics
ranges from intestinal infections (e.g., rotavirus infection) to extraintestinal infections (e.g.,
urinary infections) (cite) to allergic disorders (e.g., asthma); in other cases, these agents have
been used prophylactically, e.g., to prevent colon cancer The strongest clinical data
comes from trials of probiotics and prebiotics in the treatment of intestinal infections,
inflammatory bowel disease, and irritable bowel syndrome  Despite their widespread
usage, knowledge of the putative mechanism of action of probiotics and prebiotics is
limited. Most mechanistic studies in this area have centered upon production of
antimicrobial substances to inhibit colonization by pathogens, enhance the mucosal barrier
function, and downregulate mucosal inflammation  It is particularly interesting that,
despite the growing awareness of how gut microbes contribute to energy balance and despite
the administration of probiotics/prebiotics as nutritional supplements, little research on this
topic has focused on how these agents specifically impact nutrition, metabolism, or energy
balance..

Several studies have been conducted to test the hypothesis that outcomes in critically ill
patients can be improved by administering probiotics and prebiotics. These studies,
including a randomized trial comparing the effects of early enteral nutrition with and
without prebiotic supplementation, indicate that the incidence of sepsis and multi-organ
dysfunction syndrome among patients with severe pancreatitis is lower after treatment with
probiotics/prebiotics  However, in 2008, the Dutch Acute Pancreatitis Study Group
released results of a well-publicized multicenter, randomized, controlled study
demonstrating increased mortality among patients with severe acute pancreatitis that
received probiotic prophylaxis. The increased mortality was attributed to a high incidence of
intestinal ischemia, although a direct link between the probiotic and bowel ischemia was not
proven  A subsequent meta-analysis concluded that probiotics do not influence
mortality in the treatment of acute pancreatitis  however, the results of the Dutch study
have raised important questions about the whether and how probiotics should be
administered to vulnerable populations. Nonetheless, several other studies conducted in.

surgical and medical ICUs, document improved outcomes after probiotic administration
following trauma, liver transplant, and ICU admission for severe sepsis .

As noted, data regarding the safety and efficacy of probiotic and prebiotic administration are
limited. Potential safety issues involved with manipulation of the microbiota with probiotics/
prebiotics include probiotic-induced disease and antibiotic resistance  Even if questions
remain about efficacy and optimal route of delivery, it is generally accepted that probiotic
administration in healthy individuals is safe. However, there is little understanding of how to
approach these issues in the ICU. While probiotics have indeed been safely administered to
vulnerable hospitalized populations such as neonates and transplant recipients, the
significance of the results of the Dutch pancreatitis study cannot be overemphasized. They
serve as a powerful reminder of the seemingly obvious fact that administering live microbial
organisms to unhealthy patients might be dangerous, particularly when so little is known
about the putative mechanism of action. The importance of exercising caution is further
underscored by the scant federal regulation of commercial interests in this area..

Another possible approach to improve outcomes for critically ill patients is to manipulate the
intestinal microenvironment to maintain the local microbial ecology of the GI tract
indirectly. It is well established that the use of vasoactive pressors, antibiotics, and highly
processed nutrients will change not only the local microbiota, but also pH, oxygen tension,
SCFA production, and various critical micronutrients that maintain the health of normal
intestinal microbes. Our group and others have shown that maintenance of a more acidic
intestinal pH through the course of surgical injury and administration of oral pH solutions
enhance local intestinal immunity and prevent lethal gut-derived sepsis . Most recently
we have shown that surgical injury causes a rapid depletion of mucus phosphate, thereby
inducing certain strains of pathogenic bacteria to upregulate their virulence against the
intestinal epithelial barrier  Most bacteria that cause serious infections in ICU patients
are equipped with exquisite sensory mechanisms to detect the level of local phosphate
concentration. Phosphate concentration is a key trigger by which bacteria activate their
virulence machinery to, in some cases, cause lethal sepsis. When phosphate levels are high
at sites of local microbial colonization, such as the intestinal mucus, microbes use the PhoB
phosphosensory/phosphoregulatory system to repress virulence activation. However, during
phosphate depletion, the PhoB system is derepressed and virulence is activated even to the
point of tissue invasion, immune activation, and organ failure  The PhoB and analogous
systems are highly conserved among microbes and offer an opportunity for clinicians to
understand the precise host signals that trigger microbes to transform from indolent
colonizers to lethal pathogens rapidly. We have shown in animal studies that maintenance of
local phosphate concentration can suppress virulence activation among highly pathogenic
bacteria such as P. aeruginosa even during periods of severe physiologic stress  This
also appears to be the case for other pathogens such as C. albicans and E. faecalis
(unpublished observations). Therefore, providing therapies at the microenvironmental level
could be a novel approach to create molecular diplomacy between pathogen and host
through the course of severe physiologic stress such as that which occurs during human
critical illness..

10. Xu J, Bjursell MK, Himrod J, et al. A genomic view of the human-bacteroides thetaiotaomicron.

33. Hill MJ. Intestinal flora and endogenous vitamin synthesis. Eur J Cancer Prev. 1997; 6 (Suppl.

40. Nadal I, Santacruz A, Marcos A, et al. Shifts in clostridia, bacteroides and immunoglobulin-coating
fecal bacteria associated with weight loss in obese adolescents. Int J Obes. 2008; 33758–767.
41. Zhang H, DiBaise JK, Zuccolo A, et al. Human gut microbiota in obesity and after gastric bypass..

and E. coli monocontaminated mice to starvation. J Nutr. 1968; 94151–60. [PubMed: 4866341]
44. Tannock GW, Savage DC. Influences of dietary and environmental stress on microbial populations.

46. Deplancke B, Vidal O, Ganessunker D, et al. Selective growth of mucolytic bacteria including
clostridium perfringens in a neonatal piglet model of total parenteral nutrition. Am J Clin Nutr.
2002; 761117–1125. [PubMed: 12399288].

operative injury activates the virulence of P aeruginosa causing lethal gut-derived sepsis. Surgery.
2008; 144189–97. [PubMed: 18656625]