26_PARAGRAPHS

Male Kunming mice were obtained from Shanghai Slac Labo-
ratory Animal, Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China), which were kept in
an environmentally controlled breeding room (temperature:
23 (cid:2) 2 (cid:3)C, humidity: 60 (cid:2) 5%, 12 hour light–dark cycle) and fed
(cid:4)1, 10% calories in fat) or
a normal diet (total calories 3.25 kcal g
(cid:4)1, 50% calories in
a high-fat diet (HF) (total calories 3.68 kcal g
fat), or a high-fat diet supplemented with resveratrol (HF-RES)
(n ¼ 8) at a concentration of 200 mg per kg per day for 12
weeks.19 Resveratrol (>99%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(China) and mixed to homogeneity during preparation of the
diets. The study was carried out in strict accordance with the
recommendations of the Guide for the Care and Use of Labo-
ratory Animals of
the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee of Jiangnan University. Mice were killed by cervical
dislocation aer a 6 h period of fasting. The ileum, liver, and
visceral adipose tissues were dissected, immersed in liquid
nitrogen and stored at (cid:4)80 (cid:3)C. The colonic contents were
collected for further analysis..

Biochemical analysis
Aer a 6 h fasting period, blood samples were collected and
were isolated by centrifugation at 1500 (cid:5) g at 4 (cid:3)C for 10 min.
Blood glucose and insulin were assayed using commercial kits
(Jingmei BioTech Co. Ltd, Shenzhen, China). Blood glucose was
estimated by the glucose oxidase method.20 Concentrations of
total cholesterol (TC), triglycerides, high density lipoprotein
cholesterol (HDL-C), and low density lipoprotein cholesterol
(LDL-C) in serum were determined by enzymatic colorimetric
methods using commercial kits (Shanghai Rongsheng Biotech
Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China)..

The group- or genus-specic oligonucleotide probes targeted
the bacterial 16S rRNA, including the Bacteroides–Prevotella
group (Bac303, 50-CCAATGTGGGGGACCTT), the Clostridium
I & II group (Chis150, 50-TTATGCGGTATTAATC-
cluster
the Enterobacteriaceae group (Enter1432, 50-
TYCCTTT),
the Lactobacillus group (Lab158, 50-
GTTTTGCAACCCACT),
GGTATTAGCA(C/T)CTGTTTCCA), the Eubacterium rectale group
(Mib724, 50-GCTTCTTAGTCARGTACCG), the Atopobium group
(Ato291, 50-GGTCGGTCTCTCAACCC), the Bidobacterium group
(Bif164, 50-CATCCGGCATTACCACCC), the Enterococcus faecalis
(Enf191, 50-GAAAGCGCCTTTCACTCTTATGC), and the Clos-
tridium coccoides–Eubacterium rectale cluster group (Erec482, 50-
GCTTCTTAGTCA- GGTACCG) were used for enumeration of
dominant members of the gut microbiota. The EUB338 probe
used to determine total counts was labeled with uorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC), while the group- or genus-specic probes
were labeled at the 50-end with indocyanine (Cy3; Sangon
Biotech, Shanghai, China)..

Randomly selected epididymal fat and liver tissues obtained from
mice were washed with PBS and xed in 4% formaldehyde for 1 h
at 4 (cid:3)C. Paraﬃn-embedded epididymal fat tissue was sectioned at
3–5 mm thickness and stained with hematoxylin–eosin (HE).
Ornithine carbamoyl-transferase frozen liver tissue was sectioned
at 3–5 mm thickness and stained with oil red O. Histological
assessment of the tissue morphology was performed using an
Olympus light microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan)..

Table 1 Gene-speciﬁc primers used in qRT-PCR assaysa.

Peroxisome proliferator activated
receptor g
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1.

method.24 The total RNA was reverse transcribed (RT) and PCR
amplied using the AccuPower® Greenstar qPCR kit (Bioneer).
QRT-PCR assays were performed for each 10 ml reaction con-
taining cDNA corresponding to 1 ng of total RNA and 900 nM
gene-specic primers (Table 1) with the following parameters: 1
cycle of 95 (cid:3)C for 5 min; 45 cycles of 95 (cid:3)C for 20 s, 60 (cid:3)C for 30 s
and 72 (cid:3)C for 20 s; and 1 cycle of 72 (cid:3)C for 5 min. b-Actin was
chosen as the housekeeping gene. Each assay was performed in
duplicate in the same run. All assays were performed in tripli-
cate with an ABI PRISM 7900HT Sequence Detection System
(Applied Biosystems). Gene expression was calculated as DCT
using b-actin as a reference, and was expressed relative to the
control group normalised to a value of 1..

FISH analysis, as a quantitative molecular-based technique, was
applied to assess the microbiota composition. The relative
abundance of the major bacterial groups indicated that, even
when considering a degree of interindividual variation, the HF
diet induced the gut microbiota dysbiosis . The results
of principal coordinate analysis showed that HF microbiomes
were clearly diﬀerent from those in CT and HF-RES mice
. Moreover, the principal coordinate analysis scores plot
in Fig. 2B supports the presence of overlapping clusters between
HF-RES and CT groups, which illustrated the relative similarity
of CT and RES treated mice in microbiotal proles. Lactobacillus
was reduced by 1.8-fold in HF mice and Bidobacterium was
decreased by 1.9-fold, whereas Enterococcus
faecalis was
increased by 1.8-fold in the HF group compared with CT mice
. Aer RES treatment, Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium
were signicantly increased, whereas Enterococcus faecalis was
signicantly decreased to that of control levels . In.

Fig. 1 Phenotypes of mice groups fed on diﬀerent diets. (A) Average body weight, (B) liver weight (percentage of body weight) and (C) visceral
and subcutaneous adipose tissue weight (percentage of body weight). Values are means with their standard errors (n ¼ 8). Mean values were
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF
group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES..

The correlations between body weight and the colonic bacterial
content were calculated . Body weight was positively and
signicantly correlated with Enterococcus faecalis (P < 0.05)
, and body weight was negatively correlated with
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium . In addition, a
negative correlation was found between the body weight and the
ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes (r ¼ (cid:4)0.805, P ¼ 0.002)
..

Fig. 3 Correlation between the body weight and the colonic bacterial content of (A) the Lactobacillus group, (B) the Biﬁdobacterium group, (C)
Enterococcus faecalis, and (D) the ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes. Mice were fed either a control diet (CT) or a high-fat diet (HF), or a high-
fat diet supplemented with resveratrol (HF-RES). Bacterial quantities are expressed as relative abundance (%). Body weight values (g) are pre-
sented as means (n ¼ 8 animals per group), with standard errors represented by vertical bars..

and the Bacteroides phylum. These ndings are consistent with
previous studies. For instance, Vendrame et al.39 described that
wild blueberries, a rich source of polyphenols, signicantly
increased the number of Bidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus
acidophilus, and Neyrinck et al.40 demonstrated that a poly-
phenol-rich extract of pomegranate peel increased the caecal
content weight and caecal pool of Bidobacteria spp. and
Lactobacillus spp. The antimicrobial activity of resveratrol could
not explain these results. Therefore,
there are additional
mechanisms, by which resveratrol mediates the composition of
gut microbiota, which should be further elucidated..

Fig. 4 Eﬀects of high-fat diet and RES supplementation on Fiaf (A) and
Lpl (B) mRNA expressions in ileum tissue (n ¼ 6 per group). Each
sample was assayed in triplicate; values are means, with their standard
errors represented by vertical bars; mean values were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean
values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF
group: † P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-
fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES..

activity, exerting their inhibitory eﬀect on certain bacterial
groups by binding to bacterial membranes.35,36 Diﬀerences in
cell surface structures could explain why Gram-positive bacteria
are more sensitive to the bactericidal eﬀects of
these
compounds than are Gram-negative species.37 On one hand, in
our study, resveratrol has an inhibitory eﬀect on the growth of
these bacteria, which includes Enterococcus faecalis and the
Enterobacteriaceae group—an important pathogen closely
related to obesity and insulin resistance on a high-fat diet but
not on a normal chow diet.38 However, on the other hand, this
study showed that resveratrol intake positively aﬀected the
growth of the Lactobacillus group, the Bidobacterium group,.

Fig. 6 Eﬀects of high-fat diet and RES supplementation on adipocyte hypertrophy through the PPAR signaling pathway in OP mice. (A) The
corresponding hematoxylin- and eosin-stained epididymal fat sections are shown. (B) qRT-PCR assays for gene expression of the PPAR signaling
pathway in epididymal fat pads. Values are means, with their standard errors represented by vertical bars (n ¼ 6). Mean values were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent compared with those of the HF group: † P <
0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES, mice fed with HF supplemented with RES..

adipocyte triglyceride accumulation. The stearoyl-CoA desatur-
ase 1 (Scd1) gene is involved in the synthesis and regulation of
unsaturated fatty acids from saturated fatty acids.42 The Cyp7a1
gene encodes the enzyme cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase, which
catalyzes the initial step in cholesterol catabolism subsequent.

1 B. Rokholm, et al., The levelling oﬀ of the obesity epidemic
since the year 1999–a review of evidence and perspectives,
Obes. Rev., 2010, 11 835–846..

6 F. Backhed, et al., Mechanisms underlying the resistance to
diet-induced obesity in germ-free mice, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A., 2007, 104 979–984..

7 B. S. Samuel and J. I. Gordon, A humanized gnotobiotic
mouse model of host-archaeal-bacterial mutualism, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103 10011–10016..

8 F. Backhed, et al., The gut microbiota as an environmental
factor that regulates fat storage, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.
A., 2004, 101 15718–15723..

12 X. H. Zhang, et al., Anti-obesity eﬀect of resveratrol-amplied
grape skin extracts on 3T3-L1 adipocytes diﬀerentiation,
Nutr. Res. Pract., 2012, 6 286–293..

23 A. H. Franks, et al., Variations of bacterial populations in
human feces measured by uorescent in situ hybridization
with group-specic 16S rRNA-targeted oligonucleotide
probes, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1998, 64 3336–3345.
24 N. Kruse, et al., Quantication of cytokine mRNA expression
by RT PCR in samples of previously frozen blood, J. Immunol.
Methods, 1997, 210 195–203..

29 P. D. Cani, et al., Selective increases of bidobacteria in gut
microora improve high-fat-diet-induced diabetes in mice
through a mechanism associated with endotoxaemia,
Diabetologia, 2007, 50 2374–2383..

31 M. Larrosa, et al., Eﬀect of a low dose of dietary resveratrol
on colon microbiota, inammation and tissue damage in a
DSS-induced colitis rat model, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2009,
57 2211–2220..

34 R. E. Ley, et al., Obesity alters gut microbial ecology, Proc..

38 N. Fei and L. Zhao, An opportunistic pathogen isolated from
the gut of an obese human causes obesity in germfree mice,
ISME J., 2012, 7 880–884.