158_PARAGRAPHS

(Online  Methods  and  Supplementary  Note  1)  to  ensure  that  the 
reconstructions meet the quality standards set by Thiele and Palsson 
.  We  expanded  the  reconstructions  by  refining  gut-micro-
biota-specific and central metabolic subsystems, and curated all of 
the reconstructions by reference to 236 publications, two reference 
books (Supplementary Table 1), and comparative genomics analyses 
(Online Methods and Supplementary Table 2). Anaerobic growth 
was enabled for all genome-scale models  because the human 
gut is usually anaerobic or microaerobic16. We tested the metabolic 
capabilities of each model, as defined by published data, at the genus, 
species, and strain level. During the generation and validation of each 
model, solutions to QC/QA problems or failure of the metabolic capa-
bility tests of a model were used to improve the quality of others. The 
propagation of such refinements among all the models was facilitated 
because all microbes share the same human gut environment..

Our pipeline increased both the proportion and total number of sto-
ichiometrically and flux-consistent reactions17, that is, mass balanced 
and admitting a nonzero steady state flux (Fig. 1f,g, Supplementary 
Table 3 and Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2). The refinement process 
increased the predictive potential of AGORA models compared with 
the draft metabolic models; the AGORA models predicted gene essen-
tiality more accurately than the draft models , and sensitivity 
to carbon source, fermentation product, and nutrient requirement 
data was greatly increased in the AGORA models with an average 
sensitivity of 1.00 ± 0.02 compared to 0.06 ± 0.09 for the draft models 
..

Features of reconstructions
The 773 AGORA reconstructions contained an average of 771 ± 262 
genes, 1,198 ± 241 reactions, and 933 ± 139 metabolites (Fig. 1b and 
Supplementary Table 5). We found that taxonomic classes containing 
well-studied organisms, such as Gammaproteobacteria, had larger 
sets  of  genes  and  reactions  than  reconstructions  of  other  classes.  
An  AGORA  reconstruction  uses  a  generalized  microbial  biomass 
reaction, which summarizes the fractional contribution of a biomass 
precursor (e.g., amino acids and lipids) to the synthesis of a new cell, 
as provided in the draft reconstructions from Model SEED and KBase. 
The  biomass  reactions  were  not  curated,  because  species-specific 
information is required for such refinements (Supplementary Note 2).  
Qualitative growth predictions are not affected by generalized bio-
mass  equations,  whereas  information  on  species-  and  condition-
specific  cellular  composition  is  required  for  accurate  quantitative 
prediction18. Nonetheless, the predicted average microbial doubling 
time of 2.3 h on a Western diet under anaerobic conditions (Fig. 1b .

and Supplementary Table 6) was close to reported doubling times of 
single microbes in the mouse gastrointestinal tract19. .

When comparing eight AGORA reconstructions with the published 
genome-scale metabolic reconstructions for the same species, we found 
that the main differences in reaction content were in lipopolysaccha-
ride biosynthesis and transport pathways (Supplementary Tables 7  
and  8).  Cell  wall  and  lipopolysaccharide  structures  are  species- 
specific and cannot easily be derived from gene annotations alone20,21 
(Supplementary Note 2). The curation of such pathways requires 
experimental data that are currently not available for AGORA organ-
isms. AGORA models were equivalent to published GENREs in terms 
of capturing gene essentiality, as reported in the literature . 
The AGORA models have been curated for carbon source utilization 
and fermentation product secretion; they outperformed the published 
models for those functions, as measured by a sensitivity analysis of 
the carbon source uptake and fermentation product secretion of both 
seven published models and AGORA models (Supplementary Fig. 3).  
Until now, manually curated reconstructions have been refined to fit 
certain applications and, consequently, curated to different extents. As 
they are not comparable in scope, they may not be a good choice for 
investigating microbe interactions. In contrast, all AGORA reconstruc-
tions have been curated for the same metabolic pathways ..

We determined the overlap of microbial metabolism with human 
metabolism. Two cellular compartments are common between human 
and microbes, the cytosol and extracellular space. To compare the 
metabolic  functions,  we  decompartmentalized  the  human  meta-
bolic reactions by placing all metabolites that occur in an organelle  
(e.g., mitochondria) compartment in the human metabolic recon-
struction Recon 2 (ref. 22), into the cytosol, and removed duplicate 
reactions, resulting in 6,256 unique metabolic reactions. Collectively, 
the AGORA reconstructions account for 3,192 unique metabolic reac-
tions, 695 of which are shared with Recon 2, including 162 
exchange  reactions.  We  found  that  89%   of  human 
metabolic  reactions  were  unique  to  the  human  reconstruction,  
and 78% of AGORA metabolic reactions were unique 
to the microbial reconstructions..

Metabolic diversity of AGORA reconstructions
The  variety  of  AGORA  reconstructions  is  shown  in  Figure  2a.  
To  prove  that  our  method  produced  metabolically  distinct  recon-
structions for each organism, we computed the metabolic distance 
of every reconstruction pair  
using the Jaccard distance between the reaction lists from each recon-
struction. Metabolic distances range from zero to 1 with identical .

Figure 1  The reconstruction refinement pipeline and properties of the metabolic models, derived from the reconstructions. (a) The refinement 
pipeline starts with an automatic draft reconstruction generation from the online platforms Model SEED14 and KBase (Department of Energy Systems 
Biology Knowledgebase (KBase), http://kbase.us), followed by the translation of reaction and metabolite identifiers to match those of the human 
metabolic reconstruction, Recon 2.04 (ref. 22). The reconstructions are then tested for QC/QA measures and 162 metabolic functions are curated 
based on available knowledge and genomic evidence. A microbial reconstruction can be converted into a condition-specific model by the application 
of condition-specific constraints. All AGORA reconstructions are available at http://vmh.life. (b) Boxplots of the number of genes, reactions, and 
metabolites for reconstructions belonging to the 13 phyla captured in AGORA (Supplementary Table 5). Dashed lines represent the average over all 773 
reconstructions. The number of reconstructions per phylum is shown above the phylum name. Whiskers show the minimum and maximum values. Values 
below Q1 – 1.5 × IQR and above Q3 + 1.5 × IQR are plotted as outliers. Q1: first quartile, Q3: third quartile, IQR: interquartile range. (c) Differences in 
the gap-filling process of manually curated reconstructions and AGORA. In AGORA, gap filling of a certain pathway in one reconstruction is propagated 
to all N reconstructions that share the same gap and should perform the metabolic function in question. For manually curated reconstructions, every 
gap is filled with organism-specific reactions based on the available organism-specific data and experimental validations. (d) Gene essentiality accuracy 
predicted by the draft reconstructions, the AGORA reconstructions, and four published reconstructions (Supplementary Note 2) when compared 
against in vitro data sets48. (e) Table showing the number of AGORA and draft models that grow anaerobically on rich medium and the number of 
carbon sources, and fermentation products captured by draft reconstructions and AGORA reconstructions. (f) The number of stoichiometrically- and 
flux-consistent reactions in each draft versus the corresponding AGORA reconstruction. (g) Change in number of stoichiometrically and flux consistent 
reactions. (h) Comparison of the predictive potential of the draft reconstructions and the AGORA reconstructions. The sensitivity (true-positive rate) of 
known fermentation products, carbon sources, and growth requirements captured by the corresponding metabolic models..

JANUARY 2017  nature biotechnology.

reconstructions having a metabolic distance of zero and completely dis-
similar reconstructions having a metabolic distance of 1. As expected, 
taxonomically related bacteria shared more reactions than taxonomi-
cally distant bacteria (Supplementary Fig. 4). Bacilli and Clostridia 
had high metabolic distances, reflecting the metabolic and pheno-
typic differences between these two classes (Supplementary Fig. 4). 
 Notably, low metabolic distances were only observed within a class, 
but not between members of a phylum or between taxonomic classes. .

Overall, the average metabolic distance was 0.48, which is consistent 
with  other  reports  of  metabolic  and  functional  distances  between 
microbes based on the presence of KEGG enzymes and KEGG orthol-
ogy annotations23,24. Metabolic pathway enrichment was detected 
at different taxonomic levels ; for example, plant polysac-
charide  degradation  was  mainly  present  in  Bacteroidia,  O-glycan  
degradation in the genera Akkermansia spp., Bifidobacterium spp., and 
Bacteroides spp., and methane metabolism was unique to four archaea.  .

Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482.

Campylobacter jejuni jejuni NCTC 11168.

Escherichia coli str. K-12 substr. MG1655.

Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica
serover Typhimurium str. LT2.

nature biotechnology  VOLUME 35  NUMBER 1 .

Crenarchaeota 
T hau m archaeota 
E uryarchaeota 
S pirochaetes 
Proteobacteria 
Actinobacteria 
Fir micutes 
C yanobacteria 
Fusobacteria 
B acteroidetes 
Tenericutes 
Synergistetes 
Verruco microbia .

Figure 2  Taxonomic and metabolic diversity of the 773 genome-scale metabolic reconstructions. (a) Taxonomic tree of the 773 organisms showing the 
diversity of the AGORA resource. Colors correspond to the taxonomic classes. The tree was created using GraPhlAn49. (b) Hierarchical clustering of the 
average ratio of reactions per subsystems found in the reconstructions of the 25 taxonomic classes. The reconstructions are ordered based on phyla and 
taxonomic classes..

As  expected,  lipopolysaccharide  biosynthesis  was  found  only  in 
Gram-negative  bacteria.  Only  69  reactions  were  common  to  all  
773 reconstructions..

To  assess  whether  the  known  functional  diversity  of  the  gut  
microbiota  was  captured  in  our  models,  we  tested  for  the  uptake  
of 74 different carbon sources and for the secretion of 18 fermenta-
tion products  using flux variability analysis25. The known 
distribution of short-chain fatty acid production in the gut was well-
represented in our models ; most models fermented sugars 
into short-chain fatty acids and organic acids, with acetate, succinate, 
formate, lactate, propionate, and ethanol being the most commonly 
produced  metabolites.  As  expected,  butyrate  was  secreted  by  the 
Fusobacteria models26 and by many Firmicutes models27, and meth-
ane secretion was specific to the Euryarchaeota. Carbon source utili-
zation capabilities were found to be in agreement with the literature28. 
Notably, only certain genera (e.g., Bacteroides spp. and Akkermansia 
spp.) can utilize diet- and host-derived polysaccharides ..

Validation of AGORA model predictions
We demonstrated the predictive capability of AGORA models using 
two  models,  Bacteroides  caccae  ATCC  34185  (a  fiber-degrading 
symbiont common in microbiomes of Western individuals29,30) and 
Lactobacillus  rhamnosus  GG  (LGG),  a  common  human  probiotic 
strain31. No chemically defined medium has been reported for B. caccae.  
We predicted that B. caccae should be able to grow on DMEM 6429 
defined culture medium supplemented with vitamin K, hemin, and ara-
binogalactan under anaerobic conditions. In the laboratory, B. caccae  
was cultured on this medium in a flask under anaerobic conditions 
(Online Methods, Supplementary Note 3 and Supplementary Table 10).  
This medium would not support growth of LGG, according to our 
in silico predictions, and growth was unstable in flask cultures using 
this medium. The reported chemically defined growth medium for .

LGG contains all amino acids and most vitamins32 but our in silico 
predictions suggested that these could be supplemented by growing 
LCG with B. caccae . When modeled in silico in co-culture in 
DMEM 6429 defined culture medium supplemented with vitamin  
K,  hemin,  and  arabinogalactan,  both  bacteria  grew  (Fig.  4d  and 
Supplementary Table 11). We predicted that B. caccae would sup-
ply  LGG  with  alanine,  asparagine,  and  nicotinic  acid,  while  LGG 
would provide lactate to B. caccae . The addition of alanine  
and  nicotinic  acid  to  the  defined  medium  was  sufficient  in  silico  
to enable the single growth of the LGG model . Using gas 
chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC-MS)-based metabolomic 
analysis,  we  confirmed  the  secretion  of  numerous  metabolites  by 
the two strains grown individually, including alanine secretion by 
B. caccae , thus supporting the 
predicted cross-feeding..

Pairwise interactions of models
We  computed  the  pairwise  growth  interactions  (‘co-growth’)  of 
every pair of microbes in the AGORA resource  Each 
model was grown in silico on its own and as part of a pair with every 
other model on two different diets with and without oxygen (Online 
Methods and Supplementary Tables 9 and 12). Under all conditions, 
the most commonly predicted pairwise co-growth relationships were 
parasitism or commensalism . Consistent with one previ-
ous in silico study33, the presence of oxygen resulted in a decrease in 
commensalism and mutualism, especially for Gammaproteobacteria 
(Supplementary  Fig.  6).  Competitive  and  amensal  interactions 
increased in the presence of oxygen . The effects of a typical 
Western diet and a diet high in fibers, such as arabinogalactan and 
xylan, on pairwise interactions among models were also evaluated. 
The  high  fiber  diet  led  to  a  higher  proportion  of  commensal  and 
mutualistic interactions , which, using flux balance analysis34,  .

JANUARY 2017  nature biotechnology.

type per condition per taxonomical family , our simulations 
predict that the carbohydrate fermentation capacity defines the type 
of interaction between microbes when considering the family level. 
Cluster  1  contained  saccharolytic  microbes  that  do  not  produce 
butyrate and respiratory bacteria and was enriched in commensal 
interactions. Clusters 2a and 2b were enriched in butyrate and lactate 
fermenters and generalists related to Bacillaceae, respectively. Both 
subclusters were mostly negatively affected by parasitic interactions. 
Cluster 3 contained the majority of asaccharolytic and proteolytic 
families, which mainly benefitted from the pairwise interactions. The 
effect of carbohydrate fermentation capacity holds true for the genus 
level (Supplementary Fig. 6). Even though most interactions were 
observed over a wide range of metabolic distances, positive interac-
tions, in which the growth rates of one or both microbes are neutral or 
enhanced in the pairwise simulation, occurred only among metaboli-
cally distant organisms (Supplementary Fig. 7), in agreement with 
previous computational studies23,24..

Integrating metagenomics and 16S rRNA with AGORA
We tested whether AGORA can be used to analyze metagenomic data. 
We  retrieved  strain-resolved  metagenomic  data  from  149  healthy 
individuals from the human microbiome project (HMP; Fig. 6a)36.  
AGORA  microbes  mapped  to,  on  average,  91%  of  the  strains  in  
the  HMP  individuals  with  comparable  reaction  diversity  for  all  
individuals  ,  highlighting  that  AGORA  is  representative  
of the human gut microbiota..

We then mapped published species-resolved 16S rRNA data of 164 
elderly  and  13  young  individuals  (‘ELDERMET’)37  onto  AGORA  
. The 210 ± 39 species present in each individual mapped 
to 108 ± 16 AGORA pan-species reconstructions, which are the union 
of reactions from all strain-specific reconstructions in AGORA of one 
species. Two clusters were observed . The cluster with more 
reactions was characterized by the presence of Gammaproteobacteria 
.  The  corresponding  reconstructions  contain  on  aver-
age more reactions compared to other taxonomic classes . 
Principal  coordinate  analysis,  using  each  individual  microbiota’s 
metabolic reaction set, revealed that the clusters separated owing to 
reactions associated with glycerophospholipid and cell wall metabo-
lism (Supplementary Table 13), consistent with the Gram-negative 
nature of Gammaproteobacteria. The second principal coordinate was 
mainly associated with the presence of methanogenesis reactions that 
are unique to the methanogenic archaea..

DISCUSSION
AGORA reconstructions were assembled using a comparative meta-
bolic reconstruction approach that speeded up curation and provided 
knowledge-driven  refinement  of  gut-specific  metabolic  microbial 
functions that were not present in the draft reconstructions . 
Our pipeline included extensive QC/QA and curation against avail-
able knowledge, which is not done by pipelines that automatically 
generate GENREs. The resulting models significantly outperformed 
the draft models in correctly capturing gene essentiality in addition 
to known carbon sources, fermentation products, and essential nutri-
ents . Even though AGORA reconstructions do not cover 
all of the species-specific aspects of manually curated reconstruc-
tions (e.g., lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis), the performance of each 
of  eight  AGORA  models  was  on  par  with  that  of  their  previously 
published, manually curated models of the same strain (Fig. 1d and 
Supplementary  Fig.  3).  This  resource  of  reconstructions  helps  to 
address the need for literature-curated GENREs to help to analyze 
gut metagenomic data38..

Inulin
Amylopectin
Amylose
Pullulan
Pectins
Xylan
Mucins
Arabinogalactan
Arabinoxylan
Xyluglucan
Dextran 40
Heparan sulfate proteoglycan
Arabinan
Cellulose
Hyaluronan
Pectic galactan
Rhamnogalacturonan I
Chondroitin sulfates
α-mannan
Beta-glucans
Galactomannan
Laminarin
Glucomannan
Homogalacturonan
Levan
Starch (n = 1,200)
Rhamnogalacturonan II
Lichenin.

Figure 3  Carbon source uptake and fermentation product secretion 
capabilities in AGORA. Number of AGORA models in each phylum 
that can consume the different carbon sources and secrete the tested 
fermentation products. The total number of models in each phylum is 
reported in parentheses. The models’ capabilities to consume or secrete 
the different metabolites were determined using flux variability analysis..

was found to be due to cross-feeding of metabolites between species. 
Low-fiber diets are thought to modulate the microbiota composi-
tion  by  depleting  commensal  microbe-to-microbe  interactions35. 
Based on hierarchical clustering of the ratio of pairwise interaction .

nature biotechnology  VOLUME 35  NUMBER 1 .

Bacteroides caccae ATCC 43185
0.15 h–1
0.22 h–1.

Arabinogalactan  Galactose  L-arabinose Glucuronate.

Figure 4  Comparison of in vitro experiments and in silico simulations for Bacteroides caccae ATCC 43185 and Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG ATCC 53103. 
(a) Both microbes were grown anaerobically on DMEM 6429 medium supplemented with hemin, vitamin K, and arabinogalactan. The composition of  
fresh medium and spent medium after cultivation was determined using GC-MS (Supplementary Fig. 5). Only statistically significant metabolite uptake  
and secretion is shown. A paired t-test was performed for statistical significance. **P < .005 and *P < 0.01. The same medium composition was used  
for in silico simulations, and uptake and secretion capabilities were predicted using flux variability analysis. (b) In silico single culture fluxes of B. caccae 
on DMEM medium without and with arabinogalactan. Growth rates (h−1) and predicted uptake and secretion fluxes (mmol/gDW/h) of major exchanged  
metabolites are shown in blue without arabinogalactan and in purple with arabinogalactan. (c) In silico single culture fluxes of LGG on DMEM medium  
without and with arabinogalactan. The in silico medium was supplemented with l-alanine and nicotinic acid, which were predicted to be essential for 
growth. Growth rates and uptake and secretion fluxes are depicted as described for b. (d) In silico co-culture fluxes of B. caccae and L. rhamnosus on  
DMEM medium without and with arabinogalactan. Growth rates, and uptake and secretion fluxes are depicted as described for panel b..

JANUARY 2017  nature biotechnology.

GENREs have previously been used to design chemically defined 
growth media using an iterative in silico, in vitro, and metabolomics 
approach39. The predicted growth of B. caccae in extended DMEM 
medium supplemented with arabinogalactan under anaerobic condi-
tions was validated. However, the in vitro growth of LGG was unstable, 
but our in silico co-culture simulations suggest that its growth could 
be enhanced by the presence of B. caccae. This example highlights 
how metabolic models can serve as a starting point for generating 
experimentally testable hypotheses..

Bacteria in ecosystems engage in complex trophic webs based on 
interspecies interactions40, which cannot be inferred from microbial 
abundance41. We explored pairwise interactions between gut micro-
biome models under four conditions. We found that central metabolic 
traits were predicted to define co-growth interactions as a function of 
diet composition and oxygen availability (Fig. 5 and Supplementary 
Figs. 6 and 7). Inflammation of the digestive tract can disrupt the 
intestinal cell barrier, thereby increasing the oxygen level in the nor-
mally anaerobic intestine42 and reducing species variety in the gut 
microbiome43. A high-fiber diet might protect against the depletion 
of positive microbe–microbe interactions caused by the presence of 
oxygen. Negative interactions have been found to dominate stable 
microbial communities44. Based on our simulations, we propose that 
a small number of positive interactions may be sufficient to maintain 
a healthy microbial community..

One  open  question  in  microbiome  research  is  which  functions 
microbes  carry  out  and  how  those  functions  interface  with  host 
metabolism and affect host phenotypes. About a quarter of AGORA 
metabolic reactions were also present in Recon 2 (ref. 22), the human 
metabolism  reconstruction,  highlighting  the  complementarity  of 
host and microbial metabolisms. So far, a handful of studies have 
attempted to predict the metabolic effect of different microbiomes on 
host metabolism based on topological network approaches46,47, which 
cannot address functional links in the human-gut microbiota axis. 
AGORA enables superior simulations to address mechanistic ques-
tions about host–microbe co-metabolism. We envisage the combina-
tion of AGORA models into strain-resolved microbial community 
models and predictions of how those community models interact with 
human metabolic models22 could be used to systematically investigate 
host–microbiome interactions11..

Figure 5  Pairwise interactions of all AGORA metabolic models.  
(a) The number and percentage of pairs that exhibit each of six different 
interaction types during in silico simulations under four different 
conditions; Western and high-fiber diets in the presence and absence of 
oxygen. Competition: both microbes’ in silico growth rates (Supplementary 
Table 9) are slower in the paired simulation compared with each  
microbe’s in silico mono-culture growth rate on the same diet 
(Supplementary Table 12). Parasitism: one microbe grows faster  
(Taker) in the paired simulation while the other microbe grows slower 
(Giver). Amensalism: one microbe grows slower (Affected) in the 
paired simulation while the other microbe’s growth rate is unaffected 
(Unaffected). Neutralism: both microbes’ growth rates are unaffected  
in the paired simulation. Commensalism: one microbe grows faster  
(Taker) in the paired simulation while the other microbe’s growth is 
unaffected (Giver). Mutualism: both microbes grow faster in the paired 
simulation. (b) Hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance) of the  
ratio of pairwise interaction types per condition (i.e., diet and oxygen 
presence) on the taxonomic family level. See a for a description  
of the interaction types. Three main clusters were identified, each 
enriched in microbes with different carbohydrate fermentation 
capabilities, belonging to the clustered families..

nature biotechnology  VOLUME 35  NUMBER 1 .

Figure 6  Metabolic diversity of individual human gut microbiomes. The average number of unique reactions was computed based on 1,000 random 
orders of metabolic reconstruction additions. Dark and light gray areas correspond to one and two s.d., respectively. (a) Human samples of HMP,  
which have been mapped onto a set of reference genomes, were used to determine how many AGORA organisms are overlapping with each individual. 
(b) Mapped AGORA strains per HMP sample with their corresponding collective reaction diversity and the percentage of mapped reads they capture for 
three taxonomic groups. In AGORA, all microbial reconstructions were needed to achieve full metabolic diversity (i.e., 3,192 unique reactions). Also 
shown are the number of reconstructions needed to capture 75%, 90%, and 95% of the full reaction diversity. To obtain 75% and 95% of the unique 
reactions, 12 and 123 reconstructions, respectively, were sufficient on average. (c) 16S rRNA results from Claesson et al. 
were used to determine how many pan-species reconstructions of AGORA are overlapping with each individual. (d) Mapped AGORA pan-species 
reconstructions per ELDERMET sample with their corresponding collective reaction diversity (i.e., 3,188 unique reactions). Also shown are the number 
of reconstructions needed to capture 75%, 90%, and 95% of the full reaction diversity. The metabolic repertoire of the individual mapped microbiomes 
was analyzed by principal coordinate analysis in terms of the metabolic distance between the reaction sets of the mapped pan-species reconstructions. 
The presence and absence of methanogens and Gammaproteobacteria per individual mapped microbiome is shown..

AUTHoR CoNTRIBUTIoNS
S.M. and I.T. wrote the manuscript. All authors read and edited the manuscript. S.M., 
A.H., and I.T. designed the study. S.M. and A.H. reconstructed the pipeline. A.H. 
and L.K. performed literature searches. S.M., A.H., and E.B. analyzed data. D.A.R. 
and L.K. performed genome analyses on metabolic pathways. R.M.T.F. performed .

quality analysis on all reconstructions. A.N. built the VMH database for the AGORA 
reconstructions. K.G., J.B. and P.W. designed and performed in vitro experiments. 
C.J. performed the metabolomic analysis. I.T. conceived and supervised the project. .

1.  Clemente,  J.C.,  Ursell,  L.K.,  Parfrey,  L.W.  &  Knight,  R.  The  impact  of  the  gut 
microbiota on human health: an integrative view. Cell 148, 1258–1270 
2.  Shafquat,  A.,  Joice,  R.,  Simmons,  S.L.  &  Huttenhower,  C.  Functional  and 
phylogenetic assembly of microbial communities in the human microbiome. Trends 
Microbiol. 22, 261–266 .

3.  Duncan,  S.H.  et  al.  Reduced  dietary  intake  of  carbohydrates  by  obese  subjects 
results in decreased concentrations of butyrate and butyrate-producing bacteria in 
feces. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73, 1073–1078 .

4.  Duncan, S.H. et al. Effects of alternative dietary substrates on competition between 
human colonic bacteria in an anaerobic fermentor system. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
69, 1136–1142 .

5.  Faust,  K.  &  Raes,  J.  Microbial  interactions:  from  networks  to  models.  Nat.  Rev. .

6.  Kanehisa,  M.  et  al.  From  genomics  to  chemical  genomics:  new  developments  in .

KEGG. Nucleic Acids Res. 34, D354–D357 .

JANUARY 2017  nature biotechnology.

7.  Greenblum,  S.,  Turnbaugh,  P.J.  &  Borenstein,  E.  Metagenomic  systems  biology  of 
the  human  gut  microbiome  reveals  topological  shifts  associated  with  obesity  and 
inflammatory bowel disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 594–599 .

29. McNulty,  N.P.  et  al.  Effects  of  diet  on  resource  utilization  by  a  model  human  gut 
microbiota  containing  Bacteroides  cellulosilyticus  WH2,  a  symbiont  with  an 
extensive glycobiome. PLoS Biol. 11, e1001637 .

8.  Schellenberger, J. et al. Quantitative prediction of cellular metabolism with constraint-
based models: the COBRA Toolbox v2.0. Nat. Protoc. 6, 1290–1307 
9.  Thiele,  I.  &  Palsson,  B.O.  A  protocol  for  generating  a  high-quality  genome-scale .

30. Qin,  J.  et  al.  A  human  gut  microbial  gene  catalogue  established  by  metagenomic .

31. Segers, M.E. & Lebeer, S. Towards a better understanding of Lactobacillus rhamnosus .

metabolic reconstruction. Nat. Protoc. 5, 93–121 .

GG--host interactions. Microb. Cell Fact. 13 (Suppl. 1), S7 .

10. McCloskey,  D.,  Palsson,  B.O.  &  Feist,  A.M.  Basic  and  applied  uses  of  genome-scale 
metabolic network reconstructions of Escherichia coli. Mol. Syst. Biol. 9, 661 
11. Heinken,  A.  &  Thiele,  I.  Systems  biology  of  host-microbe  metabolomics.  Wiley .

32. Savijoki, K., Suokko, A., Palva, A. & Varmanen, P. New convenient defined media 
for  []methionine  labelling  and  proteomic  analyses  of  probiotic  lactobacilli. 
Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 42, 202–209 .

Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol. Med. 7, 195–219 .

scale metabolic networks. Environ. Microbiol. 16, 49–59 .

13. Overbeek, R. et al. The subsystems approach to genome annotation and its use in 
the  project  to  annotate  1000  genomes.  Nucleic  Acids  Res.  33,  5691–5702 .


33. Heinken,  A.  &  Thiele,  I.  Anoxic  conditions  promote  species-specific  mutualism 
between  gut  microbes  in  silico.  Appl.  Environ.  Microbiol.  81,  4049–4061 .


34. Orth, J.D., Thiele, I. & Palsson, B.O. What is flux balance analysis? Nat. Biotechnol. .

35. Doré,  J.  &  Blottière,  H.  The  influence  of  diet  on  the  gut  microbiota  and  its .

consequences for health. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 32, 195–199 .

scale metabolic models. Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 977–982 .

36. Human  Microbiome  Project  Consortium.  A  framework  for  human  microbiome .

15. Thorleifsson, S.G. & Thiele, I. rBioNet: A COBRA toolbox extension for reconstructing .

high-quality biochemical networks. Bioinformatics 27, 2009–2010 .

37. Claesson, M.J. et al. Gut microbiota composition correlates with diet and health in .

16. Espey,  M.G.  Role  of  oxygen  gradients  in  shaping  redox  relationships  between  
the  human  intestine  and  its  microbiota.  Free  Radic.  Biol.  Med.  55,  130–140 .


17. Fleming,  R.M.T.,  Vlassis,  N.,  Thiele,  I.  &  Saunders,  M.A.  Conditions  for  duality 
between  fluxes  and  concentrations  in  biochemical  networks.  J.  Theor.  Biol.  409, 
1–10 .

the elderly. Nature 488, 178–184 .

38. Greenblum, S., Chiu, H.C., Levy, R., Carr, R. & Borenstein, E. Towards a predictive 
systems-level  model  of  the  human  microbiome:  progress,  challenges,  and 
opportunities. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 24, 810–820 .

39. Heinken,  A.  et  al.  Functional  metabolic  map  of  Faecalibacterium  prausnitzii,  .

a beneficial human gut microbe. J. Bacteriol. 196, 3289–3302 .

18. Feist, A.M. & Palsson, B.O. The biomass objective function. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. .

40. Grosskopf, T. & Soyer, O.S. Synthetic microbial communities. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. .

19. Gibbons, R.J. & Kapsimalis, B. Estimates of the overall rate of growth of the intestinal 
microflora of hamsters, guinea pigs, and mice. J. Bacteriol. 93, 510–512 
20. Barghash,  A.  &  Helms,  V.  Transferring  functional  annotations  of  membrane 
transporters  on  the  basis  of  sequence  similarity  and  sequence  motifs.  BMC 
Bioinformatics 14, 343 .

41. Faust,  K.  et  al.  Microbial  co-occurrence  relationships  in  the  human  microbiome. .

PLOS Comput. Biol. 8, e1002606 .

42. Rigottier-Gois, L. Dysbiosis in inflammatory bowel diseases: the oxygen hypothesis. .

43. Manichanh,  C., Borruel,  N., Casellas, F.  & Guarner,  F.  The gut microbiota  in  IBD. .

21. Gelfand,  M.S.  &  Rodionov,  D.A.  Comparative  genomics  and  functional  annotation .

Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 9, 599–608 .

of bacterial transporters. Phys. Life Rev. 5, 22–49 .

44. Coyte, K.Z., Schluter, J. & Foster, K.R. The ecology of the microbiome: Networks, .

22. Thiele,  I.  et  al.  A  community-driven  global  reconstruction  of  human  metabolism. .

competition, and stability. Science 350, 663–666 .

23. Chiu,  H.C.,  Levy,  R.  &  Borenstein,  E.  Emergent  biosynthetic  capacity  in  simple .

microbial communities. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10, e1003695 .

24. Mazumdar, V., Amar, S. & Segrè, D. Metabolic proximity in the order of colonization .

of a microbial community. PLoS One 8, e77617 .

25. Gudmundsson,  S.  &  Thiele,  I.  Computationally  efficient  flux  variability  analysis. .

45. Schmidt,  B.J.  et  al.  GIM3E:  condition-specific  models  of  cellular  metabolism 
developed from metabolomics and expression data. Bioinformatics 29, 2900–2908 .


46. Taxis, T.M. et al. The players may change but the game remains: network analyses 
of  ruminal  microbiomes  suggest  taxonomic  differences  mask  functional  similarity. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 43, 9600–9612 .

47. Sridharan,  G.V.  et  al.  Prediction  and  quantification  of  bioactive  microbiota .

26. Vital,  M.,  Howe,  A.C.  &  Tiedje,  J.M.  Revealing  the  bacterial  butyrate  synthesis .

metabolites in the mouse gut. Nat. Commun. 5, 5492 .

pathways by analyzing (meta)genomic data. MBio 5, e00889 .

27. Louis,  P.  &  Flint,  H.J.  Diversity,  metabolism  and  microbial  ecology  of  butyrate-
producing  bacteria  from  the  human  large  intestine.  FEMS  Microbiol.  Lett.  294, 
1–8 .

28. Flint, H.J., Scott, K.P., Duncan, S.H., Louis, P. & Forano, E. Microbial degradation .

of complex carbohydrates in the gut. Gut Microbes 3, 289–306 .

48. Luo, H., Lin, Y., Gao, F., Zhang, C.T. & Zhang, R. DEG 10, an update of the database 
of essential genes that includes both protein-coding genes and noncoding genomic 
elements. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, D574–D580 .

49. Asnicar,  F.,  Weingart,  G.,  Tickle,  T.L.,  Huttenhower,  C.  &  Segata,  N.  Compact 
graphical  representation  of  phylogenetic  data  and  metadata  with  GraPhlAn.  PeerJ 
3, e1029 .

nature biotechnology  VOLUME 35  NUMBER 1 .

© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.ONLINE METhODS
Access  to  AGORA  reconstructions.  AGORA  is  an  ongoing  resource  of 
GENREs and that keeps abreast of human gut microbial knowledge and can 
be easily accessed via the Virtual Metabolic Human (VMH) database website  
(http://vmh.life), which allows querying each reconstruction’s content and 
data gathered from the literature search performed in this study. Any AGORA 
reconstruction can be downloaded in SBML format from the VMH website on 
the “Downloads” page. The website also hosts the human metabolic reconstruc-
tion, Recon 2 (ref. 22). New content can be added to an AGORA reconstruction  
manually or automatically, for example, using rBioNet15, which is compat-
ible with the COBRA toolbox8 and ensures all QC/QA measures defined by 
the community as described by Thiele and Palsson . The “Feedback” 
tab provides contact information to the VMH developers regarding improve-
ments to any resources available on the VMH webpage, where additions to 
any resource will be upheld by the VMH developers..

Genome  selection  and  draft  reconstructions.  In  a  previous  study50,  we 
retrieved  301  draft  reconstructions  from  Model  SEED14.  Based  on  lists  of 
human gut microbes reported by Qin et al. 0 and by Rajilić-Stojanović 
and  de  Vos  1,  we  obtained  472  additional  draft  reconstructions 
from  Model  SEED  and  KBase  (Department  of  Energy  Systems  Biology 
Knowledgebase,  http://kbase.us),  both  of  which  use  the  RAST  annotation 
server52 to annotate the genomes and build the draft metabolic networks14. 
All  reconstructions  were  downloaded  in  SBML  format  and  imported  into 
Matlab  (Mathworks,  Inc.,  Natick,  MA,  USA)  using  the  COBRA  Toolbox8.  
Each reconstruction was refined using the rBioNet extension15 to the COBRA 
Toolbox. We manually translated reaction and metabolite names into the VMH 
nomenclature (Supplementary Tables 14 and 15)..

Reaction directionalities. To ensure consistency with published reconstruc-
tions, the direction of each reaction in a draft reconstruction was set in agree-
ment with the VMH database. This curation prevented fluxes from occurring in 
thermodynamically unfavorable directions. In several cases, the change of direc-
tionality resulted in blocked reactions and/or resulted in a nonzero flux through 
the biomass objective function (BOF)18. For example, the reaction alpha,alpha-
trehalose-phosphate synthase (VMH ID: TRE6PS) has been reported to be irre-
versible53, but was reversible in each draft reconstruction and was required for 
the synthesis of UDP-glucose. We corrected this by adding the enzyme that syn-
thesizes UDP-glucose (UTP-glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase, VMH ID: 
GALU) after setting the reaction TRE6PS to be irreversible. In a similar manner, 
we manually identified solutions to the other blockages and added appropriate 
corrections to the reconstructions. Note that when an AGORA model is used to 
represent a bacterium within a particular part of the intestine, context-specific 
parameters (temperature, pH, ionic strength, cytoplasmic electrical potential 
difference, and metabolite concentrations) should be used when checking for 
consistency between the direction of each reaction and those obtained by con-
text-specific thermodynamic estimates54 (Supplementary Note 1)..

Anaerobic growth. The majority of intestinal microbes are strict or faculta-
tive anaerobes, while strict aerobes colonizing the gut are rare16. A total of 
192 draft-reconstruction-derived models could not carry flux through the 
BOF on anaerobic rich medium (all exchange reactions open, aside from the 
oxygen exchange reaction). Anaerobic growth was enabled by adding oxygen- 
independent  reactions  for  gene  products  known  to  be  functional  under 
anaerobic conditions. For example, l-aspartate oxidase (EC 1.4.3.16) func-
tions under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions55; therefore the anaerobic, 
fumarate-using l-aspartate oxidase reaction (VMH ID: ASPO5) was added  
to  those  reconstructions  containing  the  oxygen-using  l-aspartate  oxidase  
reaction (VMH ID: ASPO6)..

Removal  of  infeasible  flux  loops.  Futile  cycles  are  sets  of  reactions  that  
result in thermodynamically infeasible fluxes and are a common problem in .

reconstructions  with  many  transport  reactions9.  Each  draft  model  had  an 
unfeasibly high export flux of protons from the cytosol, resulting in biologically 
implausibly high ATP production (average flux of 933 ± 229 mmol/gDW/h 
in the absence and of 933 ± 227 mmol/gDW/h in the presence of oxygen, on 
Western diet, Supplementary Table 12). We identified futile cycles by con-
straining each reaction flux to zero individually and computed the flux through 
the ATP demand reaction using flux balance analysis (FBA)34. No flux was 
forced through the BOF. Each deleted reaction lowering the ATP demand flux 
was inspected manually and replaced by an appropriate irreversible reaction 
in all reconstructions containing that futile cycle. If such change prevented the 
model from producing biomass, the change was reversed and another reaction 
eliminating the futile cycle was identified (Supplementary Fig. 8). After the 
curation, the average ATP production flux was 19 ± 13 mmol/gDW/h in the 
absence and 38 ± 23 mmol/gDW/h in the presence of oxygen..

Curation of fermentation pathways. An extensive literature search on the 
distribution and the structure of fermentation pathways in the considered  
gut microbes was performed on the genus level and, where possible, on the  
species  level  (Supplementary Note 4).  Drawing  on  information  from  two 
books and 112 publications, we curated 28 fermentation pathways, of which 
20  were  either  absent  from  or  nonfunctional  in  all  draft  reconstructions. 
Published information on fermentation products was available for 765 out of 
773 reconstructed microbes (Supplementary Table 1)..

Curation of carbon source utilization pathways. A thorough literature search 
was performed to assess the carbon source utilization on a species and strain 
level (Supplementary Note 4). Pathways for 95 distinct carbon sources were 
added to the reconstructions based on evidence from two books56,57 and 199 
publications (Supplementary Table 1). The draft reconstructions captured 35 
of the 95 carbon sources but did not contain any of the 31 oligo- and polysac-
charides  .  Published  information  about  carbon  source  utilization 
capabilities was available for 731 out of 773 reconstructed microbial strains 
(Supplementary Table 1). To verify the functionality of new fermentation 
and carbon source utilization pathways, flux variability analysis (FVA)25 was 
performed on each refined model with all exchange reactions open and no 
flux forced through the BOF..

Comparative genomics analysis. We used the results of two previous studies 
on respiratory reductases58 and B-vitamin synthesis pathways59. We extended 
the previous analyses to the 612 of our 773 organisms that were available in 
PubSEED60. In the case of missing annotations, a similarity search was per-
formed with a BLAST algorithm implemented in PubSEED (cutoff = e−20). 
In ambiguous situations, phylogenetic trees and genomic context for the cor-
responding proteins were analyzed as follows. The neighbor-joining approach 
implemented  in  PubSEED  was  used  (default  parameters)  to  construct  the  
phylogenetic trees. Analysis of the genomic context was done using the tools 
available in PubSEED. Incorrect and inaccurate PubSEED annotations were 
edited and the corresponding genes were added to the relevant subsystems. 
Reactions were formulated for all pathways as needed and added to the recon-
structions.  Additionally,  gene-protein-reaction  associations  (GPRs)  of  the  
corresponding  reactions  were  corrected  based  on  the  refined  organisms’  
gene annotations (Supplementary Note 5). If a reaction was present in a draft 
reconstruction but the associated gene was not identified in the organism  
by comparative genomics, the reaction was removed if the deletion did not 
disable growth on rich medium..

B-vitamin  biosynthesis.  Eight  B-vitamins  (i.e.,  biotin,  cobalamin  (B12), 
folate, niacin, pantothenate (B6), pyridoxine, riboflavin, and thiamin) were 
considered. Based on the genomic predictions and available experimental data, .

Central metabolic pathways. In order to close gaps and improve gene-protein- 
reaction associations in central metabolic pathways, a comparative genomic 
analysis  was  performed  for  (i)  glycolysis  and  gluconeogenesis,  (ii)  the  
pentose  phosphate  pathway,  (iii)  the  Entner-Doudoroff  pathway,  (iv)  the  
citric  acid  cycle  and  the  glyoxylate  shunt,  (v)  the  biosynthesis  of  purine  
and  pyrimidine  nucleotides,  (vi)  amino  acid  biosynthesis  pathways,  and 
(vii)  the  N-acetylglucosamine  utilization  for  polysaccharide  biosynthesis 
(Supplementary Table 2). In total, one to 96 (median 34) reactions partici-
pating  in  the  28  central  metabolic  pathways,  represented  by  20  PubSEED  
subsystems, were added to 627 reconstructions..

Nutrient  requirements.  To  ensure  that  each  model  could  grow  on  bio-
logically plausible in silico growth media, manual curation of in silico growth 
requirements was systematically performed by (i) removing unlikely growth 
requirements, (ii) gap-filling biomass precursor biosynthesis pathways based 
on comparative genomics (see above), and (iii) curating and validating the 
models  against  experimentally  determined  growth  requirements  reported 
in  the  literature.  A  preliminary  defined  medium  was  identified  serving  as 
a starting point for curation of the nutrient requirements (Supplementary 
Note 7). Microbial growth requirements for 64 nutrients, including amino 
acids, vitamins, and nucleobases, were identified for 244 bacteria from one 
book57 and 72 peer-reviewed papers (Supplementary Table 1). False-positive 
predictions (nutrients that were reported to be nonessential in literature, but 
required for in silico growth) and false-negative predictions (nutrients that 
were reported to be essential, but nonessential in silico) were inspected and 
eliminated where possible (Supplementary Note 7). The curation resolved 
413 false-positive and 245 false-negative predictions for 64 metabolites in 244 
microbial reconstructions, increasing the prediction sensitivity from 0.32 to 
0.68 and specificity from 0.92 to 0.98. All compounds identified as essential 
for at least one reconstruction after the curation were added to the in silico 
diets (Supplementary Table 12)..

Mycoplasma  and  Ureaplasma  sp.  The  reconstructions  of  Mycoplasma  
pneumoniae,  Mycoplasma  hominis,  Ureaplasma  parvum,  and  Ureaplasma  
urealyticum, which do not contain a cell wall57 required further refinement 
to the respective BOF. We removed cell wall components from the BOF of all 
four  reconstructions.  Since  the  Mycoplasma  genus  requires  cholesterol  for 
growth57, we added cholesterol to the BOF substrate lists of both Mycoplasma 
sp. reconstructions as well as transport and exchange reactions for choles-
terol. To the two Ureaplasma sp. reconstructions, urea transport and exchange  
reactions were added as this genus requires urea57..

Stoichiometric and flux consistency. The rank of a stoichiometric matrix is an 
objective measure of the comprehensiveness of a reconstruction as it represents 
the number of linearly independent constraints on a steady-state reaction flux. 
The matrix rank was computed with numerical linear algebra. A set of stoichio-
metrically consistent (mass balanced) reactions is mathematically defined by .

Gene  sequence  acquisition.  We  retrieved  the  nucleotide  gene  sequence 
of each microbe using the Perl API from the Model SEED and KBase web 
interface. We expanded these files with the appropriate gene sequences for 
respiration, quinone biosynthesis, B-vitamin synthesis, and central metabolic 
pathways were retrieved from the web interface of the PubSEED platform60. 
The final compiled gene sequences for each organism can be found in the 
VMH database..

Metabolic  distance.  The  metabolic  distance  (MD)  between  two  microbes  
was calculated using the Jaccard distance, such that MD = 1–|Ri∩Rj|/|RiRj|, 
where Ri is the list of reactions from reconstruction i and Rj is the list of reac-
tions present in reconstruction j. MD of 1 means that the two reconstructions 
share no reactions, and MD of zero means that the two reconstructions have 
identical reaction lists..

Gene  essentiality  analysis.  Gene  essentiality  data  were  available  for  six 
AGORA microbes 48. We retrieved the gene sequences for the six draft 
reconstructions from the Model SEED and KBase platforms. Published recon-
structions of the same strains were available for four of these microbes65–68.  
Their gene sequences were retrieved from the NCBI database69. We used the 
BLAST  search  option  of  the  database  (http://  to 
identify the in vitro–validated essential genes for each microbe. The in silico 
gene essentiality analysis was carried out under rich medium conditions for 
the draft, AGORA, and published models, by constraining the flux through all 
reactions associated with a deleted gene to 0 mmol/gDW/h and maximizing 
the BOF. A gene was considered essential in silico if its deletion resulted in a 
biomass reaction flux of zero..

Pairwise model simulations. Pairwise simulations were performed on every 
possible pair of the 773 AGORA metabolic reconstructions  
Microbial models were paired by introducing a common lumen compartment, 
as described elsewhere33, in which each model could secrete or from which it 
could take up metabolites. Dietary compounds were added to the lumen and 
byproducts were removed. To prevent biologically implausible solutions, in 
which microbes benefit the paired microbe without producing any biomass, 
coupling constraints were added to the joined models65. Briefly, all reactions 
in a model were stoichiometrically coupled to its BOF, thereby enforcing a 
nonzero flux through the BOF if reaction fluxes were nonzero. Using FBA, 
growth  of  the  microbial  pair  was  maximized  under  both  diets  (Western  
and high-fiber diet), aerobically and anaerobically (Supplementary Table 9). .

© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.The maximal possible BOF of the individual microbe in the pair was deter-
mined by inactivating all reactions belonging to the other paired microbe.  
A minimal microbial BOF flux for each microbe of 0.001 h−1 was enforced. 
A model was considered to grow faster in the co-growth simulation when its 
paired growth rate was more than 10% higher than the individual growth rate 
of the same microbe under the same condition (Supplementary Table 12).  
A model was considered to grow slower in the co-growth simulation when  
its paired growth rate was more than 10% lower than the individual growth 
rate of the same microbe under the same condition..

Comparison  with  Recon  2.  The  human  metabolic  reconstruction,  Recon 
2.04 (ref. 22), containing 5,063 metabolites and 7,440 reactions, was retrieved  
from http://vmh.life. A decompartmentalized Recon was created by placing  
all  reactions  occurring  in  one  of  the  seven  intracellular  compartments  
into  the  cytosol.  The  extracellular  compartment  was  retained.  Duplicate  
reactions  and  reactions  with  identical  sets  of  metabolites  occurring  on  
both sides of the chemical equation were removed, resulting in 6,256 unique 
metabolic reactions..

Metagenomic and 16S rRNA analysis. Information on metagenomic reads 
from gastrointestinal tract samples mapped onto a set of reference genomes 
was downloaded (http://hmpdacc.org/) for 149 healthy US individuals aged 
18–40 (ref. 5). We matched the strain names of the mapped reference genomes 
to 245 AGORA reconstructions (Supplementary Table 19) and identified the 
unique reaction set (i.e., metabolic diversity) for each individual. Using the 
read depth information, we calculated the read number covered by AGORA.
For  the  ELDERMET37  data,  annotated  species  lists  for  177  individuals  
from  processed  16S  rRNA  data  were  retrieved  from  MG-RAST70  (http://
metagenomics.anl.gov/linkin.cgi?project=154). An individual’s unique reac-
tion set was obtained by mapping the reported species onto the pan-species 
reconstructions (Supplementary Table 19). Principal coordinate analysis was 
performed on the metabolic distance between each individual’s reaction set..

In vitro cell cultures. B. caccae ATCC 43185 and L. rhamnosus GG ATCC 
53103 (LGG) were precultured for 20 h in Brain Heart Infusion Broth (BHIS; 
Sigma), supplemented with 1% hemin under anaerobic conditions and shaking 
at 37 °C (Supplementary Note 3). After washing and resuspending in 10 ml of 
0.9% w/v NaCl solution, they were inoculated in DMEM 6429 supplemented 
with 1% hemin and 3.33% vitamin K, with or without arabinogalactan (Sigma; 
9.4 g/l), and maintained under anaerobic conditions. B. caccae and LGG were 
cultured for 33 and 44 h on average, respectively. Cells were harvested for cell 
counting by centrifugation and 750 µL aliquots of supernatant were 
removed for subsequent metabolite extraction. The aliquots were snap-frozen 
and placed at −80 °C until dedicated analysis. The cultures were confirmed 
using 16S rRNA sequencing..

Metabolomic analysis. The extraction and GC-MS measurement of short-
chain fatty acids was based on a protocol from Moreau et al.71 (Supplementary 
Note 8 and Supplementary Table 20). Extracellular polar metabolites from the 
supernatant samples and external concentration curves for each compound of 
interest were extracted applying a liquid–liquid extraction (Methanol/Water). 
GC-MS analysis was performed using an Agilent 7890A GC coupled to an 
Agilent 5975C inert XL Mass Selective Detector (Agilent Technologies). All 
GC-MS chromatograms were processed using MetaboliteDetector software, .

v3.020151231Ra72 (Supplementary Note 8). In addition, absolute quantitative  
values for lactic acid, glutamine, glutamic acid, and glucose were acquired 
using a 2950D Biochemistry Analyzer (YSI) (Supplementary Note 8)..

In silico simulations of B. caccae and LGG. The single models as well as the 
pairwise model of B. caccae and LGG were subjected to an in silico medium 
mimicking the supplemented DMEM 6429 medium without and with ara-
binogalactan (Supplementary Table 11). Single and combined growth was 
predicted as described above. The potential of B. caccae and LGG to consume 
and produce metabolites in silico was computed using FVA25 and compared 
with GC-MS measurements. To identify the cross-feeding between the two 
species at optimal growth, FBA was performed with simultaneous growth as 
the objective function while minimizing the sum of internal fluxes..

50. Bauer,  E.,  Laczny,  C.C.,  Magnusdottir,  S.,  Wilmes,  P.  &  Thiele,  I.  Phenotypic 
differentiation of gastrointestinal microbes is  reflected in their  encoded  metabolic 
repertoires. Microbiome 3, 55 .

51. Rajilic´-Stojanovic´, M. & de Vos, W.M. The first 1000 cultured species of the human .

gastrointestinal microbiota. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 38, 996–1047 .

52. Aziz, R.K. et al. The RAST Server: rapid annotations using subsystems technology. .

53. Cabib,  E.  &  Leloir,  L.F.  The  biosynthesis  of  trehalose  phosphate.  J.  Biol.  Chem. .

54. Noor, E., Haraldsdóttir, H.S., Milo, R. & Fleming, R.M. Consistent estimation of Gibbs 
energy using component contributions. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9, e1003098 
55. Mattevi,  A.  et  al.  Structure  of  L-aspartate  oxidase:  implications  for  the  succinate 
dehydrogenase/fumarate  reductase  oxidoreductase  family.  Structure  7,  745–756 .


56. Dworkin, M. & Falkow, S. The Prokaryotes: a Handbook on the Biology of Bacteria .

57. Krieg,  N.R.  Bergey’s  Manual  of  Systematic  Bacteriology  vol.  4,  edn.  2  (Springer, .

58. Ravcheev, D.A. & Thiele, I. Systematic genomic analysis reveals the complementary 
aerobic  and  anaerobic  respiration  capacities  of  the  human  gut  microbiota.  
Front. Microbiol. 5, 674 .

59. Magnúsdóttir, S., Ravcheev, D., de Crécy-Lagard, V. & Thiele, I. Systematic genome 
assessment  of  B-vitamin  biosynthesis  suggests  co-operation  among  gut  microbes. 
Front. Genet. 6, 148 .

60. Aziz,  R.K.  et  al.  SEED  servers:  high-performance  access  to  the  SEED  genomes, .

annotations, and metabolic models. PLoS One 7, e48053 .

61. Ravcheev, D.A. & Thiele, I. Genomic analysis of the human gut microbiome suggests 
novel enzymes involved in quinone biosynthesis. Front. Microbiol. 7, 128 
62. Shearer,  M.J.  &  Newman,  P.  Recent  trends  in  the  metabolism  and  cell  biology  of 
vitamin  K  with  special  reference  to  vitamin  K  cycling  and  MK-4  biosynthesis.  
J. Lipid Res. 55, 345–362 .

63. Vlassis,  N.,  Pacheco,  M.P.  &  Sauter,  T.  Fast  reconstruction  of  compact  context-.

specific metabolic network models. PLOS Comput. Biol. 10, e1003424 .

64. Baldwin,  E.A.  et  al.  Effect  of  extraction  method  on  quality  of  orange  juice:  hand-
squeezed,  commercial-fresh  squeezed  and  processed.  J.  Sci.  Food  Agric.  92, 
2029–2042 .

65. Heinken,  A.,  Sahoo,  S.,  Fleming,  R.M.  &  Thiele,  I.  Systems-level  characterization 
of  a  host-microbe  metabolic  symbiosis  in  the  mammalian  gut.  Gut  Microbes  4, 
28–40 .

66. Thiele,  I.  et  al.  A  community  effort  towards  a  knowledge-base  and  mathematical 
model of the human pathogen Salmonella Typhimurium LT2. BMC Syst. Biol. 5, 8 .


67. Thiele, I., Vo, T.D., Price, N.D. & Palsson, B.O. Expanded metabolic reconstruction 
of Helicobacter pylori (iIT341 GSM/GPR): an in silico genome-scale characterization 
of single- and double-deletion mutants. J. Bacteriol. 187, 5818–5830 
68. Baumler, D.J., Peplinski, R.G., Reed, J.L., Glasner, J.D. & Perna, N.T. The evolution .

of metabolic networks of E. coli. BMC Syst. Biol. 5, 182 .

69. NCBI  Resource  Coordinators.  Database  resources  of  the  National  Center  for .

Biotechnology Information. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, D7–D19 .

70. Meyer, F. et al. The metagenomics RAST server - a public resource for the automatic 
phylogenetic and functional analysis of metagenomes. BMC Bioinformatics 9, 386 .


71. Moreau,  N.M.  et  al.  Simultaneous  measurement  of  plasma  concentrations  and 
13C-enrichment  of  short-chain  fatty  acids,  lactic  acid  and  ketone  bodies  by  gas 
chromatography  coupled  to  mass  spectrometry.  J.  Chromatogr.  B  Analyt.  Technol. 
Biomed. Life Sci. 784, 395–403 .

72. Hiller,  K.  et  al.  MetaboliteDetector:  comprehensive  analysis  tool  for  targeted  and 
nontargeted  GC/MS  based  metabolome  analysis.  Anal.  Chem.  81,  3429–3439 