6_PARAGRAPHS

Actinomycetales, and Alphaproteobacteria are associated
with preterm delivery, it has been shown that a variety of
other microbes may be present in the placenta, umbilical
cord, amniotic ﬂuid, and meconium of normal preg-
nancy.7–9 The maternal microbiome is likely translocated
into the uterus via the bloodstream, an idea supported by
the detection of labeled Enterococcus faecium in the
meconium of inoculated pregnant mice.7 In a recent
population-based study, researchers found the most.

speciﬁc pregnancy-related changes
effecting the vaginal and fecal microbiome of the mother,
it is unsurprising that the mode of delivery also greatly
affects how the newborn microbiome develops. The dif-
ferences seen between cesarean section (C-section) and
vaginally delivered babies are drastic. Compared with
vaginally born babies, those that are born by C-section
without membrane rupture have no vaginal microbes,
such as Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Sneathia. Instead,
babies born by C-section are colonized with skin mi-
crobes, such as Staphylococcus, Propionibacterium, and
Corynebacterium.18 These babies have a delayed coloni-
zation of intestinal microbes, such as Bacteroides and
Biﬁdobacterium.19 Although the exact length of time
these differences exist is unknown, microbial differences
between C-section and vaginally delivered babies have
been observed to as far out as 7 years of age.20 The
deﬁcits in the human microbiome associated with
C-section deliveries have been implicated in certain
childhood autoimmune disease, such as celiac disease,
asthma, and type I diabetes.21 These studies also suggest
that restoration of a more “normal” microbiome after
C-section deliveries may therefore be beneﬁcial. “Vaginal
seeding,” or the process by which vaginal ﬂuids are
applied to a newborn child delivered by C-section, has
been a method used to restore the human microbiome.
Although a small pilot study of 4 babies demonstrated
the feasibility of restoring the early microbiome of babies
born by C-section,22 the long-term health consequence of
such a procedure remains unknown and may even in-
crease the risk of transmittable diseases to the newborn.
Therefore, further prospective studies are needed to
determine the safety and potential beneﬁts, if any, of
these methods used to restore the human microbiome..

Breastfeeding and introduction of solid food. The
other major early life events that affect the development
and maturation of the newborn microbiome are breast-
feeding and the introduction of solid food. Breast milk
bacteria, such as Corynebacterium and Rothia, can seed
the infant gut and inﬂuence the bacteria that follows,
affecting the communities even through adulthood.25
These early seeding events may be the mechanism by
which breast milk can protect children against autoim-
mune diseases, such as asthma and type 1 diabetes.26.

Diets high in plant-based protein can increase Biﬁ-
dobacterium and Lactobacillus, while decreasing patho-
genic species, such as Bacteroides fragilis and Clostridium
perfringens.62 These shifts are associated with higher
levels of SCFA and possibly improved gut barrier.

Infants living with pets showed a reduction of Biﬁdo-
bacteriaceae and an increase in Peptostreptococcaceae.
Another study found that Biﬁdobacterium longum levels
were higher in fecal samples of infants with pet exposure
compared with those without and that the abundance of
B longum was inversely associated with the onset of
wheezy bronchitis. However, the role of animal exposure
on the adult gut microbiome still remains unclear..

99. Debarry J, Garn H, Hanuszkiewicz A, et al. Acinetobacter lwofﬁi
and Lactococcus lactis strains isolated from farm cowsheds
possess strong allergy-protective properties. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2007;119:1514–1521.