67_PARAGRAPHS

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

infant nutrition, and common clinical practices in neonatal
care  We hypothesize that assembly and function
of the preterm infants’ gut microbiota is associated with
postnatal growth patterns and represents a yet unexplored
personalized therapeutic potential for optimizing infant
development..

Development of the premature infant gut microbiota
has recently been shown to evolve in a patterned pro-
gression associated with postmenstrual age (PMA; gesta-
tional age at birth plus week of
life), dominated by
Bacilli at early PMA, followed by Gammaproteobacteria
and then Clostridia  In our study, we introduce two
models to identify associations between the microbiota,
nutritional intake, medication, and preterm infant growth:
a categorical model based on three quantitatively defined
“phases” (P1, P2, and P3) that corresponds to three states
of the microbiota and a PMA-based model with the three
composition-based phases replaced by two constant time
periods identified as early (< 34 weeks PMA; n = 362 data
points) and late (≥ 34 weeks PMA; n = 343 data points).
Our analyses identified more significant associations with
phase, which led us to use the phase-based framework to
explore potential functional relationships between the pre-
term microbiota, nutrition, and growth..

We first defined the phases and phase transition points
in longitudinal gut microbiota samples from two cohorts
of preterm and full-term infants from the multicenter
Prematurity and Respiratory Outcomes Program (PROP)
and Respiratory Pathogens Research Center (RPRC) at the
University of Rochester School of Medicine. The distin-
guishing composition and putative functional capacity of
each phase was assessed, along with the properties of tran-
sitions between phases. Our data suggest phase-specific
microbiota functions and demonstrate the effect of nutri-
tional intake and clinical factors on phase and period-
specific microbiota development. Furthermore, our results
in-
indicate significant associations between nutritional
take, the phase of the microbiota, and preterm infant
growth. Finally, we demonstrate that transition out of
phase 1 (P1) occurs simultaneously with transition from
meconium to normal postnatal stool, a milestone that can
be unambiguously identified at the bedside..

development in a cohort of 95 preterm and 2 full-term in-
fants from PROP and 23 full-term infants from RPRC at
the University of Rochester School of Medicine. A total of
719 rectal swab samples were collected weekly from the
PROP preterm infants while in the NICU, spanning PMA
from 24 to 46 weeks with a good representation across ges-
tational ages. A total of 2 rectal swabs were collected from
the 2 PROP full-term infants, and 46 rectal swabs from the
23 RPRC full-term infants: one near birth (≤ 20 day of life
[DOL]) and—for the RPRC subjects only—a second at
1 month of age  The longitudinal
analyses included 719 samples from preterm and 48
samples from full-term infants. Relevant available age
metrics were gestational age at birth, day of
life
(DOL), and PMA. To select the age metric for our
analyses, we used functional data analysis to fit nutri-
tion and growth variables, as well as the abundance of
operational taxonomic units (OTUs)
in the micro-
biota, first using PMA and then DOL as the age vari-
able  The overall fitting variance using PMA was
lower for OTU abundance and, for most metrics of
growth and nutrition, consistent with previous findings
that the temporal dynamics of the preterm infant gut
microbiota correspond better to PMA than to DOL .

Table 1 Demographic and clinical variables
Variables (N = 120).

Necrotizing enterocolitis diagnosis
(medical, surgical, N)b
Received antimicrobials (any, ≥ 7 days, N)c
Received diuretics (any, N)c
Received postnatal corticosteroids (any, N)c
Received proton pump inhibitors (any, N)c
Received H2 receptor antagonist (any, N)c
Received motility agents (any, N)c
aOther race includes those unknown
bNecrotizing enterocolitis diagnosis (medical, surgical) diagnosis for one baby
is unknown because of early withdrawal from study
c Medication received within 1 week prior to microbiome sample collection.
Sample collection occurred approximately weekly throughout the majority of
the hospitalization as clinically permitted. If the interval between samples was
greater than 7 days apart, then short portions of the hospital stay are not
covered by this analysis. Therefore, subjects who had the respective
medication, but not within 1 week prior to sample collection, are not counted
in this summary table.

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

We quantified the pattern of progression of the gut
microbiota with respect to the order of phase transition
events using the sequence of phases observed in the
consecutive samples from each individual infant to com-
pute the transition probabilities between the phases. For
each phase, the probability that the subsequent sample
from the same individual will be in the same phase is
higher than the probability of transitioning to a different
phase . Transition from one phase to the next
consecutive phase is more likely than the transition from
a higher phase to a lower phase (e.g., P2 to P1) or from
P1 to P3 directly. Accordingly, we found a strong rela-
tionship between PMA and microbiota phases .
For this preterm cohort, 70% of all P1 samples were
observed at PMA of 29 weeks or less; 84% of all P2
samples were observed from 28 weeks to 36 weeks
PMA; and 78% of all P3 samples at 33 weeks or later.
Eighty six percent of all samples from 37 weeks PMA
and later were in P3, suggesting that preterm infant.

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46
Post Menstrual Age In Weeks.

Fig. 1 Overview of the preterm infant gut microbiota phases and properties. a The decision tree for classifying a microbiota sample into one of
the three phases. b A composition bar chart with each sample grouped by phases 1–3 (P1–P3) from left to right. Green, gray, orange, and blue
represent Bacilli, Gammaproteobacteria, Clostridia, and Bacteroidia, respectively. c Bar charts representing the average weighted UniFrac distance
between consecutive samples of each individual infant. The bars are grouped into three major categories from left to right according to the
initial phase of the consecutive samples being assessed. Each bar within a category corresponds to the phase of the second consecutive sample.
The height of the bar indicates the average dissimilarity between consecutive samples of the corresponding phases, with exact values included in
the table below the graph. d Bar charts indicating the transition probability between consecutive samples within an individual. The groupings
and bars within each group indicate the phases of the first and second sample of a pair of consecutive samples, respectively, and are ordered as
described in c. Transition probabilities are included in the table below the graph. e The distribution of samples over corrected gestational age in
weeks. The dashed line separates the samples into early (< 34 weeks PMA) and late period (≥ 34 weeks PMA), based on functional variance of
microbiota composition across all 81 individuals. f Bar charts showing the average composition of the samples in each phase at the genus level,
with prominent genera labeled. For two Enterobacteriacaea and one Clostridiacaeae, the genus could not be determined and the family is indicated
instead (See Additional file 2: Comment on Figure 3F). Lines connecting segments between phases indicate that the segment represents the same
genus in each bar. A complete list of the genera represented here and their relative abundances can be found in Additional file 4: Table S3.

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .


degradation and carotenoid synthesis pathways with
BPA being an environmental contaminant
frequently
found in preterm infants due to repeated exposure to
plastics in medical devices and carotenoids con-
ferring protection of gut microbiota against oxidative
stress  Additional pathways were found to be
significantly differentially abundant when comparisons
were made between phases, including an increased cap-
acity for synthesis of isoquinoline alkaloids, glycan and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in P2 and P3. Protein transla-
tion, fatty acid biosynthesis and glycolysis and gluco-
neogenesis were increased in P1. A complete list of
differentially abundant putative functions can be found
in Additional file 6: Table S5..

The longitudinal patterns of rectal microbiota phase
transitions for 95 preterm and 25 full-term subjects are
shown in Fig. 3a relative to gestational age at birth.
Growth of the subjects is shown as change in weight Z-
score from birth to NICU discharge for preterms and
birth to 1 month for full terms. Comparison of preterm
infants in P1 (N = 42; mean birth GA (gestational age) =
27.43 weeks) with those in P2 or P3 (N = 55; mean birth
GA = 30.29 weeks) at the time of their first microbiota
sample showed significant difference (p < 0.0001)
in
mean birth GA between these two groups. Furthermore,
the most premature subjects (< 29 weeks birth GA) were
significantly more likely to be in P1 than the full-term.

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

Fig. 2 a–i Functional capacity of microbiota phases. The functional capacity of the microbiota present in each sample was inferred using PICRUSt
(Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States)  Each gray panel corresponds to one function and each
point within a gray panel represents one sample. The samples are stratified by phase along the x axis, with red circles corresponding to P1,
orange triangles corresponding to P2, and green squares corresponding to P3 samples. The sample position on the y axis indicates the relative
abundance of the specified KEGG pathway, calculated as the fraction of times functional components of that pathway occurs across all organisms
in the sample, with the contribution of each organism weighted by its relative abundance. Within each phase, samples are plotted on top of a
box plot, which is centered on the median, with notches indicating an approximately 95% confidence interval, boxes indicating the boundaries
of the first and third quartiles, and whiskers extending to the largest and smallest values no further than 1.5*(inter-quartile range) from the boxes.
Points beyond the whiskers are outliers. If the notches of two boxes within the same gray panel do not overlap on the y axis, there is strong
evidence that the true medians differ  Functional pathways that are differentially enriched among the three phases include those that
contribute to the degradation of phthalates on NICU medical devices (bisphenol degradation), protection against oxidative stress (carotenoid
biosynthesis), microbiota driven increases in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) concentrations (lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis), short-chain fatty acids
(fatty acid biosynthesis), isoquinoloine alkaloid biosynthesis, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, glycan biosynthesis and metabolism, membrane
transport and translation.

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

Corticosteroids past week * phase 1.

subjects at their first sample 
The change in weight Z-score is associated with length
of time in each phase, with the lowest change (at the red
end of the spectrum in Fig. 3a) in subjects (i.e., JE573,
J5028, J1B12) who remain in phase 1 or 2 for prolonged
periods. The largest negative change in weight Z-scores
was associated with delays in transition to a P3 gut
microbiota (p = 0.0023). Delayed achievement of P3 was
also associated with prematurity, with full-term subjects
reaching P3 by 1 month of age much more frequently
than preterm subjects 
Similarly, greater PMA-adjusted growth by discharge
(preterms) or 1 month (full terms) was observed in
the full-term subjects than in the preterm subjects
(mean change in weight Z-score − 0.033 vs − 1.269,
p ≈ 0.0). Eleven infants were treated for necrotizing
enterocolitis (NEC) and two of these died of the dis-
In those who survived, NEC was frequently
ease.
followed by more than 2 weeks in P2 (J6B6F, J900B,
J00F9, J2B52, and J8648). One infant who required a
jejunal ostomy remained in P1 for an extended period
of time (J0BE5). Thus, prolonged periods in P1 and P2
may represent the effects of lengthy antibiotic treat-
ment and/or lack of enteral nutrition. Although the
number of cases is insufficient for statistical assess-
ment, our data suggest an association between delayed
transition to P3 and a long-standing feeding intoler-
ance in the NICU that results in administration of
elemental amino acid-based formula (maroon ‘E’
in
the right-hand margin of Fig. 3a)..

Effect of nutrition and medication on microbiota taxa in
each phase
We next examined the effects of nutrient intake and med-
ications on the microbiota within each phase. Changes in
taxa abundance would suggest adaptation of the micro-
biota in response to factors that the preterm infant en-
counters while in the NICU and may affect development
of a mature, functional gut microbiota. Using a multivari-
ate mixed-effects regression model
that accounts for
subject-specific variations, we assessed changes in taxa
abundance at each phase, with PMA, gestational age at
birth, total calories per kilogram in the past week, propor-
tion of enteral calories in the past week, ratio of lipids,
carbohydrates and protein in the past week, antibiotics
and corticosteroid received during the past week, and add-
itional medications as covariates. We found phase-specific
changes in the microbiota significantly associated with the
ratio of
lipids, proteins, or carbohydrates in nutrition
(total enteral and parenteral), with the dominant effect of
all three nutrients in P3. At the phylum level, Actinobac-
teria and Proteobacteria are significantly associated with
lipid intake, Firmicutes with protein and Actinobacteria,
Proteobacteria, and Firmicutes with carbohydrates. Abun-
dance of Bifidobacterium, an Actinobacterium most com-
monly linked with development and maintenance of the
healthy infant gut microbiota  is significantly asso-
ciated with lipid and protein intake in P3, with increased
Bifidobacterium abundance associated with increased lipid
in the diet and decreased abundance with greater amounts
of protein. Among the commonly used NICU medica-
tions, increased abundance of Bifidobacterium was signifi-
cantly associated with use of corticosteroids and H2
receptor antagonists in the past week in P3. A complete
list of nutrition and medication variables significantly
associated with changes in microbiota taxa in all the three
phases can be found in in Additional file 7: Table S6..

Early and late periods of the preterm infant microbiome
To demonstrate the utility of modeling the microbiome
as three compositionally defined phases, we compared
gut microbiota development using two constant time pe-
riods based solely on PMA. Specifically, all preterm longi-
tudinal samples (n = 705) were divided into two groups or
periods of equal functional variance based on fitted micro-
biota taxa abundance, an early period (< 34 weeks PMA;
n = 362) and a late period (≥ 34 weeks PMA; n = 343)
. This separ-
ation into early and late periods was used as an un-
biased point of comparison to assess the utility of the
phase-based approach relative to a purely temporal
approach in the context of a nutrition-medication-
microbiota-growth model. Using linear mixed-effects re-
gression models as described for the phase-based nutrition
analysis (Methods-Model A) with the weight Z-score as.

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

proportion of calories from enteral feeding are signifi-
cantly associated with the phase of the microbiota in both
periods. A higher proportion of nutritional lipids is con-
sistently positively associated with the infant gut micro-
biota being in P2 and negatively associated with P1, while
a higher proportion of proteins is positively associated
with a P1 microbiota at an earlier PMA, negatively associ-
ated with being in P1 at later PMA, and negatively associ-
ated with being in P2 irrespective of PMA. Antibiotics are
positively associated with a P2 gut microbiota, significant
in the later PMA period (p = 0.0015), and nearly
significant in the earlier period (p = 0.0778). The vari-
ables used in these analyses, as well as their p values
and beta estimates, are provided in Table 3A–B and
Additional file 9: Table S8A–B..

aResults of mixed-effects logistic regression analysis between nutrition/medication and microbiome phases during the EARLY period (< 34 weeks PMA). Phases 1
and 2 are considered as binary outcome variables (yes/no) and are analyzed separately. Beta values are the estimated regression coefficients and p values are
computed from the likelihood ratio tests. For clarity, only significant associations are reported in this table. Full results are reported in Additional file 9: Table S8A
bResults of mixed-effects logistic regression analysis between nutrition/medication and microbiome phases during the LATE period (≥ 34 weeks PMA). Phases 1
and 2 are considered as binary outcome variables (yes/no) and are analyzed separately. Beta values are the estimated regression coefficients and p values are
computed from the likelihood ratio tests. For clarity, only significant associations are reported in this table. Full results are reported in Additional file 9: Table S8B.

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

sought to identify dynamic aspects of host biology that
correspond to phase transition. Emerging evidence sug-
gests that the initial newborn infant gut microbiota is
partially acquired by maternal transmission from the
amniotic fluid and placenta before birth  In
utero, the fetus swallows large quantities of amniotic
fluid that is colonized with bacteria in those mothers
who deliver prematurely  Genera in common
between amniotic fluid and the meconium, the earliest
fecal material passed by infants, suggests that pioneer
colonizers of
the infant gut are from this maternal
source. In addition to amniotic fluid that has been con-
sumed, meconium is formed from sloughed off gastro-
intestinal epithelial cells which are generated as debris
during periods of rapid digestive tract development and
convolution of the intestinal epithelial surface. It has
in preterm infants, passage of
been established that
meconium as stool is both delayed and prolonged and is
observed well beyond the first stool, with final clearance
occurring up to several weeks after birth .

To identify potential associations between the presence
of meconium and P1 of the microbiota, we examined the
relationship between clearance of the meconium from the
stool and the initial transition of the microbiota out of P1
,
but did not survive beyond the first weeks in the NICU.
Two infants cleared their meconium by discharge but
their last microbiota sample was still in P1 (J0BE5 and
J5633). The remaining 38 infants that were observed to be
in P1 at their first rectal sample were included in a linear
regression model using gestational age at birth and the
DOL of their last P1 sample before their initial transition
to another phase as explanatory variables, with the DOL
of meconium clearance as the dependent variable. This
model explained approximately half of the variation in the
day of life of stool transition from meconium to normal
infant stool (R-square = 0.51). Phase transition was found
to be highly significant in this model (p < 0.0001), while
gestational age at birth and the intercept did not exhibit
significant associations (p values = 0.35 and 0.23, respect-
ively), indicating that the time of stool transition was not
associated with prematurity or PMA once microbiota
phase transition was controlled for. On average, the last
P1 sample before the initial phase transition occurred
4.7 days before stool transition was observed . To
assess the similarity between the meconium and P1
microbiota samples, we first categorized all 721 samples
as meconium or not, depending on whether the sample
was collected from an infant that had not transitioned to
normal stool, and as P1 or not, according to the decision
tree. A majority of meconium samples were in P1 
and P1 samples in meconium (Additional file 2:
Figure S6A). We next used linear regression analysis to
identify the taxa significantly associated with meconium.

Discussion
Development of the early life gut microbiome is a crit-
ical factor in neonatal survival and long-term health
 In this study, we examined the effects of
nutrition and clinical practices in the NICU on devel-
opment of the preterm gut microbiome and neonatal
growth. The developing microbiota of preterm infants
is dominated by three classes of bacteria, whose rela-
tive proportions are temporally defined  In most
infants, Bacilli initially dominate, followed by Gam-
maproteobacteria, and ultimate convergence to a state
dominated by Clostridia by approximately 37 weeks
PMA. We demonstrate that this process can be under-
stood as a series of three ordered phases, with relative
stability being maintained for a period within each
phase and transitions between phases characterized by
rapid, dramatic shifts in the composition of the microbial
community. The phases and transition points between
them can be defined quantitatively, allowing individual
microbiota samples to be unambiguously categorized.
Analyses of the putative functional capacity of the phases
revealed marked differences and suggest significant roles
in host metabolism and gastrointestinal development.
While progression through the phases depends largely on
PMA, we identified significant associations with nutri-
tional factors, diuretics, and antibiotics. Notably, the initial
transition out of P1 is significantly associated with the ob-
served transition from meconium to normal stool. These
results suggest that the gut microbiota of premature in-
fants and its temporal dynamics may be best understood
through a phase-based paradigm. We have demonstrated
the utility of this paradigm by applying it to our examin-
ation of the relationships between the gut microbiota,
nutrition, and growth..

The gut microbiota of preterm infants at birth is less di-
verse than in full-term infants and at a greater risk for dys-
biosis due to physiological and immune immaturity and
postnatal influences that disrupt developmental succession
of the microbiota as they mature  Factors
that influence microbiota development include prolonged
hospitalization, postnatal medications, and formula feed-
ing  In this study, preterm infants were
fed specialized premature base formulas or breast milk,
which were then fortified with composition and volume.

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

The succession of gut microbiota in our preterm co-
horts revealed a low level of initial diversity in P1, which
is dominated by facultative anaerobes, followed by in-
creasing diversity and abundance of obligate anaerobes
and a shift to fermentation based metabolism in P3.
Consistent with other studies, we determined that this
programmed, non-random developmental succession of
microbiota is largely determined by PMA  What
drives this patterned succession toward a homeostatic
relationship between the infant and colonizing microbiota
is not known, but likely involves complex interactions be-
tween the mucosal immune system as well as metabolic
interactions within the gut microbial community and the
surrounding tissue and microenvironment, which remain
dynamic during periods of gastrointestinal development in
early life. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) produced by
Paneth cells (PCs) in the epithelium of the small intestine
establish a feedback loop between the host and com-
mensal bacteria that is essential for intestinal homeostasis
and microbiota colonization  Although the number of
immune-competent PCs are significantly higher after
37 weeks of gestation when compared to preterm infants,
the number of immune-competent PCs are higher in in-
fants with GA above 29 weeks compared to infants with
GA under 29 weeks  This period around PMA
29 weeks corresponds to the PMA ~ 30 weeks where we
observed the transition from P2 to P3 in our preterm co-
horts, suggesting that PC AMPs are one factor that modu-
lates the shift toward a community dominated by obligate
anaerobes. Streptococcus and Veillonella in P3, which fre-
quently co-occur and interact metabolically in microbial
communities, through the production of lactic acid by
Streptococcus which is used as a carbon source by Veillo-
nella  Similar metabolic interactions that contribute.

to succession and homeostasis will
likely be identified
through metabolic profiling of communities within each
phase .

Significant associations with phase succession were
identified with exposure to broad-spectrum antibiotics,
gut motility agents, corticosteroids for treatment of
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), histamine-2 recep-
tor (H2)-blockers and proton pump inhibitors (PPI)
that reduce gastric acidity and gastroesophageal reflux
 Previous studies evaluating use of antibi-
otics, H2-blockers and PPI in preterm infants identified
a relationship between their use and development of
necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC)  Treatment with
H2-blockers has been shown to favor the proliferation
of Proteobacteria over Firmicutes in fecal microbiota,
which is also associated with development of NEC 
Eleven preterm infants with NEC were included in our
study, but were not analyzed as an independent group,
and therefore, we cannot directly associate phase with
changes in microbiota and NEC. However, our analysis
of phase succession demonstrated that treatment of our
preterm infants with H2-blockers or PPI was associated.

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

The clearance of meconium and transition out of P1 is
not always stable, with the microbiota of some infants
reverting back to a meconium state or P1 after the initial
transition to P2 . Furthermore, clearance of
meconium occurs in P2 of some (e.g., J5028 in Fig. 3a)
or whose first sample was in P2 (i.e., J94E8). Expansion
of meconium clearance over P2 is also shown in
Additional file 2: Figure S6, where a significant num-
ber of P1 samples were not identified as meconium.
This may be due to our reliance on a clinical obser-
vation of meconium clearance to more solid fecal
material. Another likely source is the dynamic environ-
ment of the preterm gut and changes in microbiota-gut
epithelium interactions during rapid development  In
addition to the expected observation of delayed and pro-
longed meconium clearance due to hypomotility consist-
ent with the immature preterm gastrointestinal tract, it
may be that the continued accumulation of sloughed off
epithelial cells during the period of rapid intestinal growth.

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

Methods
Clinical methods
All study procedures were approved by the University of
Rochester School of Medicine Internal Review Board (IRB)
(Protocol # 37933). Infants included in the study were from
the multicenter Prematurity and Respiratory Outcomes
Program (PROP) and the Respiratory Pathogens Research
Center (RPRC) at the University of Rochester School of
Medicine and were cared for in a single-center Newborn
Intensive Care Unit (NICU). Clinical care in terms of type
and duration of antibiotic treatment, corticosteroids, di-
uretics, motility agents, and H2 receptor agonists as well as
the timing and volume of feeds was at the discretion of
treating physicians. Rectal swabs were used to collect fecal
material from consented infants from 24 PMA until dis-
charge and again at 6 months and 1 year for preterms and
birth and 1 month for full terms. Each sample was collected
by inserting a sterile Copan flocked nylon swab (Copan
Diagnostics, Murrieta, CA) moistened with normal saline
beyond the sphincters into the rectum and then twirled.
Each sample was immediately placed into sterile buffered
saline and stored at 4 °C for no more than 4 h. Samples
were processed daily, which involved extraction of the fecal
material from the swab in a sterile environment and imme-
diately frozen at − 80 °C until DNA extraction. All sampling
swabs, plasticware, buffers, and reagents used for sample
collection and extraction of nucleic acids were sterile and
UV-irradiated to insure no contamination from sources
outside of the infant and sample..

Derived medication and nutrition variables
For all medications considered, binary variables were
derived for each sample that indicate whether or not a
given medication was administered in the week 
prior to sample collection. Weight Z-score was com-
puted as a proxy for growth. First, weight percentile was
computed as the percentage of weight measures of a
population of the same sex and age that fall below the
observed weight value. We applied Cole’s LMS method
as used by CDC and WHO  The standard growth
chart is based on sex-matched premature infant popula-
tion weight data collected by Fenton and Kim 
Weight Z-scores were computed based on the corre-
sponding weight percentiles. Four variables associated
with each sample were derived for nutritional
intake:
total calories per kilogram in the week prior to sample
collection, ratio of lipids or proteins in the week prior to
sample collection, and the ratio of total calories in the
week prior to sample collection that were consumed en-
terally (as opposed to parenterally). These values were
computed based on detailed daily feeding records and
the available nutrition facts for all
formulas, supple-
ments, and total parenteral nutrient preparations used in
the NICU. Total calories per kilogram in the past week.

is the sum of total calories per kilogram per day for the
7 days prior to sampling. The proportion of enteral calo-
ries computed as the ratio of (grams of lipids/protein
per kilogram) divided by (total calories per kilogram) for
each day, summed over the 7 days prior to sampling.
“Enteral calorie ratio past week” was computed as the
total calories per kilogram consumed enterally in the
week prior to sampling divided by the total calories per
kilogram consumed (enterally and parenterally) in the
same period..

Genomic DNA extraction
Total genomic DNA was extracted with a modified
method using the QIAGEN Fecal DNA kit and FastPrep
mechanical
lysis (MPBio, Solon, OH). 16S ribosomal
RNA (rRNA) was amplified with Phusion High-Fidelity
polymerase (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and
dual indexed primers specific to the V3-V4 hypervari-
able regions (319F: 5′ ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG
3′; 806R: 3′ ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG 5′) 
Amplicons were pooled and paired-end sequenced on
an Illumina MiSeq (Illumina, San Diego, CA) in the
University of Rochester Genomics Research Center.
Each sequencing run included positive controls con-
sisting of a 1:5 mixture of Staphylococcus aureus, Lacto-
coccus lactis, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Streptococcus
mutans, and Escherichia coli and negative controls
consisting of sterile saline..

16S rRNA sequence processing
Raw data from the Illumina MiSeq was first converted
into FASTQ format 2 × 300 paired-end sequence files
using the bcl2fastq program, version 1.8.4, provided by
Illumina. Format conversion was performed without de-
multiplexing and the EAMMS algorithm was disabled.
All other settings were default. Sequence processing and
microbial composition analysis were performed with the
Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME)
software package  version 1.9. Reads were multi-
plexed using a configuration described previously 
Briefly, for both reads in a pair, the first 12 bases were a
barcode, which was followed by a primer, then a hetero-
geneity spacer, and then the target 16S rRNA sequence.
Using a custom Python script, the barcodes from each
read pair were removed, concatenated together, and
stored in a separate file. Read pairs were assembled
using fastq-join from the ea.-utils package, requiring at
least 40 bases of overlap and allowing a maximum of
10% mismatched bases. Read pairs that could not be
assembled were discarded. The concatenated barcode
sequences were prepended to the corresponding assem-
bled reads, and the resulting sequences were converted
from FASTQ to FASTA and QUAL files for QIIME ana-
lysis. Barcodes, forward primer, spacer, and reverse primer.

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

sequences were removed during de-multiplexing. Reads
containing more than four mismatches to the known
primer sequences or more than three mismatches to all
barcode sequences were excluded from subsequent pro-
cessing and analysis. Assembled reads were truncated at
the beginning of the first 30 base window with a mean
Phred quality score of less than 20 or at the first ambigu-
ous base, whichever came first. Resulting sequences
shorter than 300 bases or containing a homopolymer lon-
ger than six bases were discarded. Operational taxonomic
units (OTU) were picked using the reference-based
USEARCH (version 5.2) pipeline in QIIME, using the
May 2013 release of the GreenGenes 99% OTU database
as a closed reference  An indexed word length
of 128 and otherwise default parameters were used with
USEARCH. Chimera detection was performed de novo
with UCHIME, using default parameters  OTU
clusters with less than four sequences were removed,
and representative sequences used to make taxonomic
assignments for each cluster were selected on the basis
of abundance. The RDP Naïve Bayesian Classifier was
used for taxonomic classification with the GreenGenes
reference database, using a minimum confidence thresh-
old of .85 and otherwise default parameters  Phylo-
genetic investigation of communities by reconstruction of
unobserved states (PICRUSt) was used with the pro-
vided pre-processed KEGG Orthologs database to infer
the putative functional capacities of these communities..

16S rRNA microbiota data pre-processing
To ensure the quality of statistical analysis, microbiome
samples with < 12,000 total reads were excluded from the
subsequent data analyses. Microbiota abundance data
were
(level 2:
PHYLUM–level 7: SPECIES). For characterization of the
microbiota phases and within phase abundance analyses,
raw relative abundance values were used. For beta diver-
sity calculations, normalization by rarefaction at a depth
of 12,000 reads was performed. For longitudinal abun-
dance analyses, at each taxonomic level we excluded OTU
units (taxa) with equal or more than 98% of exactly zero
reads among the 705 samples. In total, 140 genera and
198 species are used for these statistical analyses. The
abundance data were log2 transformed (log2(x + 1)) fol-
lowing normalization by cumulative sum scaling .

Description of decision tree logic to define microbiota
phases
Drawing on the microbial dysbiosis index described by
Gevers et al.  the first step in the decision tree is to
compute and evaluate the log of (total abundance of the
classes increased in prematurity (Bacilli + Gammaproteo-
bacteria)) over (total abundance of the class decreased in
prematurity (Clostridia)). If this value is less than or equal.

to two, the gut microbiota is defined as being in phase 3.
If the result of the first step in the tree is greater than two,
a second step is taken where we compute and evaluate the
log of (total abundance of the class increased in extreme
prematurity (Bacilli)) over (total abundance of the class
decreased in extreme prematurity (Gammaproteobac-
teria)). If the resulting value is less than or equal to two,
the gut microbiota is defined as being in phase two; other-
wise, it is defined as being in phase one (P1). In the event
that the ratio is non-computable because Clostridia is en-
tirely absent and the P1|P2 branch is taken, or the P1|P2
branch is taken and Gammaproteobacteria is absent, the
microbiota is defined as being in P1 or the P1|P2 branch
is taken and Bacilli is absent, the microbiota is defined as
being in P2. If two of the three classes are absent, the
microbiota is defined as being in the phase characterized
by the class that is present. No samples were entirely
devoid of all three classes, but such a case could not be
resolved within this framework. Dirichlet multinomial
mixture (DMM) modeling for comparative purposes was
performed using the Dirichlet multinomial R package,
which is based on Holmes et al.  Class-level compos-
ition was used, and per sample normalization was per-
formed by converting relative abundances to counts
summing to 12,000 (the minimum read threshold for in-
clusion in analysis). The dmn function was used with de-
fault parameters and an arbitrary seed value of 11; count
data was fit to one through ten Dirichlet components, and
model fit was estimated using the Laplace metric..

Functional capacity of microbiota phases
The functional capacity of the microbiota present in
each sample was inferred using PICRUSt (Phylogenetic
Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Un-
observed States)  which reconstructs the functional
composition of a microbial community sample using
16S rRNA phylogeny and a database of annotated refer-
ence genomes. For each functional pathway from the
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) that
was putatively identified, comparisons were made be-
tween the phases using LEfSe, which identifies features
that are statistically differentially abundant among bio-
logical classes (in this case phases) and then performs
comparative tests between pairs of biological classes to
identify where these features are significantly enriched
or diminished..

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

assessed at each taxonomic level using the metagen-
omicsSeq zero-inflated Gaussian test  and the re-
sults are summarized in Additional file 5: Tables S4A–C.
Testing for differential functional capacity between the
phases was performed using LEfSe with per-sample
normalization to 1 M total counts, minimum effect size
of 2.0, alpha of 0.1, an all-against-all strategy, and other-
wise default parameters. The results are summarized in
Additional file 6: Table S5. An exploratory test of the
equality of the median of the week-to-week differences
of samples within individual subjects between the cases
where the phase remains the same and the cases where the
phase changes was performed using the Wilcoxon rank-
sum test. The p value reported for this test is approximate
due to the paired nature of beta-diversity and the presence
of repeated measures from the same subjects..

Determination of early and late time periods
We applied functional principal component analysis to
the microbiota abundance data  The estimated tem-
poral abundance function of taxon v and subject I, xi;v
tð Þ , was represented by a linear combination of eigen-
functions as follows:.

Here, x⋅;v tð Þ represents the sample mean abundance
function calculated from all subjects. V tð Þ represents the
overall temporal variance at the species level. The max-
imum of V tð Þ occurred at PMA = 34 weeks (rounded to
integers), which is illustrated in Additional file 2: Figure S5.
Based on this cutoff, we define the EARLY period of PMA
to be  The EARLY
interval has 362 data points; the LATE interval has 343
data points..

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

Here, NutriMed(i,k) (tj) is the kth clinical covariate for
the ith subject measured at the jth time point. βk is the
corresponding linear coefficient (fixed effect); αi
is a
random-effect term that quantifies the within-subject
dependence; and ϵij is the i.i.d. measurement error. In
summary, model A associates weight Z-score to the
time periods (EARLY versus LATE), nutrition and
medication variables, and their interactions. Model B is
much like model A except
it uses microbiota
phases to quantify the developmental stages of micro-
bial community instead. For model A, LATE is consid-
ered as the baseline phase (coded as 0) and EARLY is
coded as 1. For model B, phase 3 is considered as the
baseline phase (coded as 0); phases 1 and 2 are coded
as 1 in two separate binary variables. The interactions
included in both models are defined as the products of
the nutrition/medication variables and period/phase-re-
lated covariates. The significance of associations is de-
test with Satterthwaite’s
termined by regression t
approximation. Due to the use of large number of co-
variates in these models, stepwise model selection
based on the Akaike information criterion (AIC) was
used to reduce model complexity. The results of model
B for weight Z-score are summarized in Table 2 of the
main text. As an example, the linear associations of P2
and percent lipids * P2 with the weight z-score are both
significant (beta = − 0.7766 for P2 and 5.658 for lipids *
P2); meaning that while P2 is correlated with a smaller
weight z-score as compared with the baseline (P3), a
higher percent of lipid intake for P2 subjects increases
the weight Z-scores for subjects in P2. Analyses were
performed in R 3.2.0 (R Foundation for Statistical Com-
puting, Vienna, Austria)..

Additional file 1: Table S1. Number of significant associations
identified in the initial linear mixed-effects regression analysis. Specifically,
for each covariate listed in this table, we performed linear mixed-effects
regression analyses in which the response variables are microbial taxa
abundance and the regressors are as follows: gestational age at birth,
the interation
between the main covariate and PMA. Regression t tests were used to
assess the statistical significance of associations. Benjamini-Hochberg multiple
testing procedure was used to control false discovery rate at 0.05 level. Listed
in this table are the numbers of taxa that are significantly associated with
each regressors in these initial regression analyses. (DOCX 17 kb).

Additional file 2: Figure S1. Composition bar charts by subject and
sampling method. Figure S2. Alpha diversity by subject and sampling
method observed OTUs. Figure S3. Number of Dirichlet components vs.
model fit. Figure S4. Weighted UniFrac Principal Coordinate Analyses of
phase and Dirichlet component. (A) Weighted UniFrac Principal
Coordinate Analysis plot colored by phase. (B) Weighted UniFrac Principal
Coordinate Analysis plot colored by Dirichlet Component. Figure S5.
Total functional variance based on the fitted microbiome abundance at
the species level relative to postmenstrual age (PMA). Figure S6. Linear
regression analysis of meconium samples and Phase 1 rectal samples.
Comment on Figure 3F. (DOCX 1141 kb).

Additional file 3: Table S2. Confusion table of phases vs. Dirichlet
multinomial mixture components. Each sample was classified as
representing a specific phase based on the ratios of Bacilli,
Gammaproteobacteria, and Clostridia, as described. Independently, each
sample was classified as representing a Dirichlet multinomial mixture
(DMM) component based on the abundances of all classes of bacteria
present. Each row of the table above indicates the number of samples
classified as a given phase, and each column indicates the number of
samples classified as a given DMM component. Row/column
intersections indicate the number of samples classified as the
corresponding phase (row) and DMM component (column). DMM
components are numbered automatically from the most common to the
least common, while phases are numbered according to their order in a
model of temporal progression. Phase 1 is equivalent to DMM
component 3; phase 2 corresponds to DMM component 2; and phase 3
corresponds to both DMM components 1 and 4. Colors on the row and
column labels indicate these correspondence relationships, and colors
internal to the table identify sets of samples where the phase-based and
DMM component classifications are in agreement. (DOCX 18 kb).

Additional file 5: Table S4. A. Results of differential abundance tests
(metagenomeSeq zero-inflated Gaussian) of all bacterial taxa between
microbiome phases 1 and 2. B. Results of differential abundance tests
(metagenomeSeq zero-inflated Gaussian) of all bacterial taxa between
microbiome phases 2 and 3. C. Results of differential abundance tests
(metagenomeSeq zero-inflated Gaussian) of all bacterial taxa between
microbiome phases 1 and 3. (ZIP 536 kb).

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

Additional file 7: Table S6. Significant associations between bacterial
taxa and nutrition, medications, and other clinical factors, within each of
the three phases of the microbiome. (XLSX 34 kb).

Availability of data and materials
All phenotypic data, 16S rRNA sequence reads and generated datasets is
publically available through dbGaP accessions phs001297.v1.p1 (PROP
rectal samples n = 721, n = 97 subjects) and phs001347.v2.p1 (RPRC/PROP
fullterm samples n = 46 samples, n = 23 subjects, meconium and stool
samples, n = 10 samples, n = 5 subjects) through url http://
nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs00001297.v1.p1 and
url http://
phs00001347.v2.p1..

Received: 18 April 2017 Accepted: 23 November 2017.

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

17. Brown CT, Sharon I, Thomas BC, Castelle CJ, Morowitz MJ, Banfield JF. Genome
resolved analysis of a premature infant gut microbial community reveals a
Varibaculum cambriense genome and a shift towards fermentation-based
metabolism during the third week of life. Microbiome. 2013;130.
Liu Z, Roy NC, Guo Y, Jia H, Ryan L, Samuelsson L, Thomas A, Plowman J,
Clerens S, Day L, et al. Human breast milk and infant formulas differentially
modify the intestinal microbiota in human infants and host physiology in
rats. J Nutr. 2016;146191–9..

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 .

•  We accept pre-submission inquiries 
(cid:129)  Our selector tool helps you to ﬁnd the most relevant journal
(cid:129)  We provide round the clock customer support 
(cid:129)  Convenient online submission
(cid:129)  Thorough peer review
(cid:129)  Inclusion in PubMed and all major indexing services 
(cid:129)  Maximum visibility for your research