38_PARAGRAPHS

The congruent phylogenies of mammals and their microbiota8 provide strong evidence for
the inheritance of the microbiota7 Although inheritance of the microbiota from the father is
presently little studied, increasing evidence supports inheritance from the mother34,53. Until
the amniotic sac ruptures, a fetus is considered to be sterile, or essentially sterile.
Immediately after vaginal delivery, founding microbial populations in the baby closely
resemble that of their mother’s vagina54, with lactobacilli predominating. Since lactic acid-
producing bacteria dominate in both vagina and in mother’s milk, the initial gastro-intestinal
tract bloom of lactobacilli in the baby cannot be considered accidental. Lactobacilli
represent the pioneer community in mice55 as well as humans39, preparing the
gastrointestinal tract for subsequent microbial successions, until microbial maturity is
reached..

The multiple opportunities for the microbiota to be transferred from a mother to her baby
may be disrupted by modern lifestyles. Caesarian section instead of vaginal delivery is an
obvious example of the potential impact of medical practice on microbiota composition,
with substantial differences in founding population54, that may persist for months56 (Figure
3). In many host species, paternal contributions to offspring traits have been well
documented57,58; these observations have been extended to the microbiome, where paternal
contributions to offspring H. pylori allele composition have been shown59, In any event,
there is evidence for extensive horizontal gene transfer (HGT) within human populations,
functional classes, and ecological niches60, indicating the site-specificity and dynamism of
selection on the human microbiome. Even so, microbial inheritance can provide important
confirmation of human ancestry61..

Our knowledge of microbiome dynamics, especially age-related changes, during human
adulthood is limited. The older literature (predating the use of HTS), clearly shows that the
post-menopause vaginal microbiota differs substantially from that during the reproductive
period73,74. Similarly, in the stomach,, the age-related progressive development of gastric
atrophy (enhanced by H. pylori presence75,76) selects for gastric microbiota that are
substantially different from the norm 77. Analogous changes may be occurring in other body
sites as senescence advances. In the gut, the ratio of Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes changes
with age78..

These concepts are particularly relevant to oncogenesis, which is generally age-related. In
the multi-step Nordling hypothesis of oncogenesis79, 4–6 somatic cell mutations are needed
for cancer development. We propose that age-related microbiota shifts contribute to this
multi-step process. Residential microbes can contribute to somatic mutagenesis by causing
genotoxicity secondary to inflammation, increased cell proliferation, and production of pro-
mutagenic metabolites (e.g. butyrate)80. Genes may have alternative effects at different life
stages, illustrating the idea of antagonistic pleiotropy81. We hypothesize that specific human
microbiota and their genes that are beneficial early in life may be harmful later in life. The
dominant gastric bacterium, H. pylori provides an example:early in life, inflammatory
responses to the organism improve control of infection82,83 and allergy84, but later in life
promote atrophy and oncogenesis85. A related hypothesis is that co-evolved microbiota are
adaptive for the human species both by supporting early-in-life host functions and by
leading to later-in-life host demise 86..

The cutaneous microbiome is an obvious target in specific diseases, such as psoriasis, a
chronic, idiopathic inflammatory dermatologic condition87. In studies predating HTS, the
use of PCR and cloning led to observations that Firmicutes were significantly over-
represented and Actinobacteria were significantly under-represented in psoriatic lesions
compared to both unaffected skin in psoriasis patients and in normal controls88. Studies to
explore these findings using HTS are currently underway89. Atopic dermatitis, another
chronic inflammatory condition, has increased in incidence approximately three-fold over
the last 30 years in industrialized countries, suggesting a potential role for microbiome
alterations. Classic atopic dermatitis occurs in areas, such as the ANTECUBITAL and POPLITEAL FOSSAE,
with similar microbial populations89, suggesting a microbiome role. Similarly,
Propionibacterium acnes has been implicated in the common dermatologic condition, acne.
Although P. acnes thrives in the cutaneous PILOSEBACEOUS UNITS and secretes enzymes that cause
local injury and inflammation, and is widely accepted to have a function in acne
development90, continuing investigations also are examining other microbes in the
development of acne. Chronic skin ulcers, often secondary to venous stasis or diabetes, lead
to substantial morbidity. Cutaneous microbiome shifts, such as an increased abundance of
Pseudomonadaceae in patients with chronic ulcers treated with antibiotics and an increased
abundance of Streptococcaceae in diabetic ulcers have been noted91. Such shifts may
interact with aberrantly expressed host cutaneous defense response genes92, thereby
increasing disease risk..

The discovery that H. pylori was adapted to survive in the acidic gastric environment
overturned the dogma that the stomach is sterile. In H. pylori-negative individuals, gastric
microbiota diversity is high; most of the prominent gastric phylotypes (Streptococcus,
Actinomyces, Prevotella, Gemella) also are abundant in the oropharynx of these
individuals93; indicating that either many constituents are swallowed from more proximal
sites, or that close relatives of the oral microbiota colonize more distally. In contrast, among
pylori-positive persons, H. pylori usually accounts for >90% of sequence reads from the
 
H
.
gastric microbiota93, dramatically reducing the overall diversity of this microbiota. The
ability of H. pylori to dominate indicates an evolved fitness for that specialized niche. H.
pylori is a classical AMPHIBIONT; the presence (or absence) of an H. pylori dominated gastric
microbiota is strongly associated with particular diseases with important age-related
differences85. Its presence increases risk for developing peptic ulcer disease, gastric mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) tumors, and gastric adenocarcinoma94 but also is
associated with decreased reflux esophagitis95 and childhood-onset asthma96; demonstrating
the complex biological interactions with our microbiota..

Further evidence of a link between colonic microbiota and colorectal cancer is suggested by
the ability of antibiotic administration to alter the composition of the colonic microbiota and
to affect the expression of host genes involved in cell cycle regulation, reducing epithelial
proliferation100. Early studies evaluating specific microbes were limited to identifying
culture-dependent species, such as Streptococcus bovis, but could not adequately assess
anaerobic constituents. However, members of the anaerobic genus Fusobacterium have
recently been associated with colorectal cancer; whole genome sequences of Fusobacterium
species were compared between cases and matched controls using both quantitative PCR
analysis and HTS101,102. Fusobacterium nucleatum is a mucosally adherent, pro-
inflammatory microbe that was first identified in the mouth103. In colorectal cancer samples,
F
nucleatum sequences were significantly enriched compared to samples obtained from
 
.
control subjects, while both Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes were relatively depleted in those
with Fusobacterium-rich malignancies102. The enrichment of Fusobacterium species (not
limited to F. nucleatum) was confirmed when evaluating the mucosal microbiome of
colorectal cancers compared to adjacent normal tissues from 99 subjects101. However, the
causal direction of the association has not yet been ascertained..

The microbiome is essential for the activation of host immune responses 104. For example,
Th17 cell differentiation in the mouse LAMINA PROPRIA requires the presence of segmented
filamentous bacteria (SFB)105, and polysaccharide A produced by Bacteroides fragilis
mediates conversion of CD4+ T cells into regulatory T cells106. The inflammatory bowel
diseases have long been considered to reflect interactions between microbes and the host.
IBD susceptibility is associated with host polymorphisms in bacterial sensor genes such as
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 2 (NOD2) also known as
caspase recruitment domain-containing protein 15 (CARD15)107,108 and toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4)109, and IBD patients sometimes improve following antibiotic treatment110. Early
childhood antibiotic exposure has been associated with significantly increased risk for
Crohn’s disease111, suggesting that gut microbiome perturbations may be critical for disease
risk. Microbial diversity is significantly diminished in Crohn’s disease112, suggesting
decreased gut microbiome resilience that could affect immune interactions. Gut microbiome
population structures of patients with ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease19 depart from
normality, but remain clustered by disease within their characteristic deviated patterns.
Specific bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae genus may act together with a disordered
microbiome to increase the risk of ulcerative colitis113. Among twins discordant for
ulcerative colitis, those affected had significantly reduced bacterial diversity, but increased
proportions of Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria114. Patients with Crohn’s disease have
over-representation of E. faecium and of several Proteobacteria compared to controls115.
The microbial patterns observed for the conditions described above are preliminary and their
specificity and causal direction have not been established..

Genetically obese (ob/ob) mice have decreased Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratios compared
with lean (ob/+ and +/+ wild-type) siblings31. Transplantation of gut microbiota from the
obese (ob/ob) to germ-free mice conferred an obese phenotype, demonstrating
transmissibility of metabolic phenotypes17; the transferred microbiomes had increased
capacity for energy harvest. In humans, relative Bacteroidetes proportions increase with
weight loss122. In mono- and dizygotic twins, obesity was associated with decreased
Bacteroidetes and diminished bacterial diversity, with enrichment of genes related to lipid
and carbohydrate metabolism. Despite substantial taxonomic variation, functional
metagenomic differences were minor37. Changing exposures/selection pressures on the
early-life microbiome may contribute to development of obesity. Antibiotic use in human
infancy, before age 6 months, was significantly associated with obesity development123. In
contrast, perinatal administration of a Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG-based PROBIOTIC decreased
excessive weight gain during childhood124. These early studies provide support for the
concept that microbiota alterations could lead to childhood-onset obesity, which could be
modifiable. Alterations in the gut microbiome also occur with interventions used to treat
obesity. ROUX-EN-Y SURGERY significantly increases levels of Proteobacteria, while altering
specific metabolic markers, such as the production of urinary amines and cresols125..

A thin layer of loose connective tissue that lies underneath the
epithelium and with it constitutes the mucosa that lines various
lumens within the body; it is a dense locus of immunological and
inflammatory cells.

33. Douglass JM, Li Y, Tinanoff N. Association of mutans streptococci between caregivers and their.

Helicobacter pylori status. The ISME journal. 2011; 5:574–579. [PubMed: 20927139]
53. Li Y, Caufield PW, Dasanayake AP, Wiener HW, Vermund SH. Mode of delivery and other.

maternal factors influence the acquisition of Streptococcus mutans in infants. Journal of dental
research. 2005; 84:806–811. [PubMed: 16109988].

58. Hunt J, Simmons LW. Maternal and paternal effects on offspring phenotype in the dung beetle
Onthophagus taurus. Evolution; international journal of organic evolution. 2000; 54:936–941.
59. Raymond J, et al. Genetic and transmission analysis of Helicobacter pylori strains within a family..

75. Peek RM Jr, Blaser MJ. Helicobacter pylori and gastrointestinal tract adenocarcinomas. Nature.

76. Giannakis M, Chen SL, Karam SM, Engstrand L, Gordon JI. Helicobacter pylori evolution during
progression from chronic atrophic gastritis to gastric cancer and its impact on gastric stem cells..

77. Li XX, et al. Bacterial microbiota profiling in gastritis without Helicobacter pylori infection or
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug use. PLoS ONE. 2009; 4:e7985. [PubMed: 19956741]
78. Mariat D, et al. The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio of the human microbiota changes with age..

82. Perry S, et al. Infection with Helicobacter pylori is associated with protection against tuberculosis..

83. Higgins PD, et al. Prior Helicobacter pylori infection ameliorates Salmonella typhimurium-induced
colitis: Mucosal crosstalk between stomach and distal intestine. Inflammatory Bowel Diseases.
2011; 17:1398–1408. [PubMed: 21560200].

84. Arnold IC, et al. Helicobacter pylori infection prevents allergic asthma in mouse models through
the induction of regulatory T cells. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2011; 121:3088–3093.
[PubMed: 21737881].

85. Atherton JC, Blaser MJ. Coadaptation of Helicobacter pylori and humans: ancient history, modern
implications. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2009; 119:2475–2487. [PubMed: 19729845]
86. Blaser, MJ.; Webb, G. American Society for Microbiology Conference of Beneficial Microbes.
Lake Tahoe, NV: 2005. Host demise as a beneficial function of indigenous microbiota in
multicellular hosts..

Propionibacterium acnes and characterization of type I cell surface-associated antigens.
Microbiology. 2011; 157:1990–2003. [PubMed: 21511767].

94. McColl KE. Clinical practice. Helicobacter pylori infection. The New England journal of.

96. Chen Y, Blaser MJ. Inverse associations of Helicobacter pylori with asthma and allergy. Archives.

type 17 T cell responses. Nature medicine. 2009; 15:1016–1022..

100. Reikvam DH, et al. Depletion of murine intestinal microbiota: effects on gut mucosa and.

101. Castellarin M, et al. Fusobacterium nucleatum infection is prevalent in human colorectal.

nucleatum in oral epithelial cells: multiple signaling pathways and role of commensal bacteria in
innate immunity and the epithelial barrier. Infection and immunity. 2000; 68:2907–2915.
[PubMed: 10768988].

105. Ivanov II, et al. Specific microbiota direct the differentiation of IL-17-producing T-helper cells in
the mucosa of the small intestine. Cell Host & Microbe. 2008; 4:337–349. [PubMed: 18854238]
An important study that describes the immunological interplay between segmented filamentous
bacteria and Th-17 cells in the distal small bowel.

bacterium of the intestinal microbiota. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2010; 107:12204–12209. [PubMed: 20566854].

114. Lepage P, et al. Twin study indicates loss of interaction between microbiota and mucosa of.

Helicobacter pylori and the recurrence of duodenal ulcer. The New England journal of medicine.
1993; 328:308–312. [PubMed: 8419816].

134. Islami F, Kamangar F. Helicobacter pylori and esophageal cancer risk: a meta-analysis. Cancer.

135. Blaser MJ, Chen Y, Reibman J. Does Helicobacter pylori protect against asthma and allergy? Gut..

changes in the microbiome playing a role? Notable examples include childhood-
onset asthma, food allergies, type 1 diabetes, obesity, inflammatory bowel
disease, autism. *#.

cancers and other diseases associated with aging? Can these signatures be
pursued to better understand oncogenesis (work on Helicobacter pylori provides
a clear example of this)? *.

Esophageal microbiota dominated by
gram-negative anaerobes
Gastric microbiota with low or absent H. pylori.

Absent gastric Helicobacter. pylori (especially
cytotoxin-associated gene (cagA) genotype)