77_PARAGRAPHS

Obtaining bacteria in pure culture is typically the ﬁrst step in investigating bacterial
processes. However, standard culturing techniques account for 1% or less of the
bacterial diversity in most environmental samples  Although some signiﬁcant
breakthroughs have resulted from recent attempts to culture the as-yet-unculturable
bacteria  a suite of culture-independent techniques are needed to
complement efforts to culture the thousands or millions of unknown species in the
environment..

A new era of microbial ecology was initiated when sequencing of ribosomal
RNAs and the genes encoding them was introduced to describe uncultured bacteria
in the environment. The ﬁrst approach was to sequence clones from a 5S rRNA
cDNA library derived from the symbiotic community within the tubeworm Riftia
pachyptila  Variations of this method generated a set of culture-independent
techniques to (a) reconstruct phylogenies, (b) compare microbial distributions
among samples using either nucleotide sequence or restriction fragment length
polymorphisms (RFLPs), and (c) quantify the relative abundance of each taxo-
nomic group using membrane hybridization or ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (2,
47, 57, 78–80)..

The most startling result of the many microbial diversity studies that have
employed 16S rRNA culture-independent methods is the richness of the uncultured
microbial world. As of April 1, 2004, GenBank contained 21,466 16S rRNA genes
from cultured prokaryotes and 54,655 from uncultured prokaryotes, according to
the search terms described by Rapp´e & Giovannoni  and many of those from
uncultured organisms afﬁliate with phyla that contain no cultured members. When
Woese originally proposed a 16S rRNA-based phylogeny, 12 bacterial phyla
were recognized, each with cultured representatives. Since then, 14 additional
phyla with cultured representatives have been identiﬁed. In addition, 16S rRNA
gene sequence analysis suggests 26 candidate phyla that have no known cultured
representatives  Therefore, half of the known microbial phyla have no cultured
representatives..

Among the phyla that contain cultured members, a few contain many isolates
and the rest contain too few to represent the full spectrum of diversity in the
phylum. For example, Hugenholtz found that 97% of prokaryotes deposited
in the Australian Culture of Microorganisms in 2001 were members of just four
phyla: the Proteobacteria  and.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

Bacteroidetes  Within GenBank, 76% of the 16S rRNA gene sequences of
cultured prokaryotes are from these four groups. But other phyla may be more
diverse, prevalent, and ecologically consequential in the environment. 16S rRNA
gene sequences from the Acidobacterium phylum are among the most abundant
in clone libraries obtained from soil and have been found in all soils examined,
suggesting that the Acidobacteria play important roles in soil ecosystems. How-
ever, of the 684 Acidobacterium 16S rRNA gene sequences in GenBank, only 19
are from cultured isolates, providing an inadequate collection to describe
the physiological diversity of the phylum. Other than 16S rRNA gene sequences,
little is known about the bacteria within the 22 poorly cultured phyla and 26 candi-
date phyla. Many terms, such as unculturable, uncultivated, as yet uncultured, and
not yet cultured, are used to refer to microorganisms that we know of only through
culture-independent means. In this review, we refer to them as uncultured..

Describing the phylogenetic diversity of uncultured microorganisms is only the
ﬁrst step. A greater challenge is to assign ecological roles to them. The uncultured
microbiota must play pivotal roles in natural environmental processes and are a
large untapped resource for biotechnology applications. Exploiting the rich micro-
bial biodiversity for enzyme and natural product discovery is an active research
area that has been reviewed elsewhere  This re-
view discusses the application of culture-independent genomics-based approaches
to understand the genetic diversity, population structure, and ecology of complex
microbial assemblages .

“Metagenomics” describes the functional and sequence-based analysis of the col-
lective microbial genomes contained in an environmental sample (Figure 1) 
Other terms have been used to describe the same method, including environ-
mental DNA libraries  eDNA
libraries  whole genome treasures
 and
probably others. In this review, we use metagenomics to describe work that has
been presented with all of these names because it is the most commonly used term
 was used for the title of the ﬁrst
international conference on the topic (“Metagenomics 2003” held in Darmstadt,
Germany), and is the focus of an upcoming issue of the journal Environmental Mi-
crobiology. The deﬁnition applied here excludes studies that use PCR to amplify
gene cassettes 
since these methods do not provide genomic information beyond the genes that are
ampliﬁed. Many environments have been the focus of metagenomics, including
soil, the oral cavity, feces, and aquatic habitats, as well as the hospital metagenome,
a term intended to encompass the genetic potential of organisms in hospitals that
conribute to public health concerns such as antibiotic resistance and nosocomial
infections .

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

Figure 1 Metagenomics involves constructing a DNA library from an en-
vironment’s microbial population and then analyzing the functions and se-
quences in the library..

The concept of cloning DNA directly from an environment was initially sug-
gested by Pace  who constructed
a λ phage library from a seawater sample and screened it for 16S rRNA genes.
Advances by the DeLong group in cloning DNA directly from seawater provided
the landmark work that launched the ﬁeld  Development of metagenomic
analyses of soil was slower than with seawater because of the technical challenges
of cloning DNA from the complex matrix of soil, which contains many compounds
that bind to DNA or inhibit the enzymatic reactions required for cloning. Signiﬁ-
cant progress has been made, producing libraries that have substantially advanced
understanding the functions in the soil community  The past eight years have
witnessed an explosion of interest and activity in metagenomics, accompanied by
advances in technology that have facilitated studies at a scale that was not feasible
when the ﬁeld began. For example, the seminal paper in 1996 by Stein et al. 
reported the sequencing and reconstruction of a 40-kb fragment from an uncultured
marine archaeon, which was a major undertaking at the time. In 2004, Venter et al.
reported their attempt to sequence the entire metagenome of the Sargasso
Sea by obtaining over 1 million kb of nonredundant sequence. The advances in
sequencing technology have expanded the approaches and questions that can be.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

Diverse activities have been discovered by functional analysis of metagenomic
libraries. New antibiotics  hydrolytic and degrada-
tive enzymes 
antibiotic resistance enzymes have been
identiﬁed. The diversity of functionally active clones discovered in metagenomic
libraries validates the use of functional screens as one means to characterize the
libraries. Antimicrobial screens have revealed new antibiotics such as terragine
 as well as previously
described antibiotics such as indirubin  Most of these com-
pounds are structurally based on common cell substituents, such as amino acids,
and none requires more than a few genes for its synthesis. The goal of identify-
ing new polyketide, macrolide, and peptide antibiotics may require different
methods. Enhancing expression of genes in metagenomic libraries may lead to dis-
covery of a wider array of natural products. This will be accomplished by moving
the libraries into alternative hosts, such as Streptomyces, which was the basis for
discovery of terragine  Alternative hosts may enhance gene expression or
provide starting materials that Escherichia coli does not contain. E. coli can be en-
gineered to express a wider range of functions by introducing genes encoding new
sigma factors, rare tRNAs, or functions required to synthesize starting materials.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only..

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

for antibiotic biosynthesis that are deﬁcient in E. coli. Alternatively, sequences that
carry conserved regions of genes associated with antibiotic biosynthesis, such as
the polyketide synthases and peptide synthetases, may be identiﬁed by sequenced-
based screens that do not require heterologous gene expression. This approach
successfully identiﬁed clones carrying a novel hybrid polyketide synthase-peptide
synthetase gene cluster from an uncultured bacterial symbiont of a beetle .

Novel enzymes have been revealed in metagenomic libraries by screening
clones directly for activity  Pigments have been identiﬁed by visual
inspection  These methods require handling individual clones, usually
in an array format. Because the frequency of active clones is low, high-throughput
methods are essential for efﬁcient screening. Selection for the ability to grow on
hydroxyl-butyrate as the sole carbon and nitrogen source provided a powerful
selection for clones carrying new degradative enzymes  and selection for an-
tibiotic resistance identiﬁed new antibiotic resistance determinants from soil (22,
92) and from oral ﬂora .

Linking new functions with the organisms from which they were cloned will
facilitate ecological inferences and may lead to culturing strategies for uncultured
species. Several approaches have been used to identify the phylogenetic origin
of functionally active clones. First, to determine which phylogenetic groups are
represented in a metagenomic library, 16S rRNA gene libraries have been con-
structed using DNA from the metagenomic library as the template for PCR (43,
63, 68, 96, 117). Comparing the phylogenetic distribution of 16S rRNA sequences
in the environmental sample and the metagenomic library can reveal biases in
library construction  The nucleotide sequence of the genes that ﬂank the.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

region of functional interest can provide the basis for inferences about phylogeny
that are supported by similarity of the ﬂanking genes to genes of known function
in GenBank  Conclusions from these analyses must be treated
cautiously because horizontal gene transfer and the lack of functional homologues
in the database may confound the results, leading to matches in ﬂanking DNA
originating in two different phyla  However, the presence of many cloned
genes on a clone that all show similarity to genes from related organisms can bol-
ster phylogenetic claims. Analyses of G + C content and codon usage within the
region of interest and the ﬂanking gene sequences may suggest the phylogenetic
origin of the cloned DNA, although this approach has not been widely successful
to date .

Concerted effort devoted to ﬁnding clones carrying phylogenetic anchors from the
least known taxons has produced impressive collections of clones derived from
some of these groups. Sequence analysis of the DNA that ﬂanks phylogenetically
informative genes has provided the ﬁrst glimpses into the genetic potential of taxa
that contain no cultured members (Table 2). rRNA genes are the most widely
used anchors  and radA/recA homologues
have been informative as well. Other genes that contain phylogenetic in-
formation but have not been used in metagenomic analyses include DNA gyrase
 ATPase
β-subunit  σ 70-type
sigma factor  The phylogenetic anchor ap-
proach has been a rich source of information that can be used to develop hypotheses
about the function and physiology of uncultured members of microbial commu-
nities that were previously known only by their 16S rRNA gene signature. Use
of more phylogenetic anchors will increase the frequency of functionally active
clones that also contain anchors..

Genomic information about uncultured bacteria may hasten development of media
for their culture  This will be a needed boost to the laborious
work that has led to signiﬁcant recent advances in culturing technology (56, 89,
99, 127). The Acidobacterium phylum has been largely recalcitrant to culturing.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

Metagenomics has provided the ﬁrst information beyond 16S rRNA gene se-
quences about the uncultured Acidobacterium subgroups based on partial and
full-length sequencing of six fosmid clones (∼35 kb each; 85) and 12 BAC clones
from uncultured soil Acidobacterium members. Two of the clones are
from members of Acidobacterium Group III, ﬁve are from Group V, and 11 are
from Group VI. These clones provide a preliminary indication that the Acidobac-
terium phylum contains substantial genetic diversity. Among the Group V clones,
for example, the G + C content of one is 56% and the other four range from 62%
to 68%, while the one cultured member of this group, A. capsulatum, has a G + C
content of 60%. Some of the metagenomic clones that afﬁliate with the Acidobac-
terium phylum have been fully sequenced, revealing many genes with homology
to housekeeping genes involved in DNA repair, transport, cell division, transla-
tion, and purine biosynthesis. Other gene sequences include those with homology
to genes encoding cyclic β 1(cid:2)-2(cid:2) glucan synthetase, polyhydroxybutyrate depoly-
merase, Bacteroides fragilis aerotolerance functions, and an operon distantly re-
lated to the lincomycin biosynthesis pathway of Streptomyces lincolnensis 
which provide hints about ecological roles of the Acidobacteria..

Ten of the 22 ORFs on one Acidobacterium fosmid clone showed homology
to genes from members of the Rhizobiales within the α-Proteobacteria phylum
 Comparison of the fosmid sequence to the gene sequences from Rhodopseu-
domonas palustris and Bradyrhizobium japonicum, Quaiser et al. revealed
a colinear 10-kb region containing eight ORFs, which had homology to genes
encoding a penicillin-binding protein, zinc metalloprotease, hydroxybutyrate de-
polymerase, and a highly conserved two-component histidine kinase response reg-
ulator. A phylogenetic analysis of the response regulator indicated that one gene
afﬁliated within the Rhizobiales and the second gene afﬁliated with other groups
in the α-Proteobacteria. This 10-kb region was contiguous to an Acidobacterium-
type rrn operon, suggesting that this region might be the product of horizontal
gene transfer .

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

A particularly fruitful application of metagenomics to Archaea has been the
study of the symbiotic community of an Axinella sp. sea sponge 
In a culture-independent 16S rRNA gene survey, Preston et al. found that
65% of the symbiotic community associated with the sponge was represented by a
single archaeal 16S rRNA gene sequence. They proposed the name Cenarchaeum
symbiosum for the uncultured archaeal symbiont. Schleper et al. then
constructed fosmid libraries of the prokaryotic community and identiﬁed 15 unique
clones that harbored 16S rRNA genes..

Analysis of the 15 clones revealed genetic variation within the C. symbiosum
population and provided insight into the role of the population within the sponge
 After identifying two 16S rRNA sequence variants that differed by two
point mutations over a 590-bp region, they sequenced one fosmid clone from each
variant. The 16S genes of the two clones were 99.2% identical while the 28-kb
colinear region that they shared had 87.8% overall DNA identity, and 91.6% simi-
larity in ORF amino acid sequence. Of the 17 ORFs in the 28-kb region shared by
the two variants, eight had no known function, and the others had functions related
to heme and menaquinone biosynthesis, glycolysis, DNA replication and repair,
protein folding, and DNA methylation. The DNA polymerase found in this region
was expressed and characterized in an E. coli host  The complete genome
sequence of C. symbiosum will contribute to understanding its biology and symbi-
otic relationship with its sponge host. There is precedent for this in the symbiosis
between the aphid Baizongia pistacea and the bacterium Buchnera aphidicola.
B. aphidicola is found in pure culture as an endosymbiont of its host. The complete
genome sequence for the bacterium revealed a complex biochemical symbiosis be-
tween the partners in which each partner had lost biochemical functions that the
other conducted for both of them  The B. aphidicola system illustrates the
power of genomics to elucidate the biology of uncultured microorganisms..

Discovery of the rhodopsin-like photoreceptors in marine Bacteria exempliﬁes the
type of biological surprise that can be revealed through metagenomic analysis.
Previously, rhodopsins had been found only in Archaea, not in members of the do-
main Bacteria. B´ej`a et al. sequenced a 130-kb fragment that contained the 16S
rRNA operon of an uncultured γ -Proteobacterium (the SAR 86 group) and dis-
covered a bacteriorhodopsin, which indicated a novel taxon of marine phototroph.
The bacteriorhodopsins couple light-energy harvesting with carbon-cycling in the
ocean through nonchlorophyll-based pathways, and the new homologue was ex-
pressed in E. coli and shown to bind retinal and form an active, light-driven,
proton pump. Subsequent studies showed that many marine Proteobacteria harbor
“proteorhodopsins,” that are optimized for various light wavelengths at different.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

ocean depths  This line of research was successful at show-
ing that bacteria that harbor proteorhodopsin variants are widespread, and recent
work by Venter et al. using a shotgun sequencing approach revealed that
the class of proteorhodopsins previously observed is a small subset of the total
proteorhodopsin diversity..

As sequencing technology has improved, it has become feasible to sequence the
entire metagenome of an environmental sample. Most environments contain com-
munities far too complex for it to be possible to sequence a complete metagenome,
and even the simple communities contain microheterogeneity that makes most
genome reconstructions simpliﬁed versions of reality. However, it is useful to re-
fer to a metagenome, just as it is useful to refer to the human genome, although it
is widely recognized that the true human genome is far more complex and variable
than the published genomic sequence, which is based on a few of the 6 × 109
members of the species. Reconstruction was initially pursued for viral commu-
nities in the ocean and human feces and has since been attempted in an
acid mine drainage (AMD) bioﬁlm  The AMD
bioﬁlm community was ideal for complete metagenome sequencing because 16S
rRNA gene sequencing indicated that there were three bacterial and three archaeal
species in the bioﬁlm. Marine communities contain far greater species richness,
on the order of 100 to 200 species per ml of water  making the sequencing
and assembly effort considerably more difﬁcult. Further out on the continuum
of biological complexity is soil, with an estimated species richness on the or-
der of 4000 species per gram of soil  Sequencing the soil metagenome
requires faster and less expensive sequencing technology than currently avail-
able. Meanwhile, soil metagenomics continues to focus on targeted biological
questions, thereby elucidating a slice of the community’s function by genomic
analysis..

Microbial communities are dominated by bacteria, and bacterial populations are
dominated by bacteriophage. Bacteriophages inﬂuence the diversity and popula-
tion structure of microbial communities  Like their bacterial counterparts,
most bacteriophages have never been studied in the laboratory because they rep-
resent staggering diversity  and many of their hosts have not been cultured.
Complete viral genome sequences are also necessary for viral phylogeny studies
since there is no equivalent to the 16S rRNA gene for virus phylogeny. Using
metagenomic analyses, two recent studies examined phage diversity of the human
gut and marine environments..

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

The microbial community within the human gut is complex, consisting of more
than 400 species  To investigate the phage population in the human gut, Breit-
bart et al. conducted a metagenomic analysis of the viral community in human
feces. They constructed a library containing random fragments of viral DNA from
a preparation of virus particles isolated from a 500-g human fecal sample, end-
sequenced 532 clones, and found that 59% of them did not contain signiﬁcant
similarity to previously reported sequences. The viral community contains ap-
proximately 1200 genotypes, which probably outnumber the bacterial species in
the human intestine. The viral community may affect community structure by in-
fecting and lysing particular members of the bacterial community and enhancing
its diversity by mediating genetic exchange between bacteria..

In another study, Breitbart et al. described a metagenomic analysis of
marine phage collected at two locations. In total, almost 2000 viral sequences
were obtained. The results suggest that the phage populations differed between
the two marine locations and between the marine and fecal samples. For instance,
T7-like podophages comprised over 30% of the marine phage types and less
than 6% of the fecal phage types  The predominance of gram-positive bacteria
in the gut and gram-negative bacteria in seawater is at least partly responsible for
the substantial difference in viral communities..

Acid mine drainage results from bacterial iron oxidation, which leads to acidiﬁca-
tion due to dissolution of pyrite in abandoned mines  The microbial bioﬁlm
growing in the AMD in the Richmond mine at Iron Mountain, California, has a
pH of 0.83, temperature of 43◦C, and high concentrations of Fe, Zn, Cu, and As
ends of 384 16S rRNA genes obtained from the
bioﬁlm revealed members of Leptospirillum groups II and III, Sulfobacillus sp.,
Ferroplasma sp., “A-plasma,” and “G-plasma.” There are also protists containing
Rickettsiales-type endosymbiotic bacteria .

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

BIOGEOCHEMISTRY With a metagenome sequence, Tyson et al. set out to
determine the ecological role of each of the ﬁve prokaryotes in the acid mine
drainage. Genes that would enable most of the organisms to ﬁx carbon via the
reductive acetyl coenzyme A pathway were identiﬁed within each of the genome
sequences. Based on the many genes in the Ferroplasma type I and II genomes that
have signiﬁcant similarity to sugar and amino acid transporters, they predicted that
these Ferroplasma spp. preferred a heterotrophic lifestyle. The only N2 ﬁxation
genes that were identiﬁed in the metagenome belonged to the genome of the Lep-
tospirillum group III population. Because of its specialized role in the environment
and relatively low abundance  Leptospirillum group III was proposed as a
keystone species. They tested and supported this hypothesis by isolating Leptospir-
illum group III in pure culture from a N2-based enrichment (J.F. Banﬁeld, personal
communication). Other genes that are potentially responsible for microaerophilic
survival, bioﬁlm formation, acid tolerance, and metal resistance were observed..

Many of the hypotheses suggested in the AMD study will be evaluated by con-
structing microarrays and developing new techniques for isolating the uncultured
prokaryotes  The simplicity of the community and the differences in G +
C content of its members facilitated the powerful genomic reconstruction in the
AMD bioﬁlm. The genomics, coupled with keen insight into the chemistry of the
environment, produced inferences and hypotheses that will lead to future studies
to culture each of the community’s members and unravel the complex interactions
that produce this extreme environment..

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

The ideal phylogenetic anchor would be equally represented in all species. The 16S
rRNA genes do not meet this standard because microorganisms differ in the number
of rrn operons they carry in their genomes, with a range of 1 to 15  If the number.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

An alternative to ﬁnding phylogenetic anchors on a DNA fragment encoding a
function of interest is to ﬁnd fragments of the genome that are linked to the one
of interest and search for phylogenetic anchors on them. This method increases
the effective size of the contiguous piece of DNA that is being analyzed without
requiring an increase in the size of the inserts in the library. To ﬁnd fragments that
are linked in a simple community, a library with high redundancy is needed. The
clones can be blotted on a membrane and then probed with the clone of interest to
identify those that have an end overlapping with it or clones can be screened
by PCR for overlapping regions  Neither of these methods has been reported
as successful, but this is an area of rapid development and functional methods will
likely be established in the future..

Constructing metagenomic libraries from environmental samples is conceptu-
ally simple but technically challenging. If seawater contains 200 species per
ml  then the metagenome would contain 1 Gbp of unique DNA. To ob-
tain greater than single sequencing coverage, the size of a metagenomic library
would need to be many times the size of the metagenome. Because members
of a community are not equally represented, it is likely that a metagenomic
library of minimum coverage would only represent the genomes of the most
abundant species. To obtain substantial representation of rare members (<1%)
of the community, the library would likely need to contain 100- to 1000-fold
coverage of the metagenome. A library of 500 Gbp might be required to capture
the species richness in 1 ml of seawater. Cloning the metagenome of soil, with
a species richness 20-fold higher than seawater  would be a considerably
more daunting prospect  These examples illustrate several chal-
lenges in constructing and interpreting information from metagenomic libraries:
(a) a large amount of DNA must be isolated and cloned from a small sample,
(b) many clones and sequences must be processed to provide meaningful data, and
(c) lognormal-type population distributions make it difﬁcult to represent the minor
species from a sample. Each of these challenges is being addressed, and several
studies evaluating methods for library construction have been published (10, 33, 34,
37, 44)..

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

Strategies for library construction vary depending on the intended study of the
resulting library. Libraries containing large DNA fragments are constructed in
lambda phage, cosmid, fosmid, and BAC vectors. Most of the reported large-
insert metagenomic libraries contain fewer than 100,000 clones (Tables 1 and 2)
and are several orders of magnitude too small to capture the entire microbial diver-
sity present in the complex communities they represent. Although increasing the
library size is a worthy goal, existing libraries have provided useful insights into the
microbial ecology of several ecosystems in the absence of complete metagenome
coverage..

Small-insert libraries have a signiﬁcant advantage over large insert libaries be-
cause to obtain small inserts the microorganisms can be lysed by harsh methods
that would shear DNA too much to obtain large inserts. Bead beating, for example,
extracts DNA from diverse Bacteria and Archaea, providing a good representa-
tion of the community. Small-insert libraries are not useful for capturing complex
pathways requiring many genes, but they provide an appropriate resource for dis-
covery of new metabolic functions encoded by single genes and for reconstructing
metagenomes  The past reconstruction studies, however, did not take
advantage of the harsh lysis methods that are accommodated by small-insert li-
brary construction, instead using chemical lysis, which does not access DNA from
as diverse a group of organisms. Although both reconstruction studies reported
sequences from Archaea, which are notoriously difﬁcult to lyse, the Sargasso Sea
study did not report members of the phyla containing only uncultured organisms,
so the effect of the DNA extraction on the diversity of DNA in the metagenomic
libraries method remains unclear..

The two metagenome reconstruction studies illustrate the difﬁculty in repre-
senting all of the members of a community in the library. For example, ﬁve species
were identiﬁed within the AMD metagenome and the two archaeal Ferroplasma
and Leptospirillum spp. were represented similarly in the metagenomic libraries,
although ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) showed that the Leptospirillum
spp. represented 85% of the community  The discrepancy between FISH
and genome-sequencing data suggests that there may be a cloning bias, which
is advantageous for this application because it led to high representation in the
library of minor members of the community. In the Sargasso Sea study 
the genomes of ﬁve species were represented with more than 3x coverage in the
libraries, but the seawater contains an estimated 1800 species, suggesting that at
least ﬁve of the species are far more abundant than others, illustrating the limitation
of metagenomics in providing access to rare community members..

As with any genomics study, gene product toxicity is a concern in metagenomic
analyses. However, a high-copy vector was used to construct the AMD metage-
nomic library  and the small number of gaps suggests little impact on the
composition of the library. High-copy vectors are useful because it is easier to ob-
tain sufﬁcient DNA for further analysis, and for this reason, several plasmids that.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

have copy number that can be modulated from 1 to 50 per cell have been developed
 These plasmids can be maintained at low copy during clone isolation to avoid
toxicity and then can be ampliﬁed for screening or plasmid isolation..

SEQUENCE-BASED SCREENING Screening libraries for genes of interest using
primers or probes based on conserved sequences identiﬁes homologues of known
genes. This has proved effective to identify phylogenetic anchors and genes en-
coding enzymes with highly conserved domains  A challenge associated with
screening libraries for clones carrying phylogenetic anchors is detecting the an-
chor on the cloned DNA without detecting the homologue in the chromosome of
the host cell. This can be circumvented by using a vector with high or inducible
copy number  When the cloned gene is in 50-fold excess to the chromosomal
copy, the signal is sufﬁcient to detect. Alternatively, “terminator PCR” can be used
to block ampliﬁcation of the host cell’s homologue. Terminator PCR was used to
identify clones carrying 16S rRNA genes, and terminator oligonucleotides speciﬁc
for the E. coli 16S rRNA gene prevented detection of the host cell genes 
Finally, libraries can be screened with taxon-speciﬁc oligonucleotide probes and.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

PCR primers for 16S rRNA genes of interest that will not detect the E. coli genes.


New approaches are directed toward identifying sequences that are unique to un-
cultured microorganisms or those speciﬁc to a particular environment. These meth-
ods involve proﬁling clones with microarrays that identify previously unknown
genes in environmental samples  subtractive hybridization to eliminate all
sequences that hybridize with another environment, or subtractive hybridization
to identify differentially expressed genes 
These methods will enhance the efﬁciency of screening and aid in identifying
minor components in communities and genes that deﬁne community uniqueness..

Metagenomics complements direct observation of microorganisms in situ with
FISH  Fluorescent in situ hybridiza-
tion (FISH) is commonly used in microbial ecology studies to visualize microor-
ganisms that contain rRNA that hybridizes with a ﬂuorescently labeled probe, most
often directed toward the 16S rRNA gene. Until recently, FISH has been limited
to detection of highly expressed genes, such as the 16S rRNA genes, because
it detects abundant RNA and not single-copy genes. To overcome this limita-
tion, Zwirglmaier et al. described an adaptation of FISH called RING-FISH
(recognition of individual genes-FISH) that facilitates visualization of plasmid
or chromosomal genes in situ by increasing the sensitivity of detection. Another
variation on FISH is to link it with microautoradiography to identify taxons that
utilize particular substrates in natural microbial communities  Further
augmentation of metagenomics with microscopy that can monitor genes, gene ex-
pression, and environmental conditions on a microscale will provide new insights
into the workings of microbial communities..

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

∗
Acidobacteria
Actinobacteria .

Coprothermobacter
Cyanobacteria .

Deferribacteres
Deinococcus-Thermus .

OP11
OS-K
SBR1093
SC3
SC4
Termite Group 1
TM6
TM7
VadinBE97
WS2
WS3 .

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

isotopes into their DNA. Building metagenomic libraries from such communities
can be used either to determine which community members are metabolically ac-
tive (using a labeled substrate such as glucose, which can be metabolized by many
organisms) or which utilize the labeled substrate (using a specialized substrate,
such as an environmental pollutant). The DNA from the fraction of the community
that used the labeled substrate will contain DNA with the stable isotope, making it
separable from unlabeled DNA by density centrifugation. Metagenomic libraries
and 16S rRNA gene libraries can be constructed with the labeled DNA to enrich
for genes associated with the active species  Innovative
approaches such as these will advance metagenomic analysis to the next level,
linking phylogeny and function more precisely..

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

42. Gruber TM, Bryant DA. 1998. Charac-
terization of the group 1 and group 2
sigma factors of the green sulfur bac-
terium Chlorobium tepidum and the green
non-sulfur bacterium Chloroﬂexus auran-
tiacus. Arch. Microbiol. 170:285–96
43. Hallam SJ, Girguis PR, Preston CM,
Richardson PM, DeLong EF. 2003. Iden-
tiﬁcation of methyl coenzyme M reduc-
tase A (mcr A) genes associated with
methane-oxidizing archaea. Appl. Envi-
ron. Microbiol. 69:5483–91.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

83. Preston CM, Wu KY, Molinski TF, De-
Long EF. 1996. A psychrophilic crenar-
chaeon inhabits a marine sponge: Cenar-
chaeum symbiosum gen. nov., sp. nov.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:6241–46
84. Quaiser A, Ochsenreiter T, Klenk HP,
Kletzin A, Treusch AH, et al. 2002. First
insight into the genome of an uncultivated
crenarchaeote from soil. Environ. Micro-
biol. 4:603–11.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.20 Oct 2004 18:0.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.P1: JRX
October 18, 2004.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.P1: JRX
October 18, 2004.

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2004.38:525-552. Downloaded from  Georgetown University on 03/22/13. For personal use only.