14_PARAGRAPHS

1 Comparison between 16S rRNA gene sequencing and shotgun metagenomic sequencing.

Cost: currently, 16S gene sequencing is signiﬁcantly more cost-eﬀective than WGS and requires less starting material than WGS  The low cost of
16S gene sequencing is one of the primary reasons for its widespread use..

1.2 Disadvantages of 16S rRNA sequencing.

• No gold standard hyper-variable region: The full 16S gene sequence length cannot be sequenced by all sequencing technologies (short-read
second-generation platforms). Thus, the hyper-variable regions need to be sequenced instead. However, there is no consensus about choice of
hyper-variable regions inﬂuencing the phylogenetic resolution .

• Precision of taxonomic assignment: 16S rRNA sequencing has a lower precision compared to WGS in taxonomic assignment  While
WGS may be used to assign species-level classiﬁcations to many sequences with conﬁdence, 16S rRNA sequencing classiﬁcation is typically
restricted to the genus-level, with species-level predictions based on OTUs being of generally lower precision  In addition, fungal and viral
genomes, which do not contain 16S rRNA genes and thus are not picked up with 16S rRNA sequencing, are sequenced during WGS..

• Bias: 16S rRNA sequencing suﬀers from signiﬁcant PCR ampliﬁcation biases. This is a result of diﬀerences in PCR primer binding to certain
16S rRNA gene sequences, which may cause entire groups of bacteria to be underrepresented in the sample  In addition to PCR ampliﬁcation
biases, over estimation of α diversity and proﬁling pipeline can also introduce biases in the 16S rRNA data  WGS is a comparatively
unbiased method for taxonomic proﬁling..

Principal component analysis (PCA): is one of the most widely used techniques for dimensionality reduction. PCA provides us with the principal
directions (V s) in which the data exhibits maximum variation. These principal directions are the eigenvectors of the data covariance matrix and the
eigenvalue corresponding to each eigenvector indicates the variance of the data in that particular direction. Thus, by a linear transformation we can
project the data to a low-dimensional space with principal directions as the axes. Despite its widespread use in modern data analysis, PCA has some
limitations. Since PCA involves covariance matrix estimation and eigenvalue decomposition, the computational complexity of PCA for M samples,
each represented with m features, is of the order O(m2M + m3). In addition, in order to have a reliable estimation of the covariance matrix, PCA
requires a large number of samples and typically underperforms with limited numbers of data points. Finally, PCA is a linear transformation with
several constraints, and thus cannot address the non-linearity in the data .

t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE): is a dimensionality reduction technique which has been successfully applied to
visualization problems, since it attempts to preserve pairwise distance distribution of points in lower dimensions  Since projection to lower
dimensions involves the distribution of relative distances, it requires large amounts of data points in order to ﬁnd a meaningful representation. t-SNE
is a nonlinear transformation with a computational complexity of O(M 2). However, a recent implementation of t-SNE has been reported to have a
computational complexity of O(M log(M ))  t-SNE is a relatively new technique in machine learning, and only recently has been used for the
analysis of genomic data .

Supervised representation learning: both PCA and t-SNE are unsupervised methods, meaning that the output representation is trained
independently from the instances’ categories. Deep neural models provide a powerful framework for training multiple levels of representation for the
input data in both unsupervised and supervised manners. In supervised training, like multi-class classiﬁcation task, specialized representations of the
input data are trained using the back-propagation algorithm  In such framework, the activation function of the last hidden-layer for the input
data is a specialized representation of data for that particular task or even other tasks  Such a representation trained in a supervised manner can
also be visualized using t-SNE or other visualization techniques..

The human microbiome appears to play a particularly important role in the development of Crohns disease. Crohns disease is an inﬂammatory bowel
disease (IBD) with a prevalence of approximately 40 per 100,000 and 200 per 100,000 in children and adults, respectively  In contrast to Ulcerative
Colitis, which exhibits shallow inﬂammation of the tissue, Crohns disease is characterized by ulcerous transmural inﬂammation that extends deep into
the tissue of the gut  Previous genome-wide association studies have demonstrated a link between intestinal microbe response pathways and IBD
development  This evidence, along with observations of signiﬁcantly altered microbiome compositions in IBD patients in humans, points towards
a role for the microbiome in the regulation of IBD. While the mechanism for this regulation is not well understood, it is thought that dysbiosis of the
intestinal microbiome may impact the immune system within the intestine, leading to the progression of Crohns disease..

6 Ecological environments classiﬁcation results.

7 Organismal environment classiﬁcation results.

8 Representation creation run-time comparison.

Alexander Platzer. Visualization of SNPs with t-SNE. PLoS ONE, 8 2013. ISSN 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056883.