132_PARAGRAPHS

is diet, an element which we can control. Indeed, humans not only feed themselves but also feed
their gut microbiota. These two factors alone (host genetics and diet) largely account for the huge
variability in microbiome composition and functionality which exists among individuals. Indeed,
such is the inter-individual variability that scientists still grapple with what constitutes a “healthy”
microbiota. One feature of a poorly functioning microbiota that is incapable of serving its host to its
full potential is low microbial diversity. Indeed, in Part I of this review we discussed the implications
of low microbial diversity in terms of infection and inﬂammation, the latter of which is associated with
several non-communicable diseases in its chronic form including cardiovascular diseases, diabetes,
allergies and arthritis as examples. Improving microbial diversity can be achieved through healthy
eating and consuming the recommended daily intake for ﬁbre (25 g/day for women and 38 g/day
for men . In Part I of this review we discussed the role of diet in shaping the microbiome with a
particular focus on the Mediterranean diet. Long-term consumption of this diet not only improved
the microbial proﬁle and actions of the gut inhabitants in obese men but also generated physiological
improvements in terms of metabolism  In terms of feeding our gut microbiota “long-term” healthy
dietary patterns appear to be the key since short term dietary interventions of this nature have minimal,
if any, impact on microbiota diversity levels .

Interventions involving probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and dietary ﬁbre also oﬀer opportunities
to “fertilize” our microbiota. Probiotics are deﬁned as ‘live microorganisms, which when administered
in adequate numbers confer a health beneﬁt on the host’  The following genera represent the
most commonly used probiotics for which health claims have been demonstrated, and within these,
the beneﬁts tend to be strain speciﬁc: Biﬁdobacterium, Lactobacillus, Saccharomyces, Streptococcus,
Enterococcus, Leuconostoc, Pediococcus, Escherichia coli and Bacillus  However, the prerequisite for ‘live
microorganisms’ is subject to some debate, given that a pasteurised derivative of a beneﬁcial strain
exhibited enhanced eﬀects in obese and diabetic mice  The prebiotic deﬁnition has been recently
updated/broadened to “a substrate that is selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring a health
beneﬁt” by the International Scientiﬁc Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics  By modulating the
intestinal microbiota with a high or low level of speciﬁcity and increasing the abundance of beneﬁcial
bacteria, prebiotics can improve host metabolic and physiological parameters. Synbiotics describe the
combination of probiotics and prebiotics which act synergistically. Dietary ﬁbre has been deﬁned as
“the edible part of plants or their extracts, or analogous carbohydrates, that are resistant to digestion in
the human small intestine, and undergoes complete or partial fermentation in the large intestine” 
or more simply as “any dietary component that reaches the colon without being absorbed in a healthy
gut” .

The female body undergoes several changes during pregnancy including an increase in body fat
in early pregnancy which is followed by a decrease in insulin sensitivity later on  The change
in insulin sensitivity has been linked to immunity changes which are proposed to induce metabolic
inﬂammation that is normally associated with obesity  However, during pregnancy these changes
support the growth of the foetus and prepare the mother’s body for lactation  Speciﬁc
nutritional recommendations exist for pregnancy, but these can diﬀer depending on eating tradition
and nutritional status of the population  However, the gut microbiota of the pregnant mother has
received increasing attention given that it can inﬂuence the health of both mother and child..

In a study involving 91 pregnant mothers of varying body mass index (BMI) and gestational diabetes,
Koren et al. reported that the gut microbiota changes dramatically from the first trimester (T1) to
the third trimester (T3) even though the diets and energy intake of participants did not change between
sampling times. From T1 to T3, Proteobacteria significantly increased in 69.5% of women and Actinobacteria
increased in 57% of women. As women progressed from T1 to T3, the number of operational
taxonomic units (OTUs) became signiﬁcantly reduced and T1 samples had greater within-sample alpha
phylogenetic diversity than T3 samples irrespective of pre-pregnancy BMI and health status. It has
been suggested that the reduced alpha diversity in T3 may not be due to loss of species but rather
lower relative abundance levels below the sequencing level of detection  The over-represented
OTUs in T1 mainly belonged to the Clostridiales order of the Firmicutes and included butyrate
producers such as Facalibacterium and Eubacterium  Members of the Enterobacteriaceae family and
the Streptococcus genus were over-represented in T3 samples. It is speculated that the increase in
butyrate-producing microorganisms in T1 could increase immunoregulatory T regulatory (T-reg) cells
which may be involved in reducing maternal rejection of the foetal allograft  Interestingly, no
correlations were found between the speciﬁc OTU abundance and the use of antibiotics, probiotics,
diet, previous pregnancies or health markers  The results revealed that T1 microbial diversity is
similar to the microbial diversity observed in non-pregnant women while T3 microbial diversity is
aberrant and persists for one month postpartum. In T3 and just before transmission of the microbiota
to the newborn, each mother has a “purely personal” microbiota which is suggested to have been
selected at the level of each host lineage to ensure maximum development of the developing foetus
and newborn  Transferring T3 microbiota to germ-free mice resulted in increased adiposity and
reduced insulin sensitivity compared to T1 microbiota  The study indicates that the microbial
changes which occur during pregnancy inﬂuence host metabolism and are beneﬁcial for that stage
in life. It is suggested that such changes are driven by the immunological and hormonal changes
which occur during pregnancy  However, a follow-up study conducted in 2015 investigating
temporal and spatial variation of the human microbiota at four body sites (distal gut, vagina, saliva.

and tooth/gum) did not observe changes in the gut microbiota taxonomic composition and diversity
over the course of pregnancy, reporting relative stability for all four sites  The authors suggest
that the diﬀerences in study ﬁndings may be due to the fact that many mothers in the Koren et al.,
study were in receipt of a dietary intervention between T1 and T3. Further studies investigating the
gut microbiota composition and functionality before, during and post pregnancy in larger cohorts and
from diﬀerent demographics and geographical locations are required..

It is known that excessive weight gain in pregnancy gives way to decreased glucose tolerance
and potentially gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)  GDM is associated with adverse
pregnancy outcomes including stillbirth, fetal macrosomia, neonatal metabolic disturbances and
related issues  Furthermore, oﬀspring of mothers with GDM are at greater risk of obesity
and diabetes  Medical nutritional therapy is the ﬁrst-line approach but up to 50% of women
fail to regain metabolic control by this means and must avail of insulin treatment or hypoglycemic
drugs investigated the gut microbiota during pregnancy in overweight
and normal weight women and reported that Bacteroides and Staphylococcus were signiﬁcantly higher
in overweight women, and mother’s weight and BMI before pregnancy correlated with higher
levels of Bacteroides, Staphylococcus and Clostridium. In both normal weight and overweight women,
bacterial counts increased from T1 to T3. In another study, overweight or obese mothers presented
gut microbiota with lower alpha diversity compared to lean mothers four days after delivery 
Most of the taxa that diﬀerentiated the two groups were higher in the lean mothers and included
Parabacteroides, Lachnospira, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Christensenellaceae family members, Rumincoccus
and Biﬁdobacterium, all of which have shown consistent associations with leanness. These maternal gut
microbiota characteristics were not associated with overall diﬀerences in the infant gut microbiota
over the ﬁrst two years of life but the authors state that the presence of speciﬁc OTUs in the maternal
gut microbiota at the time of delivery increased the chances of being present in the infant gut at
4–10 days old which included some lean-associated taxa. Further research is required to determine the
degree to which these maternal microbial diﬀerences inﬂuence the health of the infant over time. More
recently, Crusell et al. reported that the gut microbiota of pregnant women with GDM diﬀered
substantially from normoglycaemic pregnant women in T3. At phylum level, Actinobacteria was
observed to be more abundant in GDM women, while at genus level Collinsella, Rothia and Desulfovibrio
were more abundant. The normoglycaemic pregnant women showed enrichment of Faecalibacterium,
Anaerotruncus and depletion of Clostridium (sensu stricto) and Veillonella. Regardless of metabolic
status, OTU richness and Shannon index decreased from late pregnancy to postpartum, reﬂecting an
observation of Koren et al.  Christensenella OTUs were associated with higher fasting plasma glucose
concentration, while OTUs assigned to Akkermansia were associated with lower insulin sensitivity.
Eight months after delivery, the microbiota of women with GDM during pregnancy was still aberrant
in terms of composition resembling the aberrant microbiota composition of non-pregnant individuals
with type 2 diabetes. Further studies are required to determine if such microbiota disruption places
these individuals at increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes..

This topic has been further reviewed by Ponzo et al. who also reviewed the potential of
the microbiota as a therapeutic target in GDM and concluded that certain microbiota-accessible
carbohydrates (MACs) could beneﬁcially modulate the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism
in GDM patients. For example, reduced abundance of Bacteriodes by the end of pregnancy was
reported for women with GDM who consumed higher intakes of oligosaccharides and ﬁbre 
This is of signiﬁcance given that the genus is associated with overweight in pregnancy  In a
randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial involving 52 pregnant women in T3, consumption of a
synbiotic composed of Lactobacillus sporogenes and a prebiotic mixture daily for nine weeks resulted in
signiﬁcantly decreased serum insulin levels and beneﬁcially impacted other insulin actions but did not
aﬀect fasting plasma glucose levels and serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein  More recently,
a synbiotic composed of fructooligosaccharide (FOS) and a mixture of probiotic lactobacilli did not.

inﬂuence fasting plasma glucose and insulin resistance/sensitivity indices in women with GDM but
proved eﬀective in reducing blood pressure .

Interventions involving probiotics alone have generated conﬂicting results. For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003)  However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes  It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism.
More recently, probiotic supplementation (L. rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium animalis ssp. lactis)
from T2 of pregnancy to week 28 in overweight and obese women did not prevent GDM  These
contradictory results could be due to a number of factors including diﬀerences in probiotics and doses
used, timing and duration of supplementation as well as diﬀerences in host demographics, genetics
and baseline gut microbiota of each individual..

Probiotic intervention during pregnancy has been shown to be beneﬁcial for reducing the risk of
preeclampsia, a serious condition associated with hypertension and proteinuria that can result in poor
pregnancy outcome and is reported to be one of the leading causes of maternal death globally 
In 2011, a study conducted in Norway reported that regular consumption of milk-based probiotics
could be linked with lower risk of preeclampsia in ﬁrst-time expectant women  A follow-on
observational cohort study involving a large sample number of women from both urban and rural
regions of Norway of varying ages and socioeconomic status reported that probiotic milk intake in
late pregnancy was signiﬁcantly associated with lower risk of preeclampsia  In the same study,
probiotic milk intake during early pregnancy (but not before or during late pregnancy) was signiﬁcantly
associated with lower risk of preterm delivery. However, in the case of both observations, causality
could not be established..

Probiotic administration during pregnancy has also generated promising results in terms of
treating bacterial vaginosis (as reviewed by Sohn and Underwood, 
and the positive eﬀects of probiotic consumption during pregnancy rendered to the oﬀspring,
including prevention of atopic dermatitis  have been
conﬁrmed in meta-analysis and a large population-based cohort study
 respectively..

Given such promising results, the impact of maternal probiotic supplementation on breast
milk composition and the infant microbiome is an important area of research. Breast milk has its
own microbiota dominated by members of the staphylococcal and streptococcal genera, but also
harbors lactic acid bacteria, biﬁdobacteria and members of Propionibacterium  These microbes
originate from the mother’s skin, gut and the infant’s oral mucosa  The transfer of maternal
gut microbiota to breast milk is proposed to occur through an entero-mammary route via dendritic
cells and macrophages which selectively traﬃc commensal microorganisms  Despite this,
maternal probiotic supplementation with a fermented milk containing L. rhamnosus GG, Lactobacillus
acidophilus La-5 and Bif. animalis ssp.
lactis Bb-12 four weeks before the expected due date until
three months after birth while breastfeeding resulted in the presence of these bacteria in breast milk
of only a small subgroup of women and, thus, breastfeeding by probiotic supplemented women is
unlikely to be a source of these probiotics in infants  However, a previous study using the same
strains reported that probiotic supplementation of pregnant women from 36 weeks of gestation to
three months postnatally during breastfeeding reduced the cumulative incidence of atopic dermatitis by
almost 40% among oﬀspring at two years of age  Interestingly, a higher prevalence of L. rhamnosus
GG was found in stool samples of these infants up to three months of age 
suggest that since breastfeeding does not appear responsible for ongoing transfer of L. rhamnosus
GG to infants, early transfer of L. rhamnosus GG may be suﬃcient to ensure stable colonization in
the infant or alternatively children are receiving continued transfer of L. rhamnosus GG from their.

mother via a diﬀerent route. However, infants from mothers who had consumed the probiotic milk
and who did not develop atopic dermatitis during the two years follow-up had reduced T helper
(Th) 22 cells at three months of age which may help explain the preventative eﬀects of maternal
probiotic supplementation on atopic dermatitis  Consumption of a multistrain probiotic product
(VSL#3) by women during late pregnancy and lactation resulted in a signiﬁcant increase in both
lactobacilli and biﬁdobacteria in colostrum and mature milk in women who underwent vaginal delivery
compared with the placebo group, however, analsysis of the bacterial strains and species revealed
that the probiotic microorganisms did not pass from the maternal gut to the mammary gland 
No signiﬁcant diﬀerences in biﬁdobacteria and Lactobacillus numbers were observed in colostrum
and mature milk from mothers who underwent caesarian section from either the probiotic or placebo
groups. The authors suggest that a systemic eﬀect may be responsible for the probiotic-dependent
modulation of breask milk microbiota in vaginally delivering women..

Interestingly, Kuitunen et al. reported that probiotic supplementation of mothers from week 36
of gestation until delivery altered the immunologic composition of breast milk by signiﬁcantly increasing
IL-10 and signiﬁcantly decreasing casein IgA antibodies, however, no strong and consistent associations
were observed between breast milk antibodies and cytokines and allergy development in children up to
the age of ﬁve. Baldassarre et al. also reported that high-dose probiotic supplementation during late
pregnancy and lactation inﬂuenced breast milk cytokine patterns, signiﬁcantly increasing IL-6 levels in
colostrum and IL-10 and TGF-β1 levels in mature breast milk. Furthermore, sIgA levels were higher in
newborns whose mothers consumed the high-dose probiotic. A recent study reported that infants
born to mothers with depressive symptoms had lower levels of faecal sIgA which could presdispose
such infants to higher risk for allergic disease  Thus, probiotic supplementation to mothers
during pregnancy could circumvent such low IgA levels in newborns. In contrast, Quin et al. 
reported that maternal probiotic administration during breastfeeding (from birth to introduction of
solid food) did not alter breast milk immune markers. In the same study infants whose mothers
were self-administering probiotics also received probiotics directly which resulted in an increase in
infant faecal sIgA levels. However, the probiotic group had higher incidences of mucosal-associated
illnesses as toddlers. As a consequence the authors caution against probiotic supplementation during
infancy until rigorous controlled follow-up studies on their safety and eﬃcacy have been performed
although the study itself has a number of limitations including the fact that varying brands and doses
of probiotics were consumed by participants..

Studies investigating the impact of prebiotics and synbiotics on breast milk composition and
subsequently the infant microbiome are limited. However, Kubota et al. reported that FOS intake
by pregnant and lactating women increased levels of the cytokine IL-27 in breast milk.
The consequence of this phenomenon for the onset of allergic disorders in children requires further
investigation. A synbiotic consisting of diﬀerent probiotic strains and FOS administered to lactating
mothers for 30 days signiﬁcantly increased breast milk IgA and TGF-β2 levels and the incidence
of diarrhoea in infants whose mother’s were consuming synbiotic was signiﬁcantly decreased 
Synbiotic supplementation to lactating mothers for 30 days was also reported to positively impact
mineral levels in breast milk (zinc, copper, iron, magnesium and calcium) which were shown to
decrease signiﬁcantly in the placebo group and the synbiotic also positively impacted infant growth
(weight for age Z score and height for age Z score)  Selenium (Se) is an essential trace elemnent for
infants and is found in breast milk although its levels can vary depending on the mother’s geographical
location due to diﬀerences in soil content and hence its accumulation in cereals which are eaten by
humans and animals investigated if synbiotic supplementation consisting of
FOS and diﬀerent probiotic strains could increase breast milk Se levels. However, 30 days of synbiotic
consumption had no impact on Se levels in breast milk..

The infant gut microbiota plays an essential role in establishing the gut mucosal barrier, education
of the immune system and in preventing enteric pathogen infection  In Part I of this review, we
described the development of the infant gut microbiota from birth onwards and while several factors
have been shown to inﬂuence its composition (host genetics, gestational age, birth mode, feeding
regime, antibiotic exposure), the gut microbiota of full-term, vaginally-delivered, exclusively breast-fed
infants is generally recognised as representing the healthy microbiota  Indeed, owing to its
complex mixtures of bioactive components, which change in concentration, structure and function
over lactation, human milk is considered the “gold standard” for early life nutrition .

In the case of preterm infants, bacterial exposure occurs earlier than normal and antibiotics are
frequently administered. Very preterm infants (<32 weeks) and extremely preterm infants (<28 weeks)
are at signiﬁcant risk of sepsis, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), feeding intolerance and mortality 
The preterm infant microbiota has been shown to be lacking in the health-promoting Biﬁdobacterium
species and as a consequence of antibiotic administration can be dominated by Enterobacteriaceae,
Enterococcus and Staphylococcus and has
an increased abundance of Proteobacteria  In a study investigating the distortions in intestinal
microbiota development and late onset sepsis in preterm infants, Mai et al. reported that distortions
rather than enrichment of potential pathogens were associated with late-onset sepsis. Likewise, no
speciﬁc pathogen has been identiﬁed as responsible for NEC but inappropriate colonisation of the
preterm gut has been deemed the causative factor  Preterm infants with NEC have been reported
to harbour increased relative abundances of Proteobacteria and decreased relative abundance of
Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes prior to the onset of NEC .

Prebiotics have also proven eﬃcacious for preventing adverse health outcomes in preterm infants.
A meta-analysis involving 18 randomized controlled trials consisting of 1322 participants revealed that
those in receipt of prebiotics showed signiﬁcant decreases in incidence of mortality, sepsis, hospital
stay duration and time to full enteral feeding; however, there were no diﬀerences between control and
intervention groups in relation to the morbidity rate of NEC and feeding intolerance  A small
number of studies have investigated the eﬃcacy of synbiotics in relation to NEC in preterm infants 
In a study involving 400 very low birth weight infants, the rate of NEC was reduced by 2% in the
group receiving the probiotic Bif. lactis, but was reduced by 4% in the group receiving Bif. lactis plus
the prebiotic inulin compared to a rate of 12% in the prebiotic group and 18% in the control group 
The prebiotic FOS in combination with a probiotic mixture consisting of L. acidophilus, Biﬁdobacterium
longum, Biﬁdobacterium biﬁdum, and Streptococcus thermophilus signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of
NEC in preterm infants fed breast milk compared to the control group who
received breast milk alone  In the same study the incidences of Stage
II and Stage III (severe) NEC were nil in the test group compared to 5 and 2 cases in the control.

group, respectively. The incidence of sepsis was also signiﬁcantly lower in the test group. Likewise,
Nandhini et al. reported a 50% reduction in the incidence of NEC of all stages in preterm infants
in receipt of a synbiotic consisting of a mix of biﬁdobacteria and lactobacilli and FOS, however, the
severity of NEC, sepsis and mortality were not inﬂuenced by synbiotic administration. Despite the
apparent success of synbiotics in this small number of studies, a drawback of synbiotics is the diﬃculty
predicting selectivity and speciﬁcity and the subsequent mechanisms of action; thus, future studies
should focus on unravelling how each component in the mixture, and the mixture as a whole, exerts its
(cooperative) eﬀects .

Caesarean section has been shown to inﬂuence the development and composition of the gut
microbiota. In a study involving 192 breast-fed infants, Hill et al. reported that the gut microbiota
of the full-term caesarean section infant has a signiﬁcantly increased faecal abundance of Firmicutes
and signiﬁcantly lower abundance of Actinobacteria compared to the full-term, vaginally delivered
infant after the ﬁrst week of life. A decreased abundance of biﬁdobacteria has also been reported for
six week old infants born by caesarean section  However, the latter study also revealed that this
disturbance could be partially restored by exclusive breastfeeding. Likewise, Hill et al. reported
that breastfeeding had a beneﬁcial impact on the gut microbiota of infants delivered by caesarean
section. With this in mind, it is not surprising that probiotic supplementation to expectant mothers
and their infants (for three months) born by caesarean section or receiving antibiotics “beneﬁted” only
breast-fed infants in terms of increasing biﬁdobacteria and reducing Proteobacteria and Clostridia 
Probiotic-supplemented infant formula has been on the market in Europe and Asia for over two
decades  Such formulae have been shown to result in infant faecal microbiota proﬁles closer to
breast-fed infants  A systematic review of randomized controlled trials up to September 2016
concluded that probiotic-supplemented formulae do not raise safety concerns for healthy infants with
regard to growth and adverse eﬀects, however, while some beneﬁcial eﬀects are possible (reduction in
number of episodes of gastrointestinal infection, diarrhoea and respiratory symptoms, lower frequency
of colic or irritability and better growth) the review concluded there was a lack of robust clinical
evidence to recommend their routine use albeit this could be due to the small amount of data on
speciﬁc probiotic strain(s) and their outcomes rather than an authentic lack of an eﬀect  With this
in mind, a meta-analysis conducted in 2018 investigated the eﬃcacy of a single probiotic strain, namely
Lactobacillus reuteri DSM17398 to treat infant colic  Four double-blind trials with 345 colic infants
were included. The study concluded that the probiotic strain in question is eﬀective for treating
colic but only in breast-fed infants. With regard to formula-fed infants, the intervention eﬀects were
insigniﬁcant, however, the authors state that there were insuﬃcient data to make conclusions and thus
there is a critical need for more rigorous randomized controlled trials with this strain in formula-fed
infants suﬀering from colic..

The most common prebiotics used in infant formulae include a 9:1 mixture of short chain
galactooligosaccharides (GOS) and long chain FOS  A systematic review of 41 randomized controlled
clinical trials concluded that feeding prebiotic-supplemented infant formulae to healthy infants is safe in
terms of adverse effects and growth  The primary beneficial effect was stool softening but no robust
evidence exists to recommend prebiotic-supplemented formulae. As in the case of probiotics, the lack of
sufficient data on specific prebiotics was possibly responsible for this conclusion..

A systematic review involving three randomized controlled clinical trials (n = 475) on the
eﬃcacy of synbiotic-supplemented formulae in 2012 concluded that while synbiotics increased stool
frequency they had no impact on stool consistency, colic, spitting up/regurgitation, crying, vomiting
or restlessness  However, a recent study showed that amino acid-based formula supplemented
with Biﬁdobacterium breve M-16V and FOS over 26 weeks was capable of signiﬁcantly increasing faecal
percentages of biﬁdobacteria and reducing the Eubacterium/Clostridium coccoides group in infants with
non-IgE-mediated cow’s milk allergy (n = 35)  Interestingly, reported ear infections and use of
dermatological medication were also signiﬁcantly lower in the synbiotic group. A synbiotic starter
lactis and FOS fed to 280 infants of age 0.89 months over a three-month
formula containing Bif..

period signiﬁcantly reduced infantile crying and colic, functional constipation and daily regurgitation
compared to the reported median prevalence for a similar age according to the literature  Feeding
a synbiotic-supplemented formula to infants who had been completely weaned from breast milk
to infant formula at 28 days of age until 12 months of age resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction in the
cumulative incidence of lower respiratory tract infections compared to the prebiotic group but as the
conﬁdence interval of the estimate was wide, the authors suggest uncertainty with regards to this
result  The synbiotic in this case consisted of FOS, GOS and Lactobacillus paracasei ssp. paracasei
F19. Feeding caesarean-born infants formula supplemented with Bif. breve M-16V and FOS and GOS
from birth until week 16 generated a biﬁdogenic eﬀect that lasted until week 8, thus emulating the
gut physiological environment of vaginally-delivered infants, and reduced Enterobacteriaceae until
week 12 .

In Part I of this review we discussed the elderly (> 65 years) microbiota which is generally
characterised by a reduction in microbial diversity, a decrease in species associated with short chain
fatty acid (SCFA) production, especially butyrate, an increase in opportunistic pathogens and
even greater inter-individual variation than observed in adults  The gut microbiota of those
in long-stay residential care facilities is signiﬁcantly less diverse than individuals of the same age
group who reside within the community and the increased frailty observed in long-stay care residents
correlates with loss of community-associated microbiota  In the same study, the distinct microbiota
groups identiﬁed as a result of residence location also overlapped with diet where individuals in long
stay care facilities tended to consume high fat, low ﬁbre diets versus the low fat, high ﬁbre diet of
community dwellers. Furthermore, scientists are hypothesizing that the gut microbiota may inﬂuence
sarcopenia through a gut-muscle axis, a syndrome which aﬀects older individuals (recently reviewed
by Ticinesi et al. . Sarcopenia is described as depletion of muscle mass and reduction of muscle
performance which both result from anabolic resistance or boosted protein catabolism  It is
distinct from frailty although the two may overlap  To date, there have been no studies in humans
investigating the microbiome of sarcopenic individuals; however, Siddharth et al. identiﬁed
a distinct faecal microbiota composition associated with age-related muscle wasting in rats which
revealed a reduction in several taxa reported to have pro-anabolic and anti-inﬂammatory properties.
Interestingly, the SCFA butyrate was shown to have beneﬁcial eﬀects on muscle mass in ageing mice,
partially or wholly protecting them from muscle atrophy  and the human commensal L. reuteri
inhibited muscle wasting in mice .

Osteosarcopenic obesity describes an impairment in muscle, bone and adipose tissue which occurs
in elderly individuals in conjunction with an altered gut microbiota, especially in those in long-term
care facilities  The increased adiposity associated with osteosarcopenic obesity can manifest
as overt clinical overweight/obesity, redistribution of fat around visceral organs or the inﬁltration of
fat into muscle and bone tissues, thus impairing their function  It is more prevalent in older
women than older men and women with osteosarcopenic obesity have decreased strength, balance
and mobility compared to those with obesity, osteoporotic obesity and sarcopenic obesity alone 
The gut microbiota has been shown to regulate bone mass in mice and the probiotic L. reuteri was
reported to protect menopausal ovariectomized mice from bone loss .

In Part I of this review, we discussed the obese gut microbiota and the link between the gut
microbiota and energy storage in the body  Given the reported links between the gut microbiota,
muscle, bone, and adipose tissues, such studies suggest that the gut microbiota could be a therapeutic
target in the treatment of sarcopenia and osteosarcopenic obesity and aid in the prevention of associated
outcomes such as increased risk for falls, fractures, long-term frailty and immobility  This is
an exciting area in microbiome research and may have profound implications for the ageing process.
The gut-muscle axis is further discussed in Section 2.4 (Physical Activity)..

While the nutritional needs of the elderly do not vary signiﬁcantly from younger adults with
similar caloric expenditure and anthropometric and physiological features, elderly individuals are at
greater risk of malnutrition 
Indeed, it has been reported that approximately 30% of individuals over 50 years of age do not consume
the RDA for protein  Other nutrients which fall short in this demographic include ﬁbre, iron,
vitamins D, B6 and B12 and folic acid .

Salazar et al. suggest that nutritional strategies for the elderly should not just focus on
nutritional deﬁciencies but also consider the intestinal microbiota and immune function. With this is
mind, the following have been considered relevant targets for interventions in this age group: reduced
microbial diversity, imbalanced proportions and
reduced levels of SCFA, higher levels of
lactate, branched chain fatty acids (valeric, isovaleric, isobutyric and caproic
acids)  For the purpose of this review, we have focused on the impact of
interventions in this age group involving ﬁbre, prebiotics, probiotics and synbiotics..

Bahgurst et al. investigated the long-term effects of moderate fibre supplementation
(an increase in fibre intake of ~70%) in a nursing home population, of mean age 83 years, with an emphasis
on bowel function, body weight and mineral status. As well as improving bowel function, the ﬁbre
supplementation improved nutrient density of the diet without increasing body weight. In a more
recent study, potato intake in 32 institutionalised elderly subjects (aged between 76 and 95 years) was
directly associated with faecal SCFA concentrations, and apple intake was directly associated with
propionate concentration  In the same study, cellulose intake was associated with acetate and
butyrate concentrations. While the sample size was low, the approach provides an opportunity to
generate improved diets with an emphasis on increasing speciﬁc or total SCFAs..

Probiotic consumption in the elderly cohort has been shown to improve certain immune parameters
as well as beneﬁcially modulating the intestinal microbiota. The immuno-stimulating probiotic Bif.
lactis HN019 enhanced immunity in elderly subjects aged 68 to 84 years following consumption of
either 5 × 1010 microorganisms/day or 5 × 109 microorganisms/day for three weeks  Daily
consumption of a probiotic mixture composed of Lactobacillus gasseri KS-13, Bif. biﬁdum G9-1 and Bif.
longum MM-2 for three weeks by elderly participants increased IL-10 concentrations
compared to the placebo  In addition, 48% of participants in the probiotic group had increased
faecal biﬁdobacteria compared to 30% in the placebo which was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (P < 0.05).
Moreover, 55% of participants in the probiotic group had increased lactic acid bacteria and 52% had
decreased E. coli compared to 43% and 27% in the placebo group, respectively, representing signiﬁcant
diﬀerences (P < 0.05). Bacterial groups matching the butyrate producer F. prausnitzii were also more
abundant in stool samples from the probiotic group. The overall changes resembled those observed in
healthy younger populations. Gao et al. reported a similar ﬁnding in relation to F. prausnitzii levels
following long-term probiotic consumption by an elderly cohort. While consumption of a probiotic
cheese containing L. rhamnosus HN001 and L. acidophilus NCFM by an elderly population increased the
numbers of said probiotics in faeces, there was no eﬀect on faecal immune markers  However,
the probiotic cheese was associated with a trend towards lower C. diﬃcile counts, an eﬀect which was
statistically signiﬁcant in the subpopulation that were found to harbor C. diﬃcile at the beginning of the
study. Likewise, consumption of one probiotic-containing biscuit (Bif. longum Bar33 and Lactobacillus
helveticus Bar13) per day for one month was found to revert the age-related increase in the following.

opportunistic pathogens, C. diﬃcile, Clostridium cluster XI, Clostridium perfringens, Enterococcus faecium,
and the enteropathogenic genus Campylobacter in elderly volunteers  Consumption of a fermented
oat drink containing Bif. longum 46 and Bif. longum 2C by elderly nursing home residents for six months
signiﬁcantly increased faecal biﬁdobacteria levels  In an attempt to understand how probiotic
consumption in the elderly promotes health, Eloe-Fadrosh et al. reported the impact of a single
probiotic strain (L. rhamnosus GG) on the structure and functional dynamics of the gut microbiota in
healthy elderly individuals following consumption of 1010 colony forming units (cfu) twice daily for
28 days. The probiotic modulated the gut microbiota transcriptome. In particular, Biﬁdobacterium genes
involved in ﬂagellar motility, chemotaxis and adhesion were increased following probiotic consumption,
and gene expression in the butyrate producers Ruminococcus and Eubacterium was also increased.
This suggests that this single probiotic strain has the potential to promote anti-inﬂammatory pathways.
Prebiotic supplementation in the elderly has generated promising results in terms of beneﬁcial
alterations to the gut microbiota and also frailty syndrome. Daily consumption of 8 g of short chain FOS
for four weeks by healthy elderly individuals led to increases in faecal biﬁdobacteria counts  Daily
doses of GOS at 5.5 g for four weeks in an elderly group resulted in signiﬁcant increases in biﬁdobacteria
and bacteroides and immune alterations which included lower IL-1β levels and higher C-reactive
protein, IL-10, IL-8 and natural killer cell activity  Most recently, prebiotic supplementation
which involved a mix of prebiotics at 20 g/day for 26 weeks to frail elderly subjects did not induce
global changes in gut microbiota alpha and beta diversity but the abundance of certain bacterial
taxa increased including Ruminococcaceae and the levels of the chemokine CXCL11 were signiﬁcantly
reduced  although
the authors state that the health/clinical beneﬁts are not clear. Buiges et al. investigated the impact
of prebiotic supplementation on frailty syndrome in elderly individuals in a randomized, double-blind
clinical trial. In this case, the prebiotic in question, Darmocare Pre
which is a mix of inulin and
FOS did not signiﬁcantly modify the overall rate of frailty but did signiﬁcantly improve two frailty
criteria, exhaustion and handgrip, following 13 weeks of daily consumption. The authors suggest that
therapeutics aimed at the gut microbiota–muscle–brain axis should be considered for the treatment
of frailty syndrome. More recently, the same prebiotic was tested in nursing home residents and
of the 28 participants in the intervention group, 25 revealed reduced frailty index levels where the
moderately/severe frail participants showed the greatest reduction .

In a prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized single centre study involving
40 healthy elderly subjects (aged between 60–80 years), intake of a synbiotic combination of soluble
corn ﬁbre with L. rhamnosus GG for three weeks tended to promote innate immunity in elderly women
and 70- to 80-year-old volunteers (male and female) by increasing natural killer cell activity 
Interestingly, the pilus-deﬁcient version of L. rhamnosus GG, termed L. rhamnosus GG-PB12, with the
soluble corn ﬁbre increased natural killer cell activity in older volunteers compared to soluble corn ﬁbre
alone. The combination of L. rhamnosus GG-PB12 with the corn ﬁbre also decreased C-reactive protein,
an indicator of inﬂammation in the body. Total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol was also reduced in
individuals who had presented with elevated levels following intake of L. rhamnosus GG with the
soluble corn ﬁbre. The genus Parabacteroides was signiﬁcantly increased as a result of either strain
with the corn ﬁbre. Soluble corn ﬁbre alone and soluble corn ﬁbre with L. rhamnosus GG increased
levels of Ruminococcaceae incertae sedis. Decreases in the levels of Ruminococcaceae and Parabacteroides
have been pinpointed as the main microbial shifts associated with ageing in mice  Slight
reductions were observed in Oscillospira (positively associated with leanness and health  and
the sulphate-reducing Desulfovibrio following L. rhamnosus GG with soluble corn ﬁbre consumption,
whereas only Desulfovibrio decreased following intake of L. rhamnosus GG PB12 with corn ﬁbre..

shares the same geographical location, historical past and social habits/lifestyle etc.  Thus,
further studies are required for this cohort to ﬁnd interventions which can improve the relevant targets
of the intestinal microbiota and immune function and generate meaningful physiological changes
which translate to improved general health and well-being (e.g., frailty reduction, improved mobility,
reduced risk of fracture and falls, improved sleep and overall energy levels etc)..

The impact of exercise on the gut microbiota has only begun to be studied in recent years. In a
ﬁrst study of its kind, Clarke et al. reported increased microbial diversity in a professional rugby
team of a preseason camp compared to age-matched and BMI-matched controls. The gut microbiota
diﬀerences observed in these athletes correlated with protein consumption and creatine kinase, a
marker of extreme exercise. In fact, protein accounted for 22% of the total energy intake of athletes
compared to 16% in the low BMI control group and 15% in the high BMI control group. A follow-on
study investigating the metabolic activity of the gut microbiota of these athletes revealed several
diﬀerences compared to the control groups  Pathways involved in amino acid biosynthesis,
carbohydrate metabolism and antibiotic biosynthesis were increased in athletes. SCFA levels were
also increased in the athletic group. Of note, athletes also excreted higher levels of the uremic toxin,
trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO), which has been discussed in Part 1 of this review as it has been
proposed as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease in humans. However, the authors state that the
implications of this result are limited and require further study. As expected, the athletes consumed
more calories and macronutrients than the control groups. Fibre intake was also higher in the athletic
group compared to the high BMI control group..

In order to better understand the impact of exercise on the gut microbiota, Estaki et al. 
analysed the microbiota of healthy individuals with varying levels of ﬁtness and reported that
cardiorespiratory ﬁtness correlated with increased microbial diversity in healthy humans. Six weeks of
endurance exercise by overweight women was reported to alter the gut metagenome with an increase in
the health-promoting Akkermansia and a decrease in Proteobacteria  Notably, diets did not change
during the six weeks control period before the exercise intervention or during the six-week exercise
period. Despite the changes to the gut microbiota, systemic metabolites and body composition were not
greatly aﬀected. Likewise, ﬁve-weeks of endurance exercise by elderly men was found to signiﬁcantly
decrease the relative abundance of C. diﬃcile and signiﬁcantly increase Oscillospira which correlated with
beneﬁcial changes in several cardiometabolic risk factors  Changes in food intake did not diﬀer
between control and exercise periods. Allen et al. reported that six weeks of endurance exercise
increased faecal SCFA concentrations in lean but not obese participants and the metabolic changes
were associated with changes in bacterial taxa and genes capable of producing SCFAs. Interestingly,
the exercise-induced changes were reversed when exercise ceased. While these studies demonstrate
the beneﬁcial impacts of exercise on the gut microbiota, exercising to the point of exhaustion may
induce detrimental changes  For example, intense military training undertaken by soldiers for
four days resulted in increased intestinal permeability and changes in microbiota composition which
included increased alpha diversity and an increase in the abundance levels of potentially pathogenic
taxa (e.g., Staphylococcus, Peptostreptococcus, Peptoniphilus, Acidaminococcus, and Fusobacterium) at the
expense of several taxa thought to protect against pathogen invasion (e.g., Bacteroides, Faecalibacterium,
Collinsella, and Roseburia)  the impact of exercise on the
gut microbiota may depend on the intensity and duration, however other confounders should also
be considered including diet, nutrient intake and body composition parameters, a topic that requires
further investigation..

We have already mentioned the gut–muscle axis hypothesis in Section 2.3 (Elderly in Nursing
Homes) and indeed it has been proposed that the gut-microbiota axis may be two-way with exercise
inﬂuencing the microbiota and the microbiota inﬂuencing muscle  the latter of which was observed
in the case of muscle-wasting in rats provided a list of hypothesised pathways.

linking gut microbiota modulation to muscle function and include bioavailability of dietary proteins
and speciﬁc amino acids, biotransformation
of nutrients such as polyphenols and ellagitannins, bile acid
biotransformation, SCFA synthesis. In the case of intestinal dysbiosis, changes in these pathways
may have negative consequences for skeletal muscle function. The interaction between the gut
microbiota and the immune system is also another factor in the gut–muscle axis hypothesis 
given the purported links between inﬂammation and age-related muscle wastage  Further
studies in this ﬁeld are clearly warranted to understand the complex relationships between all
these factors. Ultimately, this should help in the design of strategic exercise programmes, diets and
probiotic/prebiotic interventions which are optimised for life stage ensuring a healthy gut microbiota
for optimal skeletal-muscle function and host health..

Nowadays probiotic supplementation is common practice for many athletes involved in diﬀerent
sports and is generally taken to reduce incidence of infection, especially upper respiratory tract infections
and gastrointestinal problems. Upper respiratory illness is reported to account for 35%–65% of illness
presentations to sports medicine clinics  These infections are generally caused by common
respiratory viruses, allergic responses to aeroallergens and exercise-related trauma to respiratory
epithelial membrane integrity  Gastrointestinal disorders in athletes can occur during or after
intense physical activity and include bloating, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, and blood in the stool
and may be caused by inadequate blood supply to the digestive tract during exercise 
Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease (GERD) can also be exacerbated by intense exercise .

Interestingly, probiotic supplementation in the form of Lactobacillus casei Shirota to men and women
(n = 32) involved in endurance-based physical activities for four months of the winter signiﬁcantly
reduced the incidence of upper respiratory tract infections compared to the placebo group and the
proportion of placebo subjects who experienced one or more weeks with upper respiratory tract
infection symptoms was 36% higher than those taking the probiotic  Salivary IgA was also
signiﬁcantly higher in the probiotic group, an eﬀect which was not evident at baseline. In a later
study with the same probiotic strain, ﬁve months of supplementation to university athletes and game
players (n = 243) had no impact on upper respiratory tract infection symptoms which the authors state
could be attributable to the low incidence of such symptoms during the study  The probiotic
was associated with plasma cytomegalovirus and Epstein Barr virus antibody titres which could be
interpreted as an improvement in immune status. Consumption of heat-killed Lactococcus lactis JCM
805, also known as LC-Plasma, for 13 days was shown to relieve the morbidity and symptoms of
upper respiratory tract infections in male athletes performing high-intensity exercise  This was
achieved by activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) which are known to play a signiﬁcant role
in viral infection. Furthermore, the bacterial strain decreased fatigue accumulation during consecutive
high intensity exercise. A later study in mice showed that LC-Plasma-activation of pDC in turn
attenuates the concentration of fatigue controlled cytokine TGF-β and muscle degenerative genes 
Consumption of a probiotic powder containing L. rhamnosus GG and Bif. animalis ssp. lactis BB12
reduced the duration and severity of upper respiratory tract infections in college students and fewer
school days were missed .

Administration of Lactobacillus fermentum (PCC.

) to male (n = 64) and female (n = 35) competitive
cyclists for 11 weeks generated mixed results in terms of gastrointestinal illness and lower respiratory
illness symptoms  Males experienced a reduction in the severity of gastrointestinal illness
which became more pronounced as training load increased. The load of lower respiratory illness
symptoms was also reduced in males compared with the placebo but actually increased in females on
the probiotic. Probiotic numbers increased 7.7-fold more in males compared to an unclear 2.2-fold
increase in females. Thus it was concluded that L. fermentum could be a useful nutritional adjunct for
exercising males. Consumption of Lactobacillus salivarius for four months in the spring by both men
and women (n = 66 in total) participating in endurance-based physical activities had no impact on
incidence of upper respiratory tract infections or mucosal immune markers  While probiotic.

supplementation for one month did not have any eﬀect on severity of upper respiratory tract infections
or gastrointestinal episodes in 30 elite rugby union players, it did signiﬁcantly reduce the number of
participants experiencing such symptoms and tended to reduce the number of illness days compared to
placebo  Consumption of a multispecies probiotic for three months in the winter by trained athletes
(n = 33) reduced the incidence of upper respiratory tract infections compared to the placebo and reduced
exercise-induced tryptophan-degradation rates  Despite this, probiotic supplementation did not
improve athlete performance. The probiotic L. helveticus Lafti L10 signiﬁcantly reduced the duration of
upper respiratory tract infection episodes in 39 elite athletes during 14 weeks of supplementation in
the winter but did not inﬂuence severity of symptoms or incidence  A follow-on study indicated
that the probiotic modulated mucosal and humoral immunity in elite athletes  The probiotic
was also shown to exert certain antioxidant potential in elite athletes following three months of
supplementation but further research is warranted to conﬁrm this eﬀect  Interestingly, based
on the results of a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials comparing probiotics with placebo
to prevent acute upper respiratory tract infections in children, adults and older people (n = 3720),
Hao et al. concluded that probiotics were better than placebo for reducing the incidence of such
episodes, the duration of episodes as well as cold-related school absence and antibiotic use. A recent
systematic review of the eﬀects of probiotic supplementation on physically active individuals (n = 1680,
athletes and non-athletes) concluded that positive eﬀects were reported for several outcomes including
respiratory tract infection, markers of immunity and gastrointestinal symptoms; however, the study
failed to identify standardised supplementation protocols owing to the distinct protocols employed
across the studies, as well as diﬀerent measured outcomes and small sample size .

In terms of performance, supplementation with certain probiotics has been shown to have a beneficial
effect by presumably influencing host and nutrient metabolism. For example, taking Lactobacillus plantarum
TWK10 for six weeks resulted in significantly higher endurance performance and glucose content in
a maximal running treadmill test in eight adults compared to the placebo group (n = 8) such that the
authors suggest it could have potential as an aerobic exercise supplement  L. plantarum PS128 was
reported to have beneficial effects on high-intensity, exercise-induced oxidative stress, inflammation and
performance in a study involving triathletes .

In terms of diet, athletes tend to consume more protein than the average population and an
early research review in 1984 examining the importance of protein for athletes concluded that athletic
individuals should consume 1.8 to 2.0 g of protein/kg of body weight/day which is approximately
twice that recommended for sedentary individuals  However, the studies reviewed in Part I of
this review in relation to the impact of protein on the gut microbiota clearly showed that dietary
source is a critical factor with animal- and plant-derived protein sources generating heterogeneous
responses in terms of gut microbiota composition and functionality. Further research is warranted
to fully comprehend the consequences of these alterations but Blachier et al. concluded that
some caution should be exercised around high protein diets given their eﬀects on the gut microbiota.

In a recent report by a UK charity called the Mental Health Foundation, stress is deﬁned as the
“body’s response to pressures from a situation or life event”  According to this report almost 74%
of people surveyed from a total of 4169 adults felt stressed to the point of being overwhelmed or unable
to cope at some point of 2018. Stress can be caused by a variety of events and life situations. Some
common stress triggers include workplace related stress, exam stress, and illness. Exam stress can be
a major issue for students, negatively aﬀecting sleep patterns and academic performance 
With regard to work-related stress, a report compiled by the UK Health and Safety Executive stated
that over half a million people suﬀer from work-induced stress, depression or anxiety, resulting in a
loss of 15.4 million working days over 2017 and 2018  Workplace stress is also the major source of
stress for adults in the USA  Implementation of work-place policies and procedures is critical in
tackling these issues. However, we now know that quality of diet, speciﬁc dietary components and
supplements can aid in the treatment or prevention of depression, anxiety and stress symptoms 
Opie et al. compiled a number of dietary recommendations for the prevention of depression
based on current available evidence which included increased consumption of fruits, vegetables,
wholegrain cereals, legumes, nuts and seeds, high consumption of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids, limited intake of processed foods and replacement of unhealthy foods with nutritious wholesome
foods. In addition, the study recommended following traditional dietary patterns such as the Japanese,
Norweigan or Mediterranean diet, the latter of which has been discussed in detail in Part I of this
review in terms of its beneﬁcial impacts on the gut microbiota and host health  Thus, the impact
of diet on the gut microbiota undoubtedly inﬂuences our emotional state. Even in adults without
diagnosed mood disorder, gut microbes have been shown to be connected to mood (depression, anxiety
and stress) and these relationships diﬀer by sex and are inﬂuenced by dietary ﬁbre intake  It is
now known that the gut microbiota communicates with the brain along the brain–gut–microbiota axis
as evidenced from preclinical and some clinical studies  we discussed
the ability of the gut microbiota to produce neurochemicals including gamma amino butyric acid
(GABA), a major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain  as well as its involvement in serotonin
biosynthesis .

The impact of psychological stress on the gut microbiota has been reviewed recently by Karl et al. 
To date, most studies have focused on rodent models, many of which have demonstrated a reduction in
Lactobacillus following exposure to stress  Interestingly, exam stress in humans has been shown
to reduce gut lactic acid bacteria reported an inverse relationship between
Anxiety scale scores and Biﬁdobacterium in females, while in males an inverse relationship was observed
between depression-scale scores and Lactobacillus. Thus probiotic and prebiotic interventions have the
potential to impact the gut-brain axis with beneﬁcial consequences for mood and stress behaviours..

Chronic fatigue syndrome is characterised by persistent and relapsing tiredness and 97% of
patients report neurological disturbances resulting in a variety of emotional symptoms of which
anxiety and depression are the most common  In a pilot study involving 39 chronic fatigue
syndrome patients intake of L. casei strain Shirota for two months resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in
anxiety symptoms compared with the control group (P = 0.01)  Lactobacillus and biﬁdobacteria
counts were also signiﬁcantly increased as a result of probiotic administration. A probiotic mix
consisting of L. helveticus R0052 and Bif. longum R0175 was found to relieve psychological distress
signiﬁcantly in healthy human volunteers (n = 55) participating in the clinical trial as measured by
the Hopkins Symptom Checklist, the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, the Coping Checklist
and urinary free cortisol  Black Depression Inventory scores were reduced in volunteers (n = 20)
with major depressive disorder following eight weeks of supplementation with a probiotic mixture
consisting of L. acidophilus, L. casei and Bif. biﬁdum  Several metabolic parameters were also.

improved including serum insulin levels and homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance.
Interestingly, probiotic administration has also proven beneﬁcial in the case of postpartum symptoms of
depression. In this case, 423 women participated in the trial at 14–16 weeks of gestation and consumed
L. rhamnosus HN001 daily until six months postpartum  Mothers in the probiotic group reported
signiﬁcantly lower depression scores and anxiety scores compared to mothers in the placebo group in
the postpartum period..

In terms of exam stress, consumption of fermented milk containing L. casei Shirota for eight weeks
by healthy medical students (n = 24) until the day before examination resulted in signiﬁcantly reduced
salivary cortisol levels and plasma tryptophan levels compared with the placebo group (n = 23)
and two weeks after the examination the probiotic group had signiﬁcantly higher faecal serotonin
levels  Furthermore, during the pre-examination period at 5–6 weeks, the rate of subjects
experiencing common abdominal and cold symptoms and total number of days experiencing such
symptoms was signiﬁcantly lower in the probiotic group. In rats exposed to water avoidance stress
(WAS), the same strain signiﬁcantly suppressed WAS-induced increases in plasma corticosterone and
signiﬁcantly reduced the number of corticotropin releasing factor–expressing cells in the paraventricular
nucleus  In the same study, intragastric administration of the strain, in a dose-dependent manner,
stimulated gastric vagal aﬀerent activity..

Modulation of the gut microbiota with prebiotics has also generated promising results in terms
of emotional symptoms. For example, consumption of the prebiotic trans-GOS for 12 weeks at
7 g/day (but not 3.5 g/day) signiﬁcantly improved anxiety scores in individuals suﬀering from irritable
bowel syndrome (IBS) compared with the placebo group  Faecal biﬁdobacteria were signiﬁcantly
increased in the prebiotic group at 3.5 g/day (P < 0.005) and 7 g/day (P < 0.001). Intake of Bimuno
-GOS
for three weeks signiﬁcantly reduced salivary cortisol awakening response in healthy volunteers 
In the same study, this particular prebiotic resulted in decreased attentional vigilance to negative
versus positive information in a dot-probe task. Consumption of short-chain FOS at 5 g/day for
4 weeks signiﬁcantly increased faecal biﬁdobacteria in IBS patients and signiﬁcantly reduced anxiety
scores .

— Reduce incidence of aGDM 
— Reduce risk of preeclampsia 
— Lower risk of preterm delivery 
— Prevent infectious mastitis 
— Reduce incidence of bacterial vaginosis 
— Alter immunologic composition of breast milk .

inﬂuence other insulin actions .

— Reduce blood pressure in women with GDM 
— Alter immunologic composition of breast milk 
— Positively impact mineral levels in breast milk .

faecal Bacteroides in
women with
GDM .

— Reduce risk of all-cause mortality, bNEC ≥ Stage II, late
onset sepsis and feeding intolerance in preterm
infant .

— Increase faecal biﬁdobacteria, reduce Proteobacteria and
Clostridia in breast-fed caesarean born infants .

— Treat infant colic in breast fed infants .

sepsis, hospital stay duration and
time to full enteral feeding in
preterm infant .

load of lower respiratory illness symptoms in male
competitive cyclists .

— Improve endurance performance 
— Alleviate oxidative stress, increase plasma-branched
amino acids and elevate exercise performance .

— Reduce incidence of NEC in preterm infant 
— Reduce incidence of sepsis in preterm infants 
— Increase stool frequency in formula-fed infants 
— Beneﬁcially modulate gut microbiota, reduce
incidence of ear infections and use of
dermatological medication in infants with
non-cIgE-mediated cow’s milk allergy on amino
acid based formula .

constipation and daily regurgitation in infants on
starter formula .

tract infections in weaned infants .

with major depressive disorder .

symptoms and number of days of such symptoms in
pre-exam period .

— Beneﬁcially modulate gut microbiota .

— Improve immunity 
— Beneﬁcially modulate gut microbiota .

— Beneﬁcially modulate gut
microbiota .

— Reduce salivary cortisol awakening
response in healthy volunteers .

— Decrease attentional vigilance to
negative versus positive
information in a dot-probe
task .

innate immunity and reduce total and
gLDL-cholesterol .

function, improve
nutrient density of
diet .

Undernutrition and overnutrition represent forms of malnutrition which manifest due to
imbalances in energy and/or nutrient intake  Symptoms of undernutrition include wasting
(low weight-for-height), stunting (low height-for-age) and underweight (low weight-for-age) 
Overnutrition results from overfeeding, deﬁned as the supply of energy containing nutrients in excess
of requirements resulting in fat storage and other undesirable outcomes as discussed in Part I of this
review  Overweight and obesity can coexist with undernutrition, a phenomenon described as
the “double burden” of malnutrition by the WHO. Thirteen percent of the world’s population aged
18 years and over are obese  According to the WHO, 462 million adults are underweight and
around 45% of deaths among children under ﬁve years of age are linked to undernutrition  Given
the link between the gut microbiota and energy regulation in the body, probiotics, prebiotics or ﬁbre
may provide eﬀective dietary strategies to restore energy homeostasis through strategic manipulation
of the gut microbiota..

The bacterium Bif. breve B-3 was used in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving adult volunteers with BMI ranging from 24 to 30 kg/m2  According to the WHO, BMI
values from 25.0 to 29.9 represent a pre-obesity nutritional status, while a BMI of 30 falls into class
I obesity  In the trial, participants received either placebo (n = 25) or a B-3 capsule (n = 19)
(approximately 5 × 1010 cfu/day) for 12 weeks  Consumption of the B-3 capsule signiﬁcantly
lowered fat mass by week 12. Improvements in some blood parameters related to liver function and
inﬂammation were observed and signiﬁcant correlations could be made between these and the changed
fat mass indicating that Bif. breve B-3 has the potential to improve metabolic disorders. Since some of
the participants in this trial were receiving medication for diabetes, hypertension or hyperlipidemia,
another randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was recently performed with B-3 involving
80 pre-obese adults without any disorders  While fat area signiﬁcantly increased
in the placebo group at weeks 4 and 8, no changes were observed in the B-3 group. Indeed, body fat
mass and percent body fat were signiﬁcantly lower in the B-3 group at weeks 8 and 12. The probiotic.

strain slightly decreased triglyceride levels and improved HDL cholesterol from baseline suggesting
potential for the strain to reduce body fat in healthy, pre-obese individuals. In overweight and obese
adults, six months consumption of Bif. animalis ssp. lactis 420 was shown to control body
fat mass and reduce weight circumference and food intake  Interestingly, circulating zonulin,
a potential marker of intestinal permeability, remained consistently lower in the probiotic group,
and changes in zonulin signiﬁcantly correlated with changes in body fat mass. In addition, changes
in high-sensitivity C-reactive protein resembled those of zonulin. Thus, the authors speculate that
the probiotic strain exerted its control on body fat mass via circulating zonulin levels and hence gut
permeability and by attenuating low-grade inﬂammation..

Certain probiotic strains have been shown to enhance weight gain to such an extent that they have
gained popularity as alternatives to antibiotic growth promoters in animal feed where they are often
referred to as direct fed microbials (DFMs)  The mechanisms responsible for this eﬀect include
promotion of a favourable gut microbiota, enhanced digestion and absorption of nutrients, altered
gene expression in pathogenic microorganisms, and the various mechanistic actions associated with
colonisation resistance including immunomodulation  A comparative meta-analysis on the eﬀects
of Lactobacillus species on weight gain in humans and animals involving 17 randomized clinical trials in
humans, 51 studies on farm animals and 14 experimental models concluded that diﬀerent Lactobacillus
species exert diﬀerent eﬀects on weight change and these eﬀects are host-speciﬁc, however, L. acidophilus
administration results in signiﬁcant weight gain in humans and animals  A more recent systematic
review assessing the potential of probiotic diets to signiﬁcantly inﬂuence weight change in obese and
non-obese individuals revealed that the eﬀects were species and strain-speciﬁc  For example,
while L. gasseri BNR17 reduced weight gain, L. gasseri L66-5 promoted it. A systematic review on the
eﬀects of probiotics on child growth involving 12 studies, 10 of which were randomized controlled
trials, revealed that probiotics have the potential to improve child growth in children in developing
countries and in under-nourished children .

Kwashiorkar is a form of severe acute malnutrition (SAM) resulting from inadequate nutrient
intake coupled with additional environmental insults  By studying Malawian twin pairs during
the ﬁrst three years of life, of which half of the twin pairs remained well-nourished, 43% became
discordant and 7% manifested concordance for acute malnutrition, Smith et al. revealed the
gut microbiota as a causative factor since the kwashiorkor microbiome with Malawian diet induced
marked weight loss when transplanted to mice. Million et al. reported a dramatic depletion of
obligate anaerobes in SAM. Indeed, while Enterococcus faecalis, E. coli and Staphylococcus aureus were
consistently enriched in cases of SAM, several species of the following families were consistently
depleted: Bacteroidaceae, Eubacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae, and Ruminococcaceae, along with dramatic
depletion of Methanobrevibacter smithii. Overall, total bacterial number was decreased and faecal redox
potential increased. Such microbes have been termed the healthy mature anaerobic gut microbiota
(HMAGM)  Indeed, the ﬁrst step in gut microbiota alterations associated with SAM is early
depletion of the pathogen inhibitor Bif. longum, followed later on by absence of the HMAGM resulting
in deﬁcient energy harvest, immune protection and vitamin biosynthesis which are associated with
malabsorption, systemic pathogen invasion and diarrhoea used a
combination of culturomics and metagenomics to analyse the stool samples of healthy children and
kwashiorkor patients to identify potential probiotics to treat SAM. This resulted in the identiﬁcation
of 12 species in healthy children which were absent in kwashiorkor patients. These 12 potential
probiotics represent an array of possible functions including antibacterial potential, polysaccharide
fermentation, butyrate production, antioxidant potential or simply common members of the gut
microbiota from healthy humans and healthy breast-fed infants. The authors propose that this cocktail
of probiotics oﬀers a deﬁned, reproducible, safe and convenient alternative to faecal transplantations
for the treatment of SAM in children..

Parnell and Reimer investigated the impact of daily oligofructose supplementation 
in healthy adults with BMI > 25 for 12 weeks in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Compared
to the control group, which experienced an increase in weight gain  the prebiotic
group experienced a 1.03 ± 0.43 kg loss in body weight. Glucose regulation was also improved
in the prebiotic group who self-reported a reduction in caloric intake. The authors suggest that
the suppression in ghrelin expression and enhanced peptide YY (PYY) expression observed in the
prebiotic group partly contributes to the reduction in energy intake. In overweight/obese children,
aged 7–12 years, daily consumption of 8 g oligofructose-enriched inulin for 16 weeks signiﬁcantly
reduced body weight z-score (reduced by 3.1%), percent body fat  and percent trunk
fat compared to children who received the placebo who experienced a slight increase
in all 3 parameters  The prebiotic group also showed a signiﬁcant decrease in IL-6 levels from
baseline  Serum triglycerides were
also signiﬁcantly reduced (by 19%) in the prebiotic group. Gut microbiota analysis revealed signiﬁcant
increases in Biﬁdobacterium species and decreases in Bacteroides vulgatus in the prebiotic group. Levels
of primary bile acids increased in the placebo group but remained unchanged in the prebiotic group
over the 16-week period. However, twelve weeks of oligofructose consumption at the same quantity
in obese and overweight children, aged 7–11 years 
in a double-blind placebo-controlled trial had no impact on body weight and body fat .

Consumption of inulin-type fructans by obese women at 16 g/day for 3 months led to gut
microbiota changes which included an increase in Biﬁdobacterium and F. prausnitzii, both of which
negatively correlated with serum lipopolysaccharides The prebiotic also decreased Bacteroides
intestinalis, Bac. vulgatus and Propionibacterium which was associated with a slight decrease in fat mass
and with phosphatidylcholine and plasma lactate levels. The authors suggest that the modest changes
in host metabolism indicate a role for inulin-type fructans to support dietary advice with regards obesity
and related metabolic disorders. In a later randomized, double-blind, parallel, placebo controlled trial,
obese women consuming the same prebiotic at the same concentration for three months had signiﬁcantly
lower total SCFAs, acetate and propionate (that positively correlated with BMI), as well as signiﬁcantly
lower fasting insulinemia and homeostasis model assessment (indicator of insulin resistance) compared
to the placebo group  The following species were signiﬁcantly increased in the prebiotic group
at the end of the three months, Biﬁdobacterium adolescentis, Biﬁdobacterium pseudocatenulatum and Bif.
longum, the latter of which negatively correlated with serum lipopolysaccharide and endotoxin..

Synbiotics have shown some promise towards improving growth outcomes in healthy and
malnourished children, although there is a paucity of clinical trials in this area. For example,
Malawian children, aged 5 to 168 months, suffering from SAM who received ready-to-use-therapeutic-food
(RUTF) with a synbiotic for approximately 33 days (median) in a double-blind efficacy randomized
controlled trial showed a trend towards reduced outpatient mortality when compared to those who
received RUTF alone (P = 0.06)  Despite this, the study showed no differences between both groups
in terms of nutritional cure, weight gain, time to cure, and prevalence of clinical symptoms including
respiratory issues, fever and diarrhoea. One year consumption of a probiotic- (Bif. lactis, 1.9 × 1010 cfu/day)
and prebiotic-fortified milk by Indian preschool healthy and stunted children resulted in increased
weight gain 
compared to children receiving control milk  A synbiotic consisting of Bif. longum, L. rhamnosus
and inulin and FOS fed to healthy 12-month-old toddlers in milk for one year significantly improved
weight gain compared to those receiving control milk (difference of 0.93 g/day)  The weight.

gain resulted in a change in z-score weight-for-age closer to the WHO Child Growth Standard. Fecal
lactobacilli and enterococcal counts were also significantly increased in the synbiotic group between 12
and 16 months. A six-month synbiotic supplementation to children with failure to thrive, a common
problem in children in underdeveloped countries, resulted in a significant increase in weight gain
compared to control children  Indeed, by the end of the six-month trial, the mean weight of the
control group was 11.760 ± 0.17 kg which increased from 10.75 ± 0.16 kg initially, while the mean weight
of the synbiotic group was 12.280 ± 0.190 kg, increasing from 10.25 ± 0.2 kg initially. More clinical trials
investigating the impact of combinations of probiotics and prebiotics on undernutrition are required.
An emphasis on gut microbiota changes should help to delineate mode of action and identify the most
suitable formulations for specific conditions. The studies discussed in this section are summarized in
Table 3..

and those that are “microbially undegradable.” Combining microbial degradability with the other
main properties of ﬁbre, including viscosity and water solubility, Bozzetto et al. presented four
main groups based on the concepts of McRorie et al.  non-viscous, insoluble, non-fermentable
ﬁbre, e.g., bran, cellulose, hemicelluloses, lignin; non-viscous, soluble, fermentable ﬁbre, e.g., inulin,
dextrin, oligosaccharides, resistant starch; viscous, soluble, fermentable ﬁbre, e.g., pectin, β-glucan,
guar gum and glucomannan; viscous, soluble, non-fermentable ﬁbre, e.g., psyllium, methylcellulose.
Diﬀerent ﬁbres can exert diﬀerent eﬀects on the gut microbiota and hence have diﬀerent physiological
consequences for the host (Table 4)..

Overweight obese adults,
aBMI = 25 to 45 kg/m2.

Obese and overweight
pregnant women
(BMI = 30.7 kg/m2).

In humans, increased ﬁbre intake has been shown to improve certain metabolic parameters
associated with obesity and its co-morbidities, such as serum cholesterol levels, particularly in
conjunction with energy-controlled dietary regimes. For example, in overweight and obese adults
(BMI = 25 to 45), daily consumption of two portions of whole-grain ready-to-eat oat cereal (3 g/day
oat β-glucan) as part of a reduced energy dietary programme (~500 kcal/day deﬁcit) with regular
physical activity for 12 weeks proved more eﬀective than an energy-matched low ﬁbre diet for
reducing LDL cholesterol levels (P = 0.005), total cholesterol (P = 0.038), and non-HDL cholesterol
(P = 0.046)  While weight loss did not diﬀer between groups, there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in waist circumference as a result of eating the high ﬁbre diet, resulting in a loss of ~3.3 cm versus
only ~1.9 cm on the low ﬁbre diet (P = 0.012). Daily consumption of whole grain wheat bread by
Japanese subjects (BMI ≥ 23) for 12 weeks resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction in visceral fat area (−4 cm2)
which was not observed in subjects consuming reﬁned white bread  Similarly, whole grain wheat
consumption in conjunction with an energy restricted diet for 12 weeks by post-menopausal women
resulted in a greater reduction in body fat percentage (−3.0%) compared to consumption of reﬁned
wheat (−2.1%)  While serum total and LDL cholesterol increased by ~5% in the reﬁned wheat
group (P < 0.01), they did not change in the whole wheat group. Body weight decreased signiﬁcantly
for both groups but did not diﬀer between groups. Consumption of the recommended intake levels
of dietary ﬁbre and fat in obese and overweight (BMI = 30.7) pregnant women positively associated
with gut microbiota richness whereas high fat with low ﬁbre and low carbohydrate consumption
associated with signiﬁcantly lower gut microbiota richness  The richer gut microbiota correlated
with lower maternal inﬂammatory status. In another study involving overweight and obese pregnant
women, low ﬁbre intake was found to increase the genus Collinsella in the gut microbiota, which is
positively associated with circulating insulin  The low ﬁbre diet was also associated with a
gut microbiota favouring lactate fermentation, whereas the high ﬁbre diet was associated with SCFA
producing bacteria..

We know that diet can directly or indirectly inﬂuence the gut microbiota, and studies have
shown that this response can be rapid with changes observed within 1–3 days when
the modiﬁcations are “large”  or large
increases/decreases in ﬁbre  However, inter-individual variance is often much greater than
the variance introduced as a result of diet  Indeed, an individual’s baseline microbiota and health
status at the beginning of an intervention inﬂuences the extent of potential changes to the microbiota
and subsequently the host, and studies are showing that baseline microbiota consisting of responders
and non-responders to dietary interventions as well as eﬀectors of host responses (both of which may
be the same microorganism or a consortia of microorganisms), is generally linked to habitual dietary
trends  In this regard, an individual’s baseline microbiota harbors predictive potential with
regard to the eﬀect of dietary constituents on the host and this has been proven particularly in case the
of ﬁbre..

Salonen et al. reported that high microbiota diversity before dietary intervention with
resistant starch or non-starch polysaccharides associated to low dietary responsiveness of the microbiota.
Similarly, obese individuals with low microbial gene richness (low microbiota diversity) in their initial
faecal microbiota showed a greater microbiota response in terms of gene richness to a weight loss
diet compared to obese individuals represented by high microbial gene richness in their initial
microbiota  However, individuals with high gene richness showed a more marked improvement
in systemic inﬂammation and adipose tissue following the intervention suggesting that gene richness
could provide a predictive tool towards intervention eﬃcacy in relation to inﬂammatory variables.
Tap et al. also reported that low OTU microbiota richness was associated with a greater microbiota
change over time following a large increase in dietary ﬁbre in healthy adults for 6 weeks
whereas high OTU microbiota richness at baseline proved more stable upon high dietary ﬁbre
intervention and was associated with high proportions of Prevotella and Coprococcus species and a
higher Prevotella:Bacteroides ratio..

Indeed, a number of studies have reported associations between the abundances or lack of
abundance of speciﬁc species and the responsiveness of the microbiota and the host to dietary
intervention. Two overweight men who failed to ferment signiﬁcant amounts of resistant starch during
a 10-week intervention involving a total of 14 participants showed very low numbers of R-ruminococci
(relatives of Ruminococcus bromii) and were also non-methanogenic  The gut microbiota of
healthy subjects exhibiting improved glucose tolerance following three days of consumption of barley
kernel-based bread was enriched with Prevotella copri and after the intervention exhibited a higher
Prevotella:Bacteroides ratio compared to non-responders  However, in a follow-on study, the
researchers failed to stratify metabolic responders and non-responders based on Prevotella and Bacteroides.

abundance at baseline, but those with the highest Prevotella:Bacteroides ratio at the beginning of the study
displayed improved appetite sensations (less hunger and less desire to eat), reduced insulin responses
and reduced inﬂammatory markers compared to those with the lowest Prevotella:Bacteroides ratio
independent of the intervention suggesting that the higher Prevotella:Bacteroides ratio is favourable 
Oligotyping of 16s rRNA gene sequencing data, which permits resolution to species level and below,
enabled De Filippis et al. to identify distinctive correlation patterns between Prevotella and
Bacteroides oligotypes with dietary components and metabolome using faecal samples from omnivore
and non-omnivore subjects. The authors concluded that an indiscriminate association between a
whole genus and a speciﬁc dietary pattern may result in an oversimpliﬁed vision of correlations
between gut microbiota and diet, failing to take diversity within a genus or even a species into
account. Based on three independent cohorts of obese adults from Finland and
Britain involved in diﬀerent dietary interventions (ﬁbre/prebiotics/weight loss diet) to improve
metabolic health, Korpela et al. reported that baseline microbiota of non-responders (in terms
of gut microbiota changes) was characterised by average abundances of two Firmicutes species,
Eubacterium ruminantium and Clostridium felsineum, which were present at very low or very high
baseline abundances in responders. Furthermore, the presence of high levels of Clostridium sphenoides,
a common gut inhabitant and Firmicutes member, in the faecal microbiota of obese individuals before
dietary invention was associated with a decrease in cholesterol following intervention while obese
individuals with abnormally low abundance of this species did not beneﬁt in terms of cholesterol
levels. Interestingly, C. sphenoides abundance was not associated with absolute levels of cholesterol
and so may not be directly involved in cholesterol metabolism. Dietary ﬁbres were shown to promote
a select group of SCFA-producing bacteria in patients with type 2 diabetes  However, when
present at greater abundance and diversity, the authors reported an improvement in haemoglobin A1c
levels (glycosylated haemoglobin), partly due to increased glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 production,
and diminution of producers of metabolically detrimental compounds. In a randomized controlled
trial investigating the impact of increased intake of whole grains versus fruits and vegetables on the
gut microbiota in obese and overweight individuals, Kopf et al. reported that both treatments
induced individualised changes but that baseline levels of Clostridiales correlated with the magnitude
of change in lipopolysaccharide binding protein which is indicative of change in inﬂammatory state.
The inﬂuence of long-term dietary habits, in particular habitual ﬁbre intake, on gut microbiota
responsiveness to speciﬁc interventions is now becoming apparent. In a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, cross-over study, Healey et al. classiﬁed participants as either high or low
dietary ﬁbre consumers prior to three weeks of daily supplementation with an inulin-type fructan
prebiotic. The high dietary ﬁbre group revealed signiﬁcant increases in the relative abundances
of Biﬁdobacterium and Faecalibacterium along with signiﬁcant reductions in Coprococcus, Dorea and
Ruminococcus (Lachnospiraceae family). The gut microbiota of the low dietary ﬁbre group was less
responsive showing only an increase in Biﬁdobacterium. Based on an in vitro approach, Brahma et al. 
investigated the impact of donor dietary pattern on the fermentation properties of whole grains and
brans. Although the samples were taken from donors with similar energy intakes, they diﬀered in
terms of their intakes of several beneﬁcial nutrients. Samples from G1 subjects were representative
of the superior diet while samples from G2 subjects represented the inferior diet. The G1 microbiota
showed higher diversity and greater abundances of beneﬁcial microbes including Faecalibacterium
and was better equipped to metabolise the complex carbohydrates than the microbiota from G2
subjects, resulting in greater butyrate production, while the microbiota of G2 subjects produced more
acetate and propionate. In another study, Griﬃn et al. reported that Americans consuming
unrestricted diets had less diverse faecal microbiota (termed AMER) compared to the microbiota of
individuals consuming calorie-restricted plant-rich diets (termed CRON) and the AMER microbiota
lacked many bacterial lineages representative of CRON. Interestingly, transplanting AMER microbiota
into gnotobiotic mice and feeding them the CRON diet resulted in community conﬁgurations but
which were weaker than their CRON counterparts. Placing the AMER communities into a model.

These studies indicate that the microbiota has the potential to serve as an eﬀective biomarker to
predict responsiveness to speciﬁc dietary constituents with most if not all studies to date focusing
on ﬁbre/complex carbohydrates. The responsiveness of the gut microbiota (including responders
and eﬀectors of host responses) appears to be largely dependent on baseline microbiota diversity
and the speciﬁc microbes present or absent at baseline, the latter of which can have a profound
inﬂuence on the poorly diverse microbiota. Indeed, a highly diverse microbiota as a result of long-term,
healthy dietary practices involving adequate ﬁbre consumption remains stable in the face of ﬁbre
intervention, is rich in both responders and eﬀectors and is capable of reaping the metabolic beneﬁts
for the host. A gut microbiota with low diversity can beneﬁt from dietary intervention but only if
the speciﬁc responder and eﬀector microbes are actually present even at low abundances. Indeed,
Healey et al. showed that lower baseline biﬁdobacteria concentrations in subjects correlated with
a more pronounced biﬁdogenic response following prebiotic intervention. But poor dietary practices
and insuﬃcient dietary ﬁbre intake over a long-term period may actually result in the extinction of
beneﬁcial microbial lineages. In this case, dietary intervention with ﬁbre/prebiotics will fail to mitigate
a beneﬁcial outcome for the host and will presumably require the addition of speciﬁc taxa along with
their corresponding MACs in the form of synbiotics. However, despite the presence of resistant-starch
degrading microorganisms at low abundances in a subset of healthy young adults, the consumption
of resistant starch failed to increase their abundances  Such a phenomenon may be due to
the presence of antagonistic microorganisms to the resistant starch-degrading microbes which the
authors suggest could require targeted removal prior to intervention and could include the presence of
bacteriophages. Another form of dietary ﬁbre may be more suited to the particular microbiota in these
individuals, or the synbiotic approach may be required. Clearly, more studies are required to determine
gut microbiota responses to speciﬁc dietary components, i.e. targeted microbiota dietary intervention,
using a top-down approach of gut microbiota analysis from diversity levels to species and even strains,
to their gene content and functionality (metabolome, transcriptome, proteome), alongside host clinical
and genetic data, for input into machine learning algorithms designed to identify correlations, which
subsequently can be investigated for causal evidence, in order to accurately predict individualised
responses for maximized health (Figure 1). Indeed, machine learning models for predicting disease
from metagenomic datasets have already been developed  Thus, already the potential of the
gut microbiota as a biomarker of responsiveness to diet is tangible with opportunity for precision
microbiomics beginning to emerge. However, ‘causal evidence,’ is a critical factor in this workﬂow
and in Section 7 we provide guidelines for evaluating the scientiﬁc validity of evidence for providing
personalised microbiome-based dietary advice..

Figure 1. Diagrammatic representation of the sequence of events involved in accurately predicting
individualised responses to diet and options for converting a non-responder into a responder. (graphic
design for Figure 1 by Chor Hung Tsang, Mad Lemur Design Studio)..

Understanding how the microbiome responds to dietary constituents and the subsequent clinical
consequences for the host can be used in the design of precision-tailored diets which ensure maximal
nutritional/functional outcome for the host. However, to date only a handful of studies are available
to provide speciﬁc examples of precision microbiomics in nutrition. For example, composition and
functional alterations observed in the faecal metagenome of 145 European women with type 2 diabetes
were integrated into a mathematical model that enabled accurate prediction of type 2 diabetes based
on metagenomic proﬁles  The model was capable of identifying women with a diabetes-like
metabolism among a group with impaired glucose tolerance. However, the model failed to work on a
Chinese cohort revealing that discriminant metagenomic markers for type 2 diabetes diﬀer between
Chinese and European cohorts and should be age- and geography-speciﬁc. Another example is
the direct modulation of colonic microbiota with short-chain GOS to metabolize lactose in lactose
intolerant individuals  In this case, GOS failed to elicit a biﬁdogenic response in three out of
30 participants; however, an increase in biﬁdobacteria was associated with a decrease in pain and
cramping revealing its signiﬁcance in terms of symptoms. Cho et al. reported that high TMAO
producers amongst healthy male adults (≥ 20% increase in urinary TMAO in response to beef and eggs)
had signiﬁcantly more Firmicutes than Bacteroidetes and signiﬁcantly less microbiota diversity. While
the results are based on a short-term feeding study, longer-term feeding trials involving larger cohorts
coupled with microbiome data could enable accurate prediction of a high TMAO-producing microbiota
and subsequent strategies to alter it. Maintaining normal blood glucose levels is critical for the
prevention and control of metabolic syndrome but blood glucose levels are rising at an increased
rate as evidenced by the prevalence of prediabetes and impaired glucose tolerance in the general
population  Food choices that induce normal PPGRs are critical for controlling blood glucose levels
which are in essence controlled by dietary intake. However, until recently, no method existed to predict
PPGRs to food. Over the period of a week Zeevi et al. continuously monitored PPGRs in a cohort of
800 healthy and prediabetic individuals in Israel in response to identical meals and noted high variation.
They also measured physical activity, anthropometrics, blood parameters, gut microbiota composition
and function, as well as self-reported lifestyle behaviours. This multidimensional data was integrated
into a machine learning algorithm that was capable of accurately predicting personalised PPGRs and
was further validated in an independent cohort of 100 people. Interestingly, the highly variable PPGRs
in individuals associated with multiple person-speciﬁc microbiome and clinical factors, and tailored
diets based on predictions from a machine learning algorithm not only signiﬁcantly improved PPGRs
but also resulted in consistent alterations to the gut microbiota. This study was recently replicated
in a diﬀerent population (from the USA)  Based on a randomized cross-over trial involving 20
healthy subjects comparing the eﬀects of consuming either traditionally made sourdough leavened
whole-grain bread or industrially made white bread for one week each, Korem et al. found that
the glycemic response varied signiﬁcantly in response to the diﬀerent bread types and the type of bread
which induced the higher glycemic response in each person could be predicted using microbiome data
recorded just prior to the intervention. However, the exact mechanisms involved in the gut microbiota
and glycemic control remain to be elucidated..

saccharin for 5 days. Four of the seven individuals developed signiﬁcantly
poorer glycemic responses 5–7 days after NAS consumption. Interestingly, the microbiome of NAS
responders was distinct from NAS non-responders both before and after NAS consumption and the
microbiome of NAS non-responders featured minimal changes after the NAS intervention in contrast
to the pronounced compositional changes observed in NAS responders. Transferring day 7 stools
from NAS responders into normal germ-free mice induced signiﬁcant glucose intolerance compared to
mice transplanted with day 1 stool (before intervention) from the same NAS responders. Similarly,
day 7 stools from non-NAS responders induced normal glucose tolerance in mice. Furthermore,
germ-free mice transplanted with responders’ day 7 stool replicated some of the dysbiosis observed
in humans including a 20-fold increase in Bacteroides fragilis (order Bacteroides) and Weissella cibaria
(order Lactobacillales) and a 10-fold decrease in Candidatus Arthromitus (order Clostridiales) 
this over-representation of Bacteroides and underrepresentation of Clostridiales has been previously
associated with type 2 diabetes in humans  Thus, humans exhibit a personalised response to
NAS as a result of their microbiota composition and functionality which as the authors state strongly
suggests that other nutritional responses may be driven by “personalised functional diﬀerences in the
microbiome,” and the resulting opportunity for “personalised nutrition” may lead to “personalised
medical outcome.” Wang et al. recently described the bacteriostatic eﬀect of non-nutritive
sweeteners such as sucralose and stevia in mice..

side of the consumer may lead to unnecessary anxiety and the adaptation of dietary alterations as well
as intake of supplements which may do more harm than good or have no eﬀect at all. In addition,
we have already mentioned that whole genome sequencing is more informative than 16s rRNA gene
sequencing and this is something the consumer should be made aware of. For example, subgroups A,
B and C of F. prausnitzii are not discriminated from each other with 16S rRNA gene sequencing, but are
identiﬁed by metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing..

Consumer receives a grade of microbiome diversity, a comparison of all six major
bacterial communities and four major fungal communities to normal levels and a
strain by strain analysis of bacterial and fungal communities. Consumer receives
personalized dietary, lifestyle and supplemental recommendations..

Most commercially available 16S rRNA-based tests report on the relative abundance of F. prausnitzii
with no diﬀerentiation between F. prausnitzii subgroups A, B and C. This may lead to a misleading
interpretation of results as it has recently been found that diﬀerent subgroups produce butyrate at
diﬀerent levels and have been linked to diﬀerent disease states. For example, F. prausnitzii A produces
comparatively lower levels of butyrate and at high levels has been linked to colon cancer, appendicitis
and inﬂammatory conditions. Similarly, F. prausnitzii B also produces comparatively lower levels
of butyrate and at high levels has been linked to atopic dermatitis. Conversely, F. prausnitzii C has.

been shown to produce the highest level of butyrate of all the three subgroups and also produces
an anti-inﬂammatory protein called MAM. As a result, higher levels of F. prausnitzii C are thought
to be anti-inﬂammatory whereas low levels have been linked to Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis,
colon cancer, type II diabetes and chronic fatigue syndrome  This highlights the importance of
understanding the relative abundance of F. prausnitzii subgroups A, B, and C when drawing conclusions
about butyrate production and association with disease..

In relation to future testing, it is also important to consider the importance of host genetics/gene
expression, and considering how host genetics can impact the gut microbiome, and be used as proxy
for providing personalised dietary advice. For example, numerous genetic variations have been linked
to inﬂuencing a range of microbiota  However, other factors
such as diet may mask the eﬀect of genetics on the microbiome making it diﬃcult to predict changes in
phenotype without assessing an individual’s diet and including this in the interpretation. An example
whereby the assessment of host genetics in a commercial setting shows utility in providing personalised
microbiome-based recommendations is the association between FUT2 genotype/secretor status and
the expression of fucosyllated glycans on host cell surfaces and in secretions  Common FUT2
polymorphisms have been shown to inﬂuence the expression of fucosyltransferase2, an important
enzyme associated with the production of the dominant human milk oligosaccharide, 2’-fucosyllactose
 and other fucosyllated oligosaccharides. Lactating mothers who possess the inactive form of the
FUT2 polymorphism (approximately 20% of the Caucasian population) do not contain 2’-FL in their
breast milk. The absence of this gene (non-secretors) has been associated with delayed establishment
of Biﬁdobacterium spp. in the infant gut and increased risk of diabetes, alcohol-induced pancreatitis
and Crohns disease. Interestingly, non-secretor status has also been associated with resistance to
infectious disease such as norovirus and rotavirus infection and Helicobacter pylori colonization. As such,
genotyping for FUT2 secretor status allows for the identiﬁcation of infants and adults that can beneﬁt
from treatment with probiotics, prebiotics and other dietary components. Hence, future commercial
tests may oﬀer genetic testing as a way to help consumers, such as lactating mothers in the case of
FUT2, make better choices and optimise health outcomes..

The requirements for clinical utility, on the other hand, may be harder to fulﬁl as it has strict criteria
in the medical sense, demanding strong evidence that a given therapy ‘will lead to an improved health
outcome’  A caveat is that deﬁning an ‘improved health outcome’ due to microbiome-based
advice in a generally healthy person is very hard. Additionally, we are still unsure as to what
constitutes a ’healthy‘ microbiome, making it even harder to deﬁne an ‘improved health outcome’.
With regard to the ethical, legal and social implications, as with personalised nutrition, existing rules
must be developed for microbiome testing to ensure that the fundamental rights of the consumer are
protected and legislation should be put in place to identify direct-to-consumer tests which provide
non-scientiﬁcally validated information and advice  Ethical, legal and social implications of
the human microbiome have been discussed elsewhere  Therefore, as per the framework
proposed by Grimaldi et al.  a guideline that evaluates the scientiﬁc validity and evidence for
providing personalised microbiome-based dietary advice should focus primarily on the assessment of
scientiﬁc validity, an essential requirement before any nutrition advice should be given..

term, study design and quality, biological plausibility as well as examples of the type criteria that can
be used to assess gene/microbiome x diet interactions, please refer to Grimaldi et al. .

A relatively “simple” interaction with a single strain of bacteria, measuring the outcome (e.g., glucose
response) over a number of weeks can give more conﬁdence of “cause and eﬀect.”
A “complex” study may involve a prebiotic + several strains administered over several weeks or months
to assess the weight management response and is likely to have higher inter-individual variation and
therefore may be harder to establish cause/eﬀect: is it the overall diet, or the microbes, or both, having an
improved eﬀect?.

The type of interaction also determines the conﬁdence and the numbers of times a study should be repeated in
order to have a level of conﬁdence. However, there are pros and cons, and all types of studies are required.
A simple or “direct” interaction gives conﬁdence but the overall health beneﬁt (e.g., short-term glucose) will be
limited. A “complex” interaction is harder to give conﬁdence but comes with a better overall health beneﬁt
(e.g., long-term weight management).
Levels of Interaction
•
•.

A ‘direct’ interaction could be administration of a bacterial strain aﬀecting glucose response.
An intermediate interaction: speciﬁc prebiotics, ﬁbre etc. with any type of response thus harder to
determine if it is the nutrients or microbe growth, or both.
An indirect interaction is the case where a mechanistic interaction between the microbe variant and the
dietary component on a health biomarker, including disease, is aﬀected to some extent but is also
inﬂuenced by many other possibly unknown processes, and it may take years for symptoms to manifest.
This type of interaction may not be fully explained physiologically or may be only
demonstrated statistically..

(ii) Biological Mechanism and Plausibility
Considerations: Biological plausibility is a judgement based on the collected evidence of a microbe x diet
interaction on a phenotype. An example of high biological plausibility could be a single microbial strain
known to have beneﬁts regarding saturated fat metabolism that leads to lower triglycerides and cholesterol.
In this respect, Neville and colleagues recently proposed a variant of Koch’s postulates to provide a framework
to establish causation in the case of a single strain in human microbiota research  On the other hand, a
vegan diet high in ﬁbre aﬀects the gut ﬂora and over time the symptoms of metabolic syndrome improve—this
type of interaction may not be fully explained physiologically or may only be demonstrated statistically.
(iii) Probability Term
Considerations: Assessing the validity of a putative microbe × diet interaction is generally complex, and as
knowledge deepens, assessment of its validity will develop..

10. Plovier, H.; Everard, A.; Druart, C.; Depommier, C.; Van Hul, M.; Geurts, L.; Chilloux, J.; Ottman, N.; Duparc, T.;
Lichtenstein, L.; et al. A purified membrane protein from Akkermansia muciniphila or the pasteurised bacterium
improves metabolism in obese and diabetic mice. Nat. Med. 2017, 23, 107–113. [CrossRef] [PubMed].

41.
42. Nordqvist, M.; Jacobsson, B.; Brantsaeter, A.L.; Myrhe, R.; Nilsson, S.; Sengpiel, V. Timing of probiotic
milk consumption during pregnancy and eﬀects on the incidence of preeclampsia and preterm delivery: A
prospective observational cohort study in Norway. BMJ Open 2018, 8, e018021. [CrossRef]
Sohn, K.; Underwood, M.A. Prenatal and postnatal administration of prebiotics and probiotics. Semin. Fetal
Neonatal. Med. 2017, 22, 284–289. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Fernández, L.; Cárdenas, N.; Arroyo, R.; Manzano, S.; Jiménez, E.; Martín, V.; Rodríguez, J.M. Prevention of
infectious mastitis by oral administration of Lactobacillus salivarius PS2 during late pregnancy. Clin. Infect. Dis.
2016, 62, 568–573. [CrossRef] [PubMed].

47. Bertelsen, R.J.; Brantsæter, A.L.; Magnus, M.C.; Haugen, M.; Myhre, R.; Jacobsson, B.; Longnecker, M.P.;
Meltzer, H.M.; London, S.J. Probiotic milk consumption in pregnancy and infancy and subsequent childhood
allergic diseases. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2014, 133, 165–171.e8. [CrossRef]
Fitzstevens, J.L.; Smith, K.C.; Hagadorn, J.I.; Caimano, M.J.; Matson, A.P.; Brownell, E.A. Systematic review
of the human milk microbiota. Nutr. Clin. Prac. 2017, 32, 354–364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Simpson, M.R.; Avershina, E.; Storrø, O.; Johnsen, R.; Rudi, K.; Øien, T. Breastfeeding-associated microbiota
in human milk following supplementation with Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, Lactobacillus acidophilus La-5,
and Biﬁdobacterium animalis ssp. lactis Bb-12. J. Dairy Sci. 2018, 101, 889–899. [CrossRef].

51. Treven, P.; Mrak, V.; Matijaši´c, B.B.; Horvat, S.; Rogelj, I. Administration of probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus
GG and Lactobacillus gasseri K7 during pregnancy and lactation changes mouse mesenteric lymph nodes and
mammary gland microbiota. J. Dairy Sci. 2015, 98, 2114–2128. [CrossRef].

85. Collier, R. Squabble over risks of probiotic infant formula. CMAJ 2009, 181, E46–E47. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Hascoët, J.M.; Hubert, C.; Rochat, F.; Legagneur, H.; Gaga, S.; Emady-Azar, S.; Steenhout, P.G. Eﬀect of
formula composition on the development of infant gut microbiota. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2011, 52,
756–762. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Skórka, A.; Pie´scik-Lech, M.; Kołodziej, M.; Szajewska, H. To add or not to add probiotics in infant formulae?
Benef. Microbes 2017, 8, 717–725. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sung, V.; D’Amico, F.; Cabana, M.D.; Chau, K.; Koren, G.; Savino, F.; Szajewska, H.; Deshpande, G.;
Dupont, C.; Indrio, F.; et al. Lactobacillus reuteri to treat infant colic: A meta-analysis. Pediatrics 2018,
141, e20171811. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Skórka, A.; Pie´scik-Lech, M.; Kołodziej, M.; Szajewska, H. Infant formulae supplemented with prebiotics:
Are they better than unsupplemented formulae? An updated systematic review. Brit. J. Nutr. 2018, 119,
810–825. [CrossRef] [PubMed].

109. Britton, R.A.; Irwin, R.; Quach, D.; Schaefer, L.; Zhang, J.; Lee, T.; Parameswaran, N.; McCabe, L.R. Probiotic
L. reuteri treatment prevents bone loss in a menopausal ovariectomized mouse model. J. Cell Physiol. 2014,
229, 1822–1830. [CrossRef].

121. Gill, S.G.; Rutherford, K.J.; Cross, M.L.; Gopal, P.K. Enhancement of immunity in the elderly by dietary
intervention with the probiotic Biﬁdobacterium lactis HN019. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2001, 74, 833–839. [CrossRef].

122. Spaiser, S.J.; Culpepper, T.; Nieves, C., Jr.; Ukhanova, M.; Mai, V.; Percival, S.S.; Christman, M.C.;
Langkamp-Henken, B. Lactobacillus gasseri KS-13. Biﬁdobacterium biﬁdum G9-1, and Bifdobacterium longum
MM-2 ingestion induces a less inﬂammatory cytokine proﬁle and a potentially beneﬁcial shift in gut
J. Am.
microbiota in older adults: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover, study.
Coll. Nutr. 2015, 34, 459–469..

124. Lahtinen, S.J.; Forssten, S.; Aakko, J.; Granlund, L.; Rautonen, N.; Salminen, S.; Viitanen, M.; Ouwehand, A.C.
Probiotic cheese containing Lactobacillus rhamnosus HN001 and Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM
modiﬁed
subpopulations of fecal lactobacilli and Clostridium diﬃcile in the elderly. AGE 2012, 34, 133–143. [CrossRef]
[PubMed].

134. Costabile, A.; Bergillos-Meca, T.; Rasinkangas, P.; Korpela, K.; de Vos, W.; Gibson, G.R. Eﬀects of soluble
corn ﬁbre alone or in combination with Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and the pilus-deﬁcient derivative
GG-PB12 on faecal microbiota, metabolism and markers of immune function: A randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, crossover study in healthy elderly (Saimes Stidy). Front.
Immunol. 2017, 8, 1443.
[PubMed].

151. Gleeson, M.; Bishop, N.C.; Oliveira, M.; Tauler, P. Daily probiotic’s (Lactobacillus casei Shirota) reduction of.

152. Gleeson, M.; Bishop, N.C.; Struszczak, L. Eﬀects of Lactobacillus casei Shirota ingestion on common cold
infection and herpes virus antibodies in endurance athletes: A placebo-controlled, randomized trial. Eur. J.
Appl. Physiol. 2016, 166, 1555–1563. [CrossRef].

153. Komano, Y.; Shimada, K.; Naito, H.; Fukao, K.; Ishihara, Y.; Fujii, T.; Kokubo, T.; Daida, H. Eﬃcacy of
heat-treated Lactococcus lactis JCM 5805 on immunity and fatigue during consecutive high intensity exercise
in male athletes: A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blinded trial. J. Int. Sports Nutr. 2018, 15, 39.
[CrossRef].

154. Kokubo, T.; Komano, Y.; Tsuji, R.; Fujiwara, D.; Fujii, T.; Kanauchi, O. Plasmacytoid dendritic cell-stimulative
lactic acid bacteria, Lactococcus lactis strain Plasma, relieves exercise-induced fatigue and aids recovery via
immuno-modulatory action. Int. J. Sports Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2019. [CrossRef] [PubMed].

and Biﬁdobacterium animalis ssp. lactis BB-12.

156. West, N.P.; Pyne, D.B.; Cripps, A.W.; Hopkins, W.G.; Eskesen, D.C.; Jairath, A.; Christophersen, C.T.;
Conlon, M.A.; Fricker, P.A. Lactobacillus fermentum (PCC
) supplementation and gastrointestinal and
respiratory tract illness symptoms: A randomised control trial in athletes. Nutr. J. 2011, 10, 30. [CrossRef]
[PubMed].

160. Michalickova, D.; Minic, R.; Dikic, N.; Andjelkovic, M.; Kostic-Vucicevic, M.; Stojmenovic, T.; Nikolic, I.;
Djordjevic, B. Lactobacillus helveticus Lafti L10 supplementation reduced respiratory infection duration in a
cohort of elite athletes: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab.
2016, 41, 782–789. [CrossRef] [PubMed].

161. Michalickova, D.M.; Kostic-Vucicevic, M.M.; Vukasinovic-Vesic, M.D.; Stojmenovic, T.B.; Dikic, N.V.;
Andjelkovic, M.S.; Djordjevic, B.I.; Tanaskovic, B.P.; Minic, R.D. Lactobacillus helveticus Lafti L10 supplementation
modulates mucosal and humoral immunity in elite athletes: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2017, 31, 62–70. [CrossRef] [PubMed].

165. Huang, W.C.; Hsu, Y.J.; Li, H.; Kan, N.W.; Chen, Y.M.; Lin, J.S.; Hsu, T.K.; Tsai, T.Y.; Chiu, Y.S.; Huang, C.C.
Eﬀect of Lactobacillus plantarum TWK10 on improving endurance performance in humans. Chin. J. Physiol.
2018, 61, 163–170. [CrossRef] [PubMed].

Available online: http:// (accessed on 23 April 2019)..

191. Messaoudi, M.; Lalonde, R.; Violle, N.; Javelot, H.; Desor, D.; Nejdi, A.; Bisson, J.F.; Rougeot, C.; Pichelin, M.;
Cazaubiel, M.; et al. Assessment of psychotropic-like properties of a probiotic formulation (Lactobacillus
helveticus R0052 and Biﬁdobacterium longum R0175) in rats and human subjects. Br. J. Nutr. 2011, 105, 755–764.
[CrossRef].

193. Slykerman, R.F.; Hood, F.; Wickens, K.; Thompson, J.M.D.; Barthow, C.; Murphy, R.; Kang, J.; Rowden, J.;
Stone, P.; Crane, J. Eﬀect of Lactobacillus rhamnosus HN001 in pregnancy on postpartum symptoms of
depression and anxiety: A randomised double-blind placebo-controlled trial. EBioMedicine 2017, 24, 159–165.
[CrossRef].

194. Kato-Kataoka, A.; Nishida, K.; Takada, M.; Suda, K.; Kawai, M.; Shimizu, K.; Kushiro, A.; Hoshi, R.;
Watanabe, O.; Igarashi, T.; et al. Fermented milk containing Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota prevents the
onset of physical symptoms in medical students under academic examination stress. Benef. Microbes 2016, 7,
153–156. [CrossRef].

195. Takada, M.; Nishida, K.; Kataoka-Kato, A.; Gondo, Y.; Ishikawa, H.; Suda, K.; Kawai, M.; Hoshi, R.;
Watanabe, O.; Igarashi, T.; et al. Probiotic Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota relieves stress-associated symptoms
by modulating the gut–brain interaction in human and animal models. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 2016, 28,
1027–1036. [CrossRef].

200. WHO. World Health Organisation Fact Sheet on Obesity and Overweight. 2018. Available online: http:
// (accessed on 15 December 2019).
201. Minami, J.; Kondo, S.; Yanagisawa, N.; Odamaki, T.; Xiao, J.; Ade, F.; Nakajima, S.; Hamamoto, Y.; Saitoh, S.;
Shimoda, T. Oral administration of Biﬁdobacterium breve B-3 modiﬁes metabolic functions in adults with
obese tendencies in a randomized controlled trial. J. Nutr. Sci. 2015, 4, e17. [CrossRef] [PubMed].

219. Sazawal, S.; Dhingra, U.; Hiremath, G.; Sarkar, A.; Dhingra, P.; Dutta, A.; Menon, V.P.; Black, R.E. Eﬀects of
Biﬁdobacterium lactis HN019 and prebiotic oligosaccharide added to milk on iron status, anemia, and growth
among children 1 to 4 years old. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2010, 51, 341–346. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
220. Firmansyah, A.; Dwipoerwantoro, P.G.; Kadin, M.; Alatas, S.; Conus, N.; Lestarina, L.; Bouisset, F.; Steenhout, P.
Improved growth of toddlers fed a milk containing synbiotics. Asia Pac. J. Clin. Nutr. 2011, 20, 69–76.
221. Famouri, F.; Khoshdel, A.; Golshani, A.; Kheiri, S.; Saneian, H.; Kelishadi, R. Eﬀects of synbiotics on treatment
of children with failure to thrive: A triple blind placebo-controlled trial. J. Res. Med. Sci. Oﬀ. J. Isfahan Univ.
Med. Sci. 2014, 19, 1046-e50..

238. De Filippis, F.; Pellegrini, N.; Laghi, L.; Gobbetti, M.; Ercolini, D. Unusual sub-genus associations of faecal
Prevotella and Bacteroides with speciﬁc dietary patterns. Microbiome 2016, 4, 57. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
239. Lappi, J.; Salojärvi, J.; Kolehmainen, M.; Mykkänen, H.; Poutanen, K.; de Vos, W.M.; Salonen, A. Intake of
whole-grain and ﬁber-rich rye bread versus reﬁned wheat bread does not diﬀerentiate intestinal microbiota
composition in Finnish adults with metabolic syndrome. J. Nutr. 2013, 143, 648–655. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
240. Korpela, K.; Flint, H.J.; Johnstone, A.M.; Lappi, J.; Poutanen, K.; Dewulf, E.; Delzenne, E.; Delzenne, N.;
de Vos, W.M.; Salonen, A. Gut microbiota signatures predict host and microbiota responses to dietary
interventions in obese individuals. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e90702. [CrossRef] [PubMed].

259. Martín, R.; Miquel, S.; Benevides, L.; Bridonneau, C.; Robert, V.; Hudault, S.; Chain, F.; Berteau, O.;
Azevedo, V.; Chatel, J.M.; et al. Functional characterization of novel Faecalibacterium prausnitzii strains
isolated from healthy volunteers: a step forward in the use of F. prausnitzii as a next-generation probiotic.
Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1226.