87_PARAGRAPHS

Among  these  treatment  approaches,  probiotic  applications  are 
among the promising alternatives. In parallel with the introduc-
tion of probiotic use into the treatment modalities of UTIs, the 
microbiological structure of the urinary system has to be exam-
ined in more detail..

The  structure  of  microbiome  in  humans  has  been  a  topic  of 
immense  interest  in  recent  years. Various  studies  have  been 
performed  concerning  the  potential  roles  performed  by  compex 
microbial  structures  in  many  different  diseases.  Although  there 
are sufficient studies in the literature on microbiota of skin, mouth, 
vagina  and  intestines,  urinary  microbiota  (UM)  has  not  been 
investigated sufficiently. The reason for this was that until recently 
urine has been thought to be sterile in healthy individuals..

In studies on urinary microbiomes, the degree of concentration 
of  bacteria  habiting  in  urinary  systems  may  vary  according  to 
the sex, the method of urine collection, and the technique used 
to  study  UM.  In  general,  Lactobacillus  and  Streptococcus  are 
the  most  frequently  observed  species  and  many  studies  have 
been performed on them. Both microorganisms are lactic acid 
bacteria and have protective roles against pathogens colonized 
in the urogenital region.Other less frequently found bacterial 
strains are Alloscardovia, Burkholderia, Jonquetella, Klebsiella, 
Saccharofermentans,  Rhodanobacter  and  Veillonella.  It  has 
been reported that the urine collection method (midstream urine 
specimen,  first  voided  urine  specimen,  suprapubic  aspiration, 
transurethral  catheterization)  and  the  technique  to  identify  the 
UM  are  the  factors  that  could  lead  to  formation  of  different 
UM profiles. UM reported in healthy women is summarized in 
Table 1..

Thanks  to  16S  rRNA  sequencing  and  advanced  quantitative 
urine  culture  (EQUC)  techniques  developed  in  recent  years, 
aerobic and anaerobic bacteria colonized in normal flora in the 
urinary system have been detected.Bacterial isolation can 
be performed using EQUC method in 80% of the cases reported 
as  ‘no  growth’  in  standard  cultures  of  urine  samples.These 
bacteria  in  the  urinary  system  have  an  important  role  in  the 
health and balance of the urinary system..

Despite the presence of many species of bacteria in the urinary 
system,  it  is  of  interest  to  note  that  these  bacteria  do  not  lead 
to  a  chronic  UTI.  Suitable  nutrients  for  these  bacteria  may  be 
found in the environment and at the same time virulence factors 
that  may  cause  infection  in  most  organisms  may  be  detected. 
Stapleton explained this condition by suggesting that unchange-
able host factors play a role in the colonization of these organ-
isms. So,  in  a  sense,  hosts  are  choosing,  and  containing .

Table 2. Properties which should be possessed by a healthy probiotic .

They should be able to form clusters so as to produce normal-balanced flora .

microorganisms that will not harm them. Are the host and the 
bacteria  developing  all  together?  It  is  known  that  frequently 
recurrent UTIs develop in children of the women who experi-
ence  clinically  recurrent  episodes  of  UTIs. It  is  debatable 
whether  this  condition  arises  from  a  genetic  predisposition  or 
from a bacterial transfer which occurs in childhood or perhaps 
even at birth. .

Even  though  the  studies  were  limited  in  number,  significant 
differences  were  detected  between  male  and  female  UM.
This  difference  may  be  thought  to  be  related  to  differences  in 
anatomical structures, hormones and local defense mechanisms. 
This difference, however, is thought to play a role in susceptibil-
ity to certain diseases..

When vaginal flora is examined, it is known that microorgan-
isms of Lactobacillus spp. are dominant bacteria and form UM 
which demonstrates antimicrobial activity. Inadequate treatment 
of  genitourinary  infections  and  recurrence  lead  to  the  shift  of 
Lactobacillus  dominancy  in  the  normal  flora  to  the  coliform 
uropathogens..

There  is  a  clear,  and  established  relationship  between  vaginal 
flora  and  urogenital  infections.  Most  of  the  microorganisms 
in  the  vagina  stem  from  the  gastrointestinal  tract  apart  from 
the  personal  hygiene. In  a  healthy  vagina  dominancy  of 
Lactobacillus spp. is observed.Many scientific studies have 
shown  that  regulation  of  the  gastrointestinal  and  vaginal  flora 
with probiotic support may prevent genitourinary infections..

sule, tablet and powder forms). The bacteria may be present from 
the beginning in probiotic foods and supportive treatment agents, 
or may be added during the preparation of the product. Probiotics 
must  be  resistant  to  gastric  and  bile  acids  in  order  to  reach  the 
intestinal system and produce beneficial effects on the body..

Since  the  vaginal  microflora  is  intended  to  be  corrected,  pro-
biotics  that  prevent  and  treat  genitourinary  infections  should 
contain Lactobacillus species. The mechanism of action of pro-
biotics may involve acidification of the mucosal surface, inhibi-
tion of adhesion of pathogens, production of substances such as 
vitamins and immunomodulators, and synergistic activity with 
the host’s immune system..

Some  Lactobacillus  species  produce  hydrogen  peroxide  and 
biosurfactants that acidify the vaginal mucosa. These properties 
as  well  as  their  microbiomimetic  regulatory  effects  have  been 
demonstrated. All  these  properties  make  Lactobacillus  the 
preferred  probiotic  agent  for  the  prophylaxis  and  treatment  of 
urogynecologic infections..

Lactobacilli  can  prevent  the  adherence,  growth  and  coloniza-
tion of uropathogenic bacteria.It has been shown that healthy 
microbial  populations  of  Lactobacillus  species  have  a  strong 
inhibitory effect on E. coliInfections treated using antibiotics 
reduce drug abuse, leading to drug resistance and render the nat-
ural barrier of the urinary system vulnerable to infections..

Definition and characteristics of probiotics
The  term  probiotic  consists  of  the  words  “pro”  in  Latin  and 
“bios”  in  Greek  meaning  life.  The  concept  of  probiotics  was 
first  introduced  by  Elie  Metchnikoff,  the  Russian  Nobel  Prize 
winner  in  1907.  Metchnikoff  notes  that  the  microbes  in  the 
digestive  system  can  provide  positive  contributions,  espe-
cially  in  the  digestive  system  diseases. The  World  Health 
Organization has defined probiotics as “useful living microor-
ganisms that have a positive effect on the health and physiology 
of a person when taken in sufficient quantities.”The proper-
ties that a good probiotic should have are indicated in Table 2.
Probiotics can be found in foods and food supplements (in cap-.

Stewardson et al.compared ciprofloxacin and nitrofurantoin 
treatments in their study and found that the ciprofloxacin group 
had a significant effect on intestinal microbiome which mostly 
contain  healthy  Lactobacillus  spp.  In  the  group  of  nitrofuran-
toin, microbiota structure demonstrated relatively lower degree 
of variations..

Modena et al.investigated the effect of prophylactic antibiot-
ic use on UM. UMs of prophylactic trimethoprim-sulfamethox-
azole treatment, and healthy control group were compared and it 
was shown that the the number of pathogenic species in the anti-
biotic group significantly increased while microbial diversities .

decreased  relative  to  the  healthy  control  group These  findings 
support  the  necessity  of  demonstrating  sensitivity  in  selecting 
optimal  prophylactic  regimens  and  suggest  that  probiotic  pro-
phylaxis can be considered more effectively..

Although proposals for the use of only probiotics in the prophy-
laxis  of  recurrent  UTI  are  limited  it  is  thought  that  probiotics 
may be effective when they are part of an alternative therapy or 
multi-drug  treatment  and  prophylaxis  of  urogenital  infections.
Another important issue is that no serious adverse effects is 
seen in any of the probiotic applications..

UTI and probiotics
Most of the recurrent UTIs in women occur in the presence of 
uropathogenic E. coli. Antibiotics used in the treatment of these 
infections reduce the number of lactobacilli in the urinary sys-
tem and may cause antibiotic resistance in the following period 
and  destroy  the  existing  natural  barrier  of  the  urinary  system 
formed against infections..

In their study, Zucotti et al.stated that probiotics could be a 
good alternative to antibiotic therapy because of their ability to 
bind  to  uroepithelial  cells  and  inhibit  pathogenic  growth,  and 
biosurfactant  secretion.  The  same  investigators  have  empha-
sized that oral Lactobacillus therapy can colonize these bacteria 
in the urinary tract following intestinal colonization. .

The  idea  of  oral  probiotic  application  is  based  on  the  knowl-
edge  that  pathogens  that  cause  most  of  the  urogenital  infec-
tions progress from the rectum to the perineal region and then 
to  the  vagina  and  the  mesentery.  If  pathogenic  bacteria  can 
achieve this, then why Lactobacillus, an important component 
of  vaginal  colonization,  can  not  do  it?  Clinical  studies  have 
demonstrated  that  oral  administration  of  Lactobacillus  can 
demonstrate  its  effects  after  reaching  the  vagina. In  these 
studies, probiotic capsules containing L. rhamnosus and L. fer-
mentes were administered orally at a dose of 109 CFU once or 
twice daily. In these studies the authors reported that probiotic 
capsules administered orally may regulate the vaginal flora and 
may be effective on recurrent UTIs. It has also been emphasized 
that oral probiotics may be more comfortable for patients than 
for  vaginal  administration,  and  that  patient  compliance  with 
treatment may be better..

Prevention of UTIs in women
A  meta-analysis  on  the  application  of  Lactobacillus  was  pub-
lished.A  total  of  294  patients  from  5  published  studies  were 
evaluated  and  as  a  result  vaginally  administered  Lactobacillus .

probiotic chain was shown to be safe and effective in preventing 
recurrent UTIs in adult women (Table 3). In the analysis, it was 
stated that the ovules containing combinations of L.crispatus CTV-
05 or  L. rhamnosus GR-1 and  L.fermentum B-54  were the most 
effective methods and that higher number of randomized clinical 
trials were needed for the evaluation of oral probiotic treatments..

Abad  and  Safdar  reviewed  25  clinical  trials  in  a  systematic 
review  they  published  in  2009  and  investigated  the  presence  of 
Lactobacillus-containing probiotics in the prevention and treatment 
of urogenital infections. In different studies where vaginal and oral 
administrations have been applied, it has been found that applica-
tion times extended from 4 days to 19 months and the amount of 
Lactobacillus in the preparations used was not less than 106/mL. .

Side  effects  due  to  Lactobacillus  prophylaxis  were  investi-
gated  in  7  of  the  studied  studies,  and  any  side  effects  were 
not observed in 4 of them and in the remaining 3 studies mild 
headache,  and  increased  appetite  or  fever  was  observed.  In 
conclusion, they found evidence that Lactobacillus species (par-
ticularly L. rhamnosus GR-1 and L. reuteri) may be useful in the 
prevention and treatment of recurrent UTIs. It is also stated that 
additional studies are needed to clearly define the optimal dose 
and duration of application..

Recently,  two  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,  randomized 
clinical  trials  investigating  the  effects  of  probiotics  in  inhibit-
ing  recurrent  UTIs  have  been  published. In  a  double-blind 
study, Beerepoot et al.demonstrated that supplementation with 
480  mg  L.  rhamnosus  GR-1  and  L.  reuteri  RC-14  significantly 
though incompletely decreased the mean number of recurrences 
in  patients  with  uncomplicated  UTI  relative  to  the  control.  In 
addition,  antibiotic  resistance  was  significantly  reduced  in  the 
probiotic  group  compared  to  the  control  group.  In  a  recent 
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2 study, Stapleton et al.
investigated 100 premenopausal women who had undergone cys-
titis at least once within the last 12 months . These patients were 
divided into two groups and for 10 weeks following an episode 
of cystitis placebo treatment was given to 48 patients, and other 
48  patients  received  intravaginal  probiotics  (Lactin-V)  contain-
ing  Lactobacillus  crispatus    The  results  of  this 
study showed that the incidence of recurrent UTIs in patients who 
received  intravaginal  Lactobacillus  treatment  decreased  signifi-
cantly compared to the placebo group. .

Relationship between premenopausal UTI and probiotics
Most  studies  on  probiotic  application  in  recurrent  UTI  in  the 
literature  have  been  performed  in  premenopausal  women.  In 
fact, the risk factors in premenopausal women are different from 
those of the postmenopausal women. These risk factors include 
recent  sexual  intercourse,  use  of  spiral  or  condom  containing 
spermicide, history of UTI, and recent antibiotic use. In a mul-.

Recurrence rate was 73% in 
25 patients who received once 
weekly doses of vaginal ovules 
containing L. rhamnosus 
GR-1 ve L.reuteri B-54; 
79% decrease was observed 
in recurrence rates in 30 
patients who received once 
weekly doses of intravaginal 
lactobacillus growth factor .

Vaginal ovule containing 
L. crispatus, and placebo 
were applied for 10 weeks in 
patients who did not receive 
UTI treatment within the 
previous 12, and a significant 
decrease in disease was 
observed in the probiotic group .

Dose, and route of 
administration .

Number of patients, and 
structure of the study .

Vaginal, >1.6x109 
CFU/L. rhamnosus 
GR-1 and 
L.fermentum B-54.

Vajinal, 1x109 
CFU/L. rhamnosus 
GR-1 ve 
L.fermentum B-54.

55 pre-menopausal women; 
randomized double-blind 
study .

Vaginal, 108 CFUs/
mL L. crispatus .

324 pre-menopausal 
patients, randomized 
placebo-controlled 
double-blind study .

Though  sufficient  number  of  studies  on  the  efficacy  of  probiotic 
applications containing especially Lactobacillus spp. in UTIs devel-
oped as a result of changes in the balance of vaginal flora in sexu-
ally active women have been reported in the literature, studies with 
postmenopausal women have not seem to be at an adequate level..

In  UTI  use  of  mono-,  and  combination  treatments  with  probiot-
ics  has  been  published  (Table  3).  These  combinations  have  been 
applied with different microorganism strains and different routes of 
administration (vaginal, oral) and effective results have been report-
ed.administered 
a combination of 120 mg cranberry, 109/CFU L. rhamnosus SGL 06 
and 75 mg vitamin C for 3 months in female patients with recurrent 
UTI. In the 3rd and 6th month controls, the response rates to treat-
ment were 72.2% and 61.1%, respectively. Researchers noted that 
the combination was well tolerated and effective. .

In  conclusion,  recurrent  UTIs  impair  quality  of  life  signifi-
cantly  and  antibiotic  prophylaxis  may  increase  resistance  to 
uropathogens while being effective during treatment. Although 
there have been few studies on the prevention of recurrent UTIs 
without use of antibiotics within the past years, interest in this 
area has increased over the years..

The  reason  for  this  interest  is  the  desire  of  the  patients  to  be 
treated  with  natural  products  while  the  physicians  are  con-
cerned about the development of resistance against antibiotics. 
Evidence of probiotic application in UTIs is not yet sufficient to 
recommend use of probiotics. Today, however, there is no doubt 
that UM has changed during UTI and antibiotherapy. Even the 
question of whether UM analysis should be done before treat-
ment of the patients has been revived..

Most  of  the  published  studies  on  the  use  of  probiotics  in  the 
treatment,  and  prophylaxis  of  UTIs  have  low  scientific  value 
and  the  treatment  regimens  applied  are  heterogeneous,  time 
consuming.  However,  probiotics  are  preferred  by  the  patients 
because they are safe and more tolerable than antibiotics..

In clinical practice, an integrality should be established between 
scientific  evidence,  clinical  experience  and  patients’  desire. 
Because of the lack of established treatment recommendations 
for recurrent UTIs up to now and/or  because the proposed treat-
ments differ in success rates across patients, probiotics seem to 
be  further  considered  as  a  part  of  multimodal  therapies  to  be 
applied in multifactorial diseases such as recurrent UTIs..

Peer-review:  This  manuscript  was  prepared  by  the  invitation  of  the 
Editorial  Board  and  its  scientific  evaluation  was  carried  out  by  the 
Editorial Board..

Author Contributions: Concept - T.A.; Design - T.A., T.K.; Supervision - 
T.A.; Resources - T.A.; Materials - T.A.; Data Collection and/or Processing 
- T.A., T.K.; Analysis and/or Interpretation - T.A., T.K.; Literature Search 
- T.A., T.K.; Writing Manuscript - T.A.; Critical Review - T.A., T.K. .

Financial  Disclosure:  The  authors  declared  that  this  study  has 
received no financial support..

1.  Foxman  B,  Brown  P.  Epidemiology  of  urinary  tract  infections: 
transmission and risk factors, incidence, and costs. Infect Dis Clin 
North Am 2003;17:227-41. [CrossRef].

2.  Foxman B, Gillespie B, Koopman J, Zhang L, Palin K, Tallman P, 
et al. Risk factors for second urinary tract infection among college 
women. Am J Epidemiol 2000;151:1194-205. [CrossRef].

3.  Albert X, Huertas I, Pereiro II. Antibiotics for preventing recurrent 
urinary tract infection in nonpregnant women. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2004;CD001209..

4.  Schito GC, Naber KG, Botto H, Palou J, Mazzei T, Gualco L, et 
al. The ARESC study: an international survey on the antimicrobial 
resistance  of  pathogens  involved  in  uncomplicated  urinary  tract 
infections. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2009;34:407-13. [CrossRef]
5.  Moreira JR, Siqueira IC, Alcantara AP, Guereiro De Moura CG, 
De Carvalho WA, Riley L. Antimicrobial resistance of Escherichia .

coli  strains  causing  communityacquired  urinary  tract  infections 
among insured and uninsured populations in a large urban center. J 
Chemother 2006;18:255-60. [CrossRef].

6.  Zhanel GG, Hisanaga TL, Laing NM, DeCorby MR, Nichol KA, 
Palatnik LP, et al. Antibiotic resistance in outpatient urinary iso-
lates: final results from the North American Urinary Tract Infec-
tion Collaborative Alliance (NAUTICA). Int J Antimicrob Agents 
2005;26:380-8. [CrossRef].

7.  Alos  JI,  Serrano  MG,  Gomez-Garces  JL,  Perianes  J.  Antibiotic 
resistance  of  Escherichia  coli  from  community-acquired  urinary 
tract infections in relation to demographic and clinical data. Clin 
Microbiol Infect 2005;11:199-203. [CrossRef].

8.  Karlowsky  JA,  Kelly  LJ,  Thornsberry  C,  Jones  ME,  Sahm  DF. 
Trends  in  antimicrobial  resistance  among  urinary  tract  infection 
isolates  of  Escherichia  coli  from  female  outpatients  in  the  United 
States. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2002;46:2540-5. [CrossRef].

9.  Cho  I,  Blaser  MJ.  The  human  microbiome:  at  the  interface  of 
health and disease. Nat Rev Genet 2012;13:260-70. [CrossRef]
10.  Shreiner AB, Kao JY, Young VB. The gut microbiome in health and 
in disease. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2015;31:69-75. [CrossRef]
11.  Wolfe AJ, Toh E, Shibata N, Rong R, Kenton K, Fitzgerald M, et 
al. Evidence of uncultivated bacteria in the adult female bladder. J 
Clin Microbiol 2012;50:1376-83. [CrossRef].

12.  Siddiqui  H,  Nederbragt  AJ,  Lagesen  K,  Jeansson  SL,  Jakobsen 
KS. Assessing  diversity  of  the  female  urine  microbiota  by  high 
throughput sequencing of 16S rDNA amplicons. BMC Microbiol 
2011;11:244. [CrossRef].

13.  Pearce  MM,  Hilt  EE,  Rosenfeld AB,  Zilliox  MJ, Thomas-White 
K,  Fok  C,  et  al.  The  female  urinary  microbiome:  a  comparison 
of women with and without urgency urinary incontinence. MBio 
2014;5:e01283-14..

14.  Thomas-White  KJ,  Hilt  EE,  Fok  C,  Pearce  MM,  Mueller  ER, 
Kliethermes S, et al. Incontinence medication response relates to the fe-
male urinary microbiota. Int Urogynecol J 2016;27:723-30. [CrossRef]
15.  Hilt  EE,  McKinley  K,  Pearce  MM,  Rosenfeld  AB,  Zilliox  MJ, 
Mueller ER, et al. Urine is not sterile: use of enhanced urine cul-
ture techniques to detect resident bacterial flora in the adult female 
bladder. J Clin Microbiol 2014;52:871-6. [CrossRef].

16.  Stapleton AE, Au-Yeung M, Hooton TM, Fredricks DN, Roberts 
PL, Czaja CA, et al. Randomized, placebo controlled Phase 2 tri-
al  of  a  Lactobacillus  crispatus  probiotic  given  intravaginally  for 
the prevention of recurrent urinary tract infection. Clin Infect Dis 
2011;52:1212-7. [CrossRef].

17.  Kuitunen  M,  Kukkonen  K,  Juntunen-Backman  K,  Korpela  R, 
Poussa T, Tuure T et al. Probiotics prevent IgE-associated allergy 
until age 5 years in cesarean-delivered children but not in the total 
cohort. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;123:335-41. [CrossRef]
18.  Fouts DE, Pieper R, Szpakowski S, Pohl H, Knoblach S, Suh MJ, 
et  al.  Integrated  next-generation  sequencing  of  16S  rDNA  and 
metaproteomics  differentiate  the  healthy  urine  microbiome  from 
asymptomatic  bacteriuria  in  neuropathic  bladder  associated  with 
spinal cord injury. J Transl Med 2012;10:174. [CrossRef].

19.  Lewis  DA,  Brown  R,  Williams  J,  White  P,  Jacobson  SK,  Mar-
chesi JR, et al. The human urinary microbiome; bacterial DNA in 
voided urine of asymptomatic adults. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 
2013;3:41. [CrossRef].

20.  Pometto A, Shetty K, Paliyath G, Levin RE. Food biotechnology. .

21.  Aragón  IM,  Herrera-Imbroda  B,  Queipo-Ortuño  MI,  Castillo  E, 
Del  Moral  JS,  Gómez-Millán  J,  et  al. The  Urinary Tract  Micro-
biome  in  Health  and  Disease.  Eur  Urol  Focus  2018;4:128-38. 
[CrossRef].

22.  Barrons  R,  Tassone  D.  Use  of  Lactobacillus  probiotics  for  bac-
terial  genitourinary  infections  in  women:  a  review.  Clin  Ther 
2008;30:453-68. [CrossRef].

23.  Bolton M, Van Der Straten A, Cohen CR. Probiotics: potential to 
prevent  HIV  and  sexually  transmitted  infections  in  women.  Sex 
Transm Infect 2008;35:214-25. [CrossRef].

24.  Donders  GG.  Microscopy  of  the  bacterial  flora  on  fresh  vaginal 
smears. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 1999;7:177-9. [CrossRef]
25.  Reid G, Dols J, Miller W. Targeting the vaginal microbiota with 
probiotics as a means to counteract infections. Curr Opin Clin Nutr 
Metab Care 2009;12:583-7. [CrossRef].

26.  Preidis  Geoffrey A,  Versalovic  J.  Targeting  the  human  Microbi-
ome with antibiotics, probiotics, and prebiotics: gastroenterology 
enters the metagenomics era. Gastroenterology 2009;136:2015-31. 
[CrossRef].

36.  Hiergeist A, Gessner A. Clinical implications of the microbiome in 
urinary tract diseases. Curr Opin Urol 2017;27:93-8. [CrossRef]
37.  Zuccotti  GV,  Meneghin  F,  Raimondi  C,  Dilillo  D,  Agostoni  C, 
Riva E, et al. Probiotics in clinical practise: an overview. J Int Med 
Res 2008;36(Suppl 1):1A-53A..

38.  Reid  G,  Beuerman  D,  Heinemann  C,  Bruce AW.  Probiotic  Lac-
tobacillus dose required to restore and maintain a normal vaginal 
flora. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 2001;32:37-41. [CrossRef]
39.  Reid G, Bruce AW, Fraser N, Heinemann C, Owen J, Henning B. 
Oral probiotics can resolve urogenital infections. FEMS Immunol 
Med Microbiol 2001;30:49-52. [CrossRef].

40.  Reid  G,  Charbonneau  D,  Erb  J,  Kochanowski  B,  Beuerman  D, 
Poehner R, Bruce AW. Oral use of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GR-1 
and  L.  fermentum  RC-14  significantly  alters  vaginal  flora:  ran-
domized,  placebo-controlled  trial  in  64  healthy  women.  FEMS 
Immunol Med Microbiol 2003;35:131-4. [CrossRef].

41.  Morelli L, Zonenenschain D, Del Piano M, Cognein P. Utilization 
of the intestinal tract as a delivery system for urogenital probiotics. 
J Clin Gastroenterol 2004;38:S107-10..

27.  Iannitti T, Palmieri B. Therapeutical use of probiotic formulations 
in clinical practice. Clinical Nutrition 2010;29:701-25. [CrossRef]
28.  Kaur IP, Chopra K, Saini A. Probiotics: potential pharmaceutical .

42.  Grin  PM,  Kowalewska  PM,  Alhazzan  W,  Fox-Robichaud  AE. 
Lactobacillus  for  preventing  recurrent  urinary  tract  infections  in 
women: meta-analysis. Can J Urol 2013;20:6607-14..

29.  Hanson  L,  VandeVusse  L,  Jerm´e  M, Abad  CL,  Safdar  N.  Pro-
biotics  for  Treatment  and  Prevention  of  Urogenital  Infections 
in  Women:  A  Systematic  Review.  J  Midwifery  Womens  Health 
2016;61:339-55. [CrossRef].

30.  Beerepoot MAJ, Geerlings SE, van Haarst EP, Mensing van Charan-
te N, ter Riet G. Nonantibiotic Prophylaxis for Recurrent Urinary 
Tract Infections: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Ran-
domized Controlled Trials. J Urol 2013;190:1981-9. [CrossRef]
31.  Ghartey JP, Smith BC, Chen Z, Buckley N, Lo Y, Ratner AJ, et al. 
Lactobacillus crispatus dominant vaginal microbiome is associat-
ed with inhibitory activity of female genital tract secretions against 
Escherichia coli. PLoS One 2014;9:e96659. .

32.  Falagas ME, Betsi GI, Tokas T. Probiotics for prevention of recur-
rent  urinary  tract  infections  in  women:  a  review  of  the  evidence 
from  microbiological  and  clinical  studies.  Drugs  2006;66:1253-
61. [CrossRef].

33.  Costantini  E,  Giannitsas  K,  Illiano  E.  The  role  of  nonantibiotic 
treatment  of  community-acquired  urinary  tract  infections.  Curr 
Opin Urol 2017;27:120-6. [CrossRef].

34.  Stewardson AJ, Gaïa N, François P, Malhotra-Kumar S, Delémont 
C, Martinez de Tejada B, et al. Collateral damage from oral cipro-
floxacin versus nitrofurantoin in outpatients with urinary tract in-
fections: a culture-free analysis of gut microbiota. Clin Microbiol 
Infect 2015;21:344.e1-11..

35.  Modena  BD,  Milam  R,  Harrison  F,  Cheeseman  JA,  Abecassis 
MM, Friedewald JJ, et al. Changes in urinary microbiome popula-
tions  correlate  in  kidney  transplants  with  interstitial  fibrosis  and .

43.  Abad  CL,  Safdar  N.  The  role  of  Lactobacillus  probiotics  in  the 
treatment or prevention of urogenital infections: A systematic re-
view. J Chemother 2009;21:243-52. [CrossRef].

44.  Beerepoot  MA,  ter  Riet  G,  Nys  S,  van  der Wal WM,  de  Borgie 
CA, de Reijke TM, et al. Lactobacilli versus antibiotics to prevent 
urinary tract infections: a randomized, double-blind, noninferiority 
trial in postmenopausal women. Arch Intern Med 2012;172:704-
12. [CrossRef].

45.    Scholes  D,  Hooton  TM,  Roberts  PL,  Stapleton  AE,  Gupta  K, 
Stamm  WE.  Risk  factors  for  recurrent  urinary  tract  infection  in 
young women. J Infect Dis 2000;182:1177-82. [CrossRef].

46.    Gupta  K,  Stapleton AE,  Hooton  TM,  Roberts  PL,  Fennell  CL, 
Stamm  WE.  Inverse  association  of  H2O2-producing  lactobacilli 
and vaginal Escherichia coli colonization in women with recurrent 
urinary tract infections. J Infect Dis 1998;178:446-50. [CrossRef]
47.  Reid G, Bruce AW, Taylor M. Influence of three-day antimicrobial 
therapy  and  lactobacillus  vaginal  suppositories  on  recurrence  of 
urinary tract infections. Clin Ther 1992;14:11-6..

48.  Reid  G,  Bruce  AW,  Taylor  M.  Instillation  of  Lactobacillus  and 
stimulation of indigenous organisms to prevent recurrence of uri-
nary tract infections. Microecol Ther 1995;23:32-45..

49.  Kontiokari T, Laitinen J, Jarvi L, Pokka T, Sundqvist K, Uhari M. 
Dietary factors protecting women from urinary tract infection. Am 
J Clin Nutr 2003;77:600-4. [CrossRef].

50.  Montorsi F, Gandaglia G, Salonia A. Effectiveness of a combina-
tion of cranberries, Lactobacillus rhamnosus, and vitamin C for the 
management of recurrent urinary tract infections in women: results 
of a pilot study. Eur Urol 2016;70:912-5. [CrossRef]