44_PARAGRAPHS

The microbiome: eﬀect compared with eﬀect
modiﬁcation
The body of research on the human microbiome, and par-
ticularly the gut microbiome, is growing rapidly. The effects
of the gut microbiome extend far beyond the gastrointestinal
system, influencing immunity  and
brain function  in short, everything we require to
function as human beings..

Study design.
Table 2 summarizes key features of the design of dietary
intervention studies. The most common approach for in-
vestigating personalized response to diet is a controlled
intervention cohort study. For example, 51 out of the 55
studies conducted between 2000 and 2019, were intervention
cohort studies in living organisms (humans or rodents).
Three studies examined the effect of supplementing nutrients
to in vitro cultures from human stool  Just 2 were
observational, cross-sectional studies .

Figure 1 Numerous research ﬁelds are integrated and contribute
to our overall understanding and study of personalized health and
nutrition..

Precision nutrition is a rapidly developing field of research
incorporating a multitude of disciplines including nutrition,
microbiology, genetics, epigenetics, metabolomics, and oth-
ers .

Subfields of precision nutrition include nutrigenetics
and nutrigenomics, which study interactions between the
human genome and diet  These fields examine how
genetics, epigenetics, and the microbiome influence dietary
response and requirements whilst also being influenced
by dietary intake. The result of these interactions is a
complex network of metabolic and physiologic processes that
define the metabolic phenotype of an individual. Metabolic
phenotype can be measured by traditional indicators such
as weight, blood pressure, or fasting glucose or by more
complex data such as metabolomics, transcriptomics, and
proteomics. In combination, these data contribute to our
understanding of the processes occurring inside the body
as a result of the interconnected influences of diet, the
microbiome, genetics, and epigenetics. The potential to
predict an individual’s response to diet and to optimize an
individual’s metabolism using diet depends on identifying
the biological or physiological features that are relevant to
dietary response, determining how these features interact.

“response,” even studies implementing the same dietary
intervention (Table 1, Responder Criteria). However, there
are some general trends. For instance, all 12 studies using
an energy-restricted or high-energy diet analyzed differences
in weight gain/loss or changes in body composition (39–
50). Changes in circulating lipids  insulin
sensitivity/resistance  or inflammatory markers
were also common measured responses. Fiber-
intervention studies measure many of these
same variables but also often include SCFAs (9, 20–24,
25, 26, 30, 34), which are one of the major metabolites
produced by the gut microbiota during fermentation of
dietary carbohydrates and have many biological effects 
Changes within the gut microbial community as well as
metabolites and clinical markers produced and/or influenced
by the gut microbiota have also been used as indicators
of responsiveness (9, 13, 15, 17, 23, 24, 27–29, 31–34, 42,
48,
59, 62, 68). Thresholds used to define response or
differentiate individuals vary based on the variables being
Ideally, such
measured and are generally not standardized.
thresholds should be based on clinically relevant effects
or standardized health recommendations. If there are no
standardized recommendations or limits for the variables
being measured, it is important that studies clarify the clinical
relevance of their findings..

Methods for analyzing precision nutrition data
Laboratory analytical methods for gut microbiome data.
The microbiome can be measured using a variety of methods
(Table 3, Microbiome Measures), which are subject to
their own inherent limitations and biases  making
comparisons between studies using different methods diffi-
cult. Additionally, differences in sample collection, sample
preparation, PCR amplification, and bioinformatics pipeline
contribute additional variability, further complicating
to make broad
comparisons. Thus,
conclusions regarding the effect of the microbiota when
looking at findings in the literature. A brief overview of
the different methods and their protocols, advantages, and
disadvantages is provided here but, for further discussion,
readers are directed to additional reviews of this topic (74,
76)..

restriction and excess; and bioactives, fermented products,
and other dietary components. Many studies investigating
the effect of the microbiota on metabolic response to
diet have employed interventions involving dietary fiber
or other nondigestible dietary components 
as these compounds cannot be hydrolyzed by endogenous
human enzymes and are thus able to pass through
the upper gastrointestinal tract largely intact and enter the
large intestine where they can be fermented by the gut
microbiota. These compounds serve as a primary source of
fuel for this community  As the microbiota has also
been shown to influence energy harvest and predisposition
to obesity  a number of studies have also looked at
the effect of the gut microbiota on response to an energy-
restricted or high-energy diet  The effect of the gut
microbiome on metabolic response to macronutrient dis-
tribution  dietary patterns
 polyphenols and other plant-based compounds
 as
well as antibiotics and certain drugs has also been
investigated. Dietary interventions may be targeted, such as
supplementing an isolated nutrient in the participants’ diets
(e.g. fiber), or broad, such as altering the participants’ entire
dietary pattern (e.g. low fermentable oligosaccharides, disac-
charides, monosaccharides and polyols [FODMAP] diet)..

Gut microbiome and precision nutrition: Part I 7.

and house-keeping function in bacteria  Protocols such
as multilocus sequence typing (MLST) may also rely
on multiple house-keeping genes. This technique, however,
requires either a completely sequenced bacterial genome or
one that contains all the loci necessary for MLST (typically
7 loci) and, due to the variability of house-keeping genes,
does not provide sufficient discrimination except between
closely related bacteria .

Before any of these techniques are implemented, sam-
ples are first subjected to PCR, amplifying the genetic
in the sample. Sequence identification of PCR
material
amplicons of the 16S rRNA gene can only be used to
provide relative abundance of the gut microbial taxa. In
contrast, qPCR, or real-time PCR, measures amplification of
DNA in real-time using fluorescence of hybridized probes
specific for individual taxa, allowing for more accurate
quantification .

Once amplified, DNA can be used for a variety of methods
to compare and identify samples. Denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis and terminal restriction fragment length
polymorphism (T-RFLP) are fingerprinting techniques that
separate mixtures of 16S rRNA gene amplicons into bands of
various sizes based on enzymatic cut sites. However, although
these methods can be useful for checking the stability of
dominant members and clustering communities according
to these dominant members, they do not provide direct
phylogenetic identification and it is difficult to relate banding
patterns to changes in particular species  When
coupled with 16S rRNA sequencing, these methods can
provide more specific composition information. DNA mi-
croarrays, which utilize oligonucleotide probes immobilized
onto a glass slide to hybridize to complementary nucleotide
sequences, provide phylogenetic identification. However,
this method is subject
to potential cross-hybridization
(hybridization of multiple probes to single targets), can have
difficulty detecting low abundance taxa, and is limited to
identifying species that will hybridize to the probes provided
on the slide .

Normalization and transformation methods for gut
microbiome data.
Microbiota sequence count data often require normalization
and/or rarefaction to avoid biases due to uneven sequencing
depth and to allow the comparison of data from
different samples  The most common normalization
technique, total sum scaling (TSS), divides the number of
reads assigned to a certain taxa by the total number of reads
in the sample  This method, although straightforward,
has been shown to bias estimates in some data sets due
to differential amplification efficiency of certain taxa 
Cumulative-sum scaling (CSS) divides raw counts by the
cumulative sum of counts up to a percentile determined by
the nature of the data set  Data can also be rarefied, rather
than scaled. Rarefying draws randomly without replacement
from each sample such that all samples then have the
same total count and excludes samples with total counts
below that defined threshold  Rarefaction curves can
provide guidance to determine proper rarefaction depth for
a specific data set but, depending on how much data is
removed, rarefying can reduce statistical power and has
been denounced by some  The choice of normalization
method depends on data characteristics such as library
size .

Microbiota enterotype (Prevotella to Bacteroides.

Salonen et al. 
and Walker
et al. .

Tuohy et al. 
Kolida et al. 
de Preter et al. .

Microbiota composition (qPCR of 7 bacteria).

1AdaBoost, adaptive boosting; ADD, average Danish diet; AIC, Akaike information criterion; ANOSIM, analysis of similarities; BIC, Bayesian information criterion; Bif, Bifidobacteria;
BN, Bayesian network; CAP, canonical analysis of principal coordinates; CASINO, community and systems-level interactive optimization; DBA, decisive bacterial abundance; DGGE,
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis; FISH, ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization; HCA, hierarchical clustering analysis; HITChip, human intestinal tract chip; iAUC, incremental AUC;
JSD, Jensen-Shannon divergence; LASSO, least absolute shrinkage and selection operator; LDA, linear discriminant analysis; LEfSe, linear discriminant analysis eﬀect size; LMM,
linear mixed models; MG-RAST, metagenomic rapid annotations using subsystems technology; MRBP, blocked multi-response permutation procedure; MRPP, multi-response
permutation procedure; NMS, nonmetric multidimensional scaling ordination; NND, new Nordic diet; OPLS-DA, orthogonal projections to latent structures discriminant analysis;
P/B ratio, Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio; PAM, partitioning around medoids; PCA, principal components analysis; PCoA, principal coordinates analysis; PDP, partial dependence plot;
PERMANOVA, permutational analysis of variance; PICRUSt, phylogenetic investigation of communities by reconstruction of unobserved states; PLSDA, partial least squares
discriminant analysis; RDA, redundancy analysis; ROC, receiver operating characteristic; T-RFLP, terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism..

using an arcsine square root transformation  which
is the transformation used by MaAsLin (multivariate as-
sociation with linear models)  a bioinformatics tool
used by researchers to discover associations between clinical
variables and the microbiome. For a more comprehensive.

Microbiota composition and function (16S, qPCR,
metagenomics, RNA-Seq) of stool as well as
lumen and mucosa samples.

Association analysis methods.
Association methods define and compare groups, find
correlations, and determine significant differences (Table
4). These methods differ in the number of groups being
compared, the nature of the data being compared (i.e.
categorical or continuous), and assumptions regarding the
distribution of the data (i.e. normal, nonnormal). The
methods shown below provide a rough introduction to
statistical approaches that are currently in use for these
types of analyses. Detailed information on commonly used
methods can be found in Van Belle et al.  Additional
references are given as needed..

Comparing 2 groups in association studies.
The t-test compares the mean responses of 2 groups to
determine whether they are significantly different. This
would be appropriate when comparing the abundance of
a single taxa between 2 groups at 1 time point. The t-test
may be conducted on paired data (e.g. comparing means
within the same individuals at different time points as in a
cross-over design) or unpaired data (e.g. comparing means
between unrelated individuals as in a parallel design). This
approach assumes that the data are normally distributed
(parametric) or the sample size is “large.” The t-test does
not account for potential confounding factors. The Mann–
Whitney U (also called the Wilcoxon rank-sum) test is
a nonparametric (does not assume the data are normally
distributed) alternative to the t-test. When the spread
and shape of the 2 distributions are the same, the Mann–
Whitney U test compares the median of 2 unpaired samples
(e.g. between groups). The Wilcoxon signed-rank test is used
to determine if the median of the differences between paired
responses is different from zero (e.g. within individuals). For
example, comparing the abundance of a single taxa within
1 individual before and after a dietary intervention. When
the dependent variable is categorical (e.g. abundance above
or below the median), a G-test or chi-square (or Fisher’s
exact test) test may be used when the data are unpaired or
a McNemar’s test may be used if the data are paired. Both.

Arumugam et al. first introduced the concept of
“enterotypes”, clustering individuals into 3 groups according
to their dominant genera: Bacteroides, Prevotella, and Ru-
minococcus. Although enterotypes have since been shown
to exist more on a continuous scale  the Bacteroides
and Prevotella enterotypes have been consistently replicated
across cohorts  The identification of the Ruminococcus
enterotype is more dependent on clustering and modeling
approaches  Roager
et al. 
and Chen et al.  highlight measures such as enterotype or
the Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio. Diversity and richness are
also common measures used to highlight differences between
groups .

In addition to these broad groupings, individuals can
also be classified according to the presence or absence of
specific taxa, taxonomic abundance, richness and diver-
sity, functional genes, or other features. For example, the
abundance of individual taxa, such as Bifidobacterium, has
been shown to be a significant indicator of response to
fiber-based interventions and combinations
of taxa, Moryella, Acetanaerobacterium, Fastidiosipila, and
Streptobacillus, were found to be associated with a higher
production of the phytoestrogen metabolite enterolactone
 Kovatcheva-Datchary
et al.  and Chumpitazi et al.
also highlight differences in the abundance of functional
genes, attempting to get closer to the activity of bacteria.
These levels of microbiome classification may be combined
in order to give a comprehensive picture of the interactions
that contribute to response to diet..

and there is currently no consensus on how to decide this
value .

time points or when the number of groups exceeds 2, as
in Bouhnik et al.  which tested 7 different types of
nondigestible carbohydrates to determine their effect on
the gut microbiota. Kruskal–Wallis is the nonparametric
equivalent of the 1-way ANOVA and has been used to
develop tools such as linear discriminant analysis effect size
(LEfSe)  PERMANOVA is a nonparametric alternative
to multivariate ANOVA (MANOVA)  ANOSIM is
also used to compare multiple independent variables with a
multivariate dependent variable  It differs from PER-
MANOVA in that, instead of using the raw data, ANOSIM
ranks values based on their similarity/dissimilarity. This
minimizes the effects of outliers in the data, making it useful.

Gut microbiome and precision nutrition: Part I 17.

Clustering methods such as k-means clustering  par-
titioning around medoids (PAM)  Calinski–Harabasz
pseudo-F-statistic 
are used to dis-
cover groups within the data. k-means clustering attempts to
identify groups within the data by minimizing the distances
between points within each group (defined by the mean
of points within that group), and maximizing the distances
between groups. Venkataraman et al. used k-means
clustering to identify responsive and nonresponsive groups
based on butyrate production before and during the fiber
intervention. PAM is similar but, instead of taking the mean
of groups, chooses one datapoint to serve as the “center”
or medoid around which groups are formed. This method
was used in Wu et al. to identify enterotype clusters.
Both k-means clustering and PAM require the input of a
desired or suspected number of clusters and use Euclidian
distances. In contrast, both the Calinski–Harabasz pseudo-
F and Rousseeuw Silhouette indices are used to determine
the optimal number of clusters in a data set. HCA starts with
the correlation matrix and sequentially groups variables and
clusters, progressing from smaller, less inclusive groups, to
larger, more inclusive groups until one large cluster is formed.
This produces a dendrogram, showing the relation among
the clusters, allowing the researcher to observe the clustering
structure. However, in all of these clustering methods, groups
are statistically defined and may not indicate any biological
significance..

Pearson (based on the raw data) and Spearman (based
on ranks and, therefore, robust) correlation coefficients both
evaluate the relation between 2 continuous variables. How-
ever, whereas the Pearson correlation assumes a linear rela-
tion and normally distributed variables, the Spearman corre-
lation only assumes a monotonic relation (i.e. continually in-
creasing or decreasing) and makes no assumption about dis-
tributions. Thus, the Spearman correlation may be preferred
for highly skewed outcomes. This may be useful when con-
sidering microbiota abundance data, which is often highly
skewed with an excess of zeros  Biweight midcorre-
lation also measures the correlation of pairs of univariate
measurements but differs from both Pearson and Spearman
correlations as it is based on the median of the data, rather
than the mean, making it less sensitive to outliers .

Combining continuous and categorical variables in asso-
ciation studies.
Some methods may be used when the independent/
explanatory variables are a mix of both continuous and
categorical variables. These include ANCOVA, regression,
linear mixed models
regression to
dependent observations), canonical analysis of principal
coordinates (CAP) 
and random forests  ANCOVA compares the means of
a continuous dependent variable across levels of a categorical
independent variable (i.e. experimental groups) whilst also
controlling for the effects of other continuous variables (i.e.
covariates such as BMI, cholesterol, etc.). This could be used
to compare weight loss between groups on different diets,
whilst controlling for baseline measures such as BMI or
habitual fiber intake..

CAP utilizes a distance matrix and PCoA to determine
significant differences in principal components between
groups (i.e. categorical) as well as along a scale (i.e. contin-
uous). This can be used to quantify the distance between
the microbiota composition of different groups or individuals
over time, as in Zhang et al.  RDA extends multiple linear
regression by summarizing the linear relations between mul-
tiple dependent variables and multiple independent variables
in a matrix, which is then incorporated into PCA. RDA could
be used to examine the effect of different components of a
dietary intervention on multiple taxa to identify microbes
that are influenced by the diet, as done in Chen et al. 
Random forests is a machine-learning technique that uses
multiple decision trees, each built on random samples of the
data, to estimate the mean value of the dependent variable.
Each node in the decision tree represents a condition or
question about the sample or datapoint (e.g. did butyrate
increase or decrease in this sample?). The branches extending
from these nodes represent the relevant data pertaining to
the sample (e.g. yes/no, degree of change, etc.), eventually
leading to a conclusion regarding an outcome of interest
(e.g. responder/nonresponder). This method may be used
for classification (i.e. categorical outcomes) or regression
(i.e. continuous outcomes). For instance, Venkataraman et
al. used random forest regression to identify asso-
ciations between operational taxonomic unit abundances
and butyrate concentration, both before and during fiber
supplementation. Classification could be used to identify taxa
associated with either an increase or decrease in butyrate
concentration (categorical)..

analysis (OPLS-DA) are extensions of LDA. Both PLS-
DA and OPLS-DA may utilize weaker sources of variation
to separate groups but OPLS-DA also eliminates variation
that is unrelated to the separation of groups, creating a less
complex model  Although these are powerful methods,
they may force group separation at the expense of model.

validity, relying on weaker sources of variability in the data
set .

Step 2: validation.
In the validation step, the model is used to predict response
in the individuals used to fit the model (internal cross-
validation) or in new individuals (external validation) to
evaluate model performance  When utilizing internal
cross-validation, a common practice is “leave-one-out” in
which the model is fitted in an iterative process that utilizes
all data minus one to predict the response of the left-out data
point. The advantage of internal cross-validation is that the
data are already available and new data does not have to be
collected or obtained from another study. However, this test
is not as rigorous as testing in an independent cohort and the
model may not perform as well when applied to new data
sets. Testing a model in an independent cohort allows for
a better assessment of the applicability of the model in the
broad population..

mechanistic hypotheses  For example, transplantation
of isolated strains or communities of bacteria into germ-free
mice is one of the best models in use to demonstrate causal
relations between the gut microbiota and host metabolism
 This approach has been used in studies such as
Kovatcheva-Datchary et al.  which used stool samples
from individuals who did (responders) or did not (nonre-
sponders) exhibit improved glucose tolerance in response to
barley kernel supplementation to colonize germ-free mice.
Colonized mice recapitulated the response phenotype of
their respective donors, suggesting that the gut microbiome
played a causal role in the improvement in glucose tolerance.
This study also investigated the effect of monocolonization
by taxa, overrepresented in responders (Prevotella copri) and
nonresponders (Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron), and found
differential gene expression in the colonized mice that
altered hepatic glycogen storage, allowing for a mechanistic
understanding of observed differences in glucose metabolism
phenotypes..

Both animal and in vitro models have limitations when
it comes to drawing conclusions about human health and
nutrition as they lack the specific interactions present in
the human supraorganism. For further information, readers
are directed to additional reviews of animal and
in vitro models for human nutrition research.
However, these techniques used in combination with human
clinical trials will be crucial in the development of precision
nutrition research and our understanding of the interaction
between the host and the gut microbiota..

Differences in methodology.
As discussed above, studies investigating the contribution of
the gut microbiota to personalized health and metabolism
differ in what features of the microbiome are highlighted.
Two meta-analyses have attempted to integrate results from
multiple studies that have investigated the effects of the
gut microbiota on human health using different laboratory
methods and analysis strategies  Such work is
important to improve our understanding of how the results
of these studies complement each other and how the features
or methods used affect the results..

10. Sonnenburg ED, Zheng H, Joglekar P, Higginbottom SK, Firbank
SJ, Bolam DN, Sonnenburg JL. Specificity of polysaccharide use
in intestinal Bacteroides species determines diet-induced microbiota
alterations. Cell 2010;1411241–52..

11. Possemiers S, Rabot S, Espín JC, Bruneau A, Philippe C,
González-Sarrías A, Heyerick A, Tomás-Barberán FA, De
Keukeleire D, Verstraete W. Eubacterium limosum activates
isoxanthohumol from hops (Humulus lupulus L.) into the potent
phytoestrogen 8-prenylnaringenin in vitro and in rat intestine. J Nutr
2008;1381310–6..

48. Dao MC, Everard A, Aron-Wisnewsky J, Sokolovska N, Prifti E,
Verger EO, Kayser BD, Levenez F, Chilloux J, Hoyles L, et al.
Akkermansia muciniphila and improved metabolic health during a
dietary intervention in obesity: relationship with gut microbiome
richness and ecology. Gut 2016;65426–36..

51. Zou H., Wang D., Ren H., Fang C., Shi Z., Zhang P., Chen P., Wang J.,
Yang H., Cai K., et al. Nonobese subjects of Bacteroides and Prevotella
enterotypes responded differentially to calorie restriction intervention,
bioRxiv. 2019; 514596.

Gut microbiome and precision nutrition: Part I 23.

65. Senan S, Prajapati JB, Joshi CG, Sreeja V, Gohel MK, Trivedi S, Patel
RM, Pandya H, Singh US, Phatak A, et al. Geriatric respondents and
non-respondents to probiotic intervention can be differentiated by
inherent gut microbiome composition. Front Microbiol 2015;6:944.
66. Veiga P, Gallini CA, Beal C, Michaud M, Delaney ML, DuBois
A, Khlebnikov A, van Hylckama Vlieg JE, Punit S, Glickman JN.
Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis fermented milk product reduces
inflammation by altering a niche for colitogenic microbes. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 2010;10718132–7..

67. Mobini R, Tremaroli V, Ståhlman M, Karlsson F, Levin M, Ljungberg
M, Sohlin M, Bertéus Forslund H, Perkins R, Bäckhed F. Metabolic
effects of Lactobacillus reuteri DSM 17938 in people with type
2 diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab
2017;19579–89.