56_PARAGRAPHS

23 Department of Neonatology La Paz University Hospital, 28046 Madrid, Spain;.

Abstract: Pregnancy induces a number of immunological, hormonal, and metabolic changes that are
necessary for the mother to adapt her body to this new physiological situation. The microbiome of
the mother, the placenta and the fetus inﬂuence the fetus growth and undoubtedly plays a major
role in the adequate development of the newborn infant. Hence, the microbiome modulates the
inﬂammatory mechanisms related to physiological and pathological processes that are involved in
the perinatal progress through diﬀerent mechanisms. The present review summarizes the actual
knowledge related to physiological changes in the microbiota occurring in the mother, the fetus,
and the child, both during neonatal period and beyond. In addition, we approach some speciﬁc
pathological situations during the perinatal periods, as well as the inﬂuence of the type of delivery
and feeding..

Pregnancy induces a number of immunological, hormonal, and metabolic changes necessary for the
normal development of the fetus and for a timely onset of labor and successful delivery  It has been
described that maternal microbiota inﬂuences prenatal and early postnatal oﬀspring development and
health outcomes  There is a lack of consensus about the real nature of microbiome changes during
pregnancy, since discrepant and unpredictable ﬁndings have been described  These diﬀerences
could be explained by the diﬀerence in gestational age, genetics, ethnicity, and environmental factors
surrounding the participants included in those studies. Indeed, it has been described that maternal
microbiota composition during pregnancy is related to maternal diet  and by pre-pregnancy
weight and weight gain over the course of pregnancy  Koren et al. described that the amounts
of anti-inﬂammatory butyrate-producer commensal bacteria present in non-pregnant women gut
microbiota decrease while bacteria associated with pro-inﬂammatory responses, such as Proteobacteria,
increase during pregnancy  Similarly, bacterial diversity tends to be reduced in vaginal microbiota
during pregnancy while increasing vaginal Streptococci along with several speciﬁc Lactobacilli strains,
which are thought to prevent the growth of pathogenic bacteria, as well as to help human digestion,
and inﬂuence host innate and adaptive immune system responses  Furthermore, the classical
paradigm of the fetus as a sterile organism is under discussion, since a characteristic microbiome has
been identiﬁed in the placenta, the amniotic ﬂuid, and the fetus in healthy pregnancies  However,
this issue is under discussion. Perez-Muñoz et al. argued the weakness of evidence supporting the.

“in utero colonization hypothesis”, due to methodological diﬃculties, and concluded that current
scientiﬁc evidence does not support the existence of microbiome within the healthy fetal milieu 
Gut microbiota inﬂuences the immune function  and thus may modulate the response
through diﬀerent microbial-derived metabolites, especially short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) such as
butyrate, acetate, or propionate  These are the key drivers of T-cell subset proliferation and
activity  Gastrointestinal bacteria generate SCFAs after fermentation of complex dietary
carbohydrates. These metabolites may have an inﬂuence both in the mother and in the newborn by
down-regulation of pro-inﬂammatory responses at the speciﬁc sites where the allergens are located,
which typically precedes asthma in childhood  In addition, the may also inﬂuence bone marrow
stimulation by reprogramming the immunological tone of the mammalian ecosystem .

During pregnancy, the female body undergoes hormonal, metabolic, and immunological changes
to preserve the health of both the mother and the oﬀspring  These changes alter the mother
microbiota at diﬀerent sites such as the gut, the vagina, and the oral cavity. However, published data
are not consistent, since a number of factors might inﬂuence the microbiota proﬁle such as the diet,
antibiotic, or other supplement intakes, as well as the methodology of research. Therefore, a holistic
approach is needed to understand all this information..

The gut microbiota shifts substantially throughout the progression of the pregnancy and is
characterized by reduced individual richness (alpha-diversity) (Figure 1), and increased inter-subject
beta-diversity  These changes are not related to, although they may be inﬂuenced by, the diet,
antibiotic treatments, gestational diabetes, or pre-pregnancy body mass index, but are vital for a healthy
pregnancy  It has been suggested that other factors, such as the state of the host immune and
endocrine systems, may actively contribute to the observed modiﬁcations  During the ﬁrst
trimester, the gut microbiota pattern is similar in many aspects to that of healthy non-pregnant women,
showing a predominance of Firmicutes, mainly Clostridiales, over Bacteroidetes  Then, maternal
gut microbiota declines in butyrate-producing bacteria, while Biﬁdobacteria, Proteobacteria, and lactic
acid-producing bacteria increase from the ﬁrst to the third trimester, when the microbiota resembles
an unpredictably disease-associated dysbiosis that diﬀers greatly among normal pregnancies 
Changes in the host immune system of the gastrointestinal mucosa together with metabolic hormonal
changes may trigger a low-grade pro-inﬂammatory status that could facilitate an increased diﬀusion
of glucose from the gut epithelium towards the lumen, and thus may induce weight gain while
modifying the gut microbiota during normal pregnancies  Indeed, changes in the microbiota
may contribute to the evolution of this process. In addition, disruption of maternal gut microbiota
during the third trimester may aﬀect host metabolism in order to provide an energy supply for
the fetus  Moreover, it has been reported that the gut microbiota during pregnancy is a critical.

determinant of oﬀspring health  and that potentially determines the development of atopy and
autoimmune phenotypes in the oﬀspring  However, the relationship among the immune system,
the gut microbiota, and metabolism in pregnancy is unclear, and more research is needed to stablish
ﬁnal conclusions..

The composition of the vaginal microbiota is dynamic, corresponding with hormonal ﬂuctuations
throughout the woman’s reproductive life, and also during pregnancy. A number of protective lactic
acid-producing Lactobacillus species dominates the healthy vaginal microbiota in most reproductive-age
women. These bacteria protect against vaginal dysbiosis and inhibit opportunistic infections through
the direct and indirect protective eﬀects of Lactobacillus products, such as lactic acid and bacteriocin
among others. Lactic acid decreases vaginal pH and thus inhibits a broad range of infections 
can directly aﬀect host immune functions, by inhibiting pro-inﬂammatory responses, and also help
to release mediators from vaginal epithelial cells and stimulate antiviral response  In addition,
Lactobacillus-derived bacteriocins may inhibit pathogen growth  The degree of protection varies
according to the predominant Lactobacillus specie  Vaginal dysbiosis is comprised of a wide array
of strict and facultative anaerobes that correlate to increased risk of infection, diseases, and poor
reproductive and obstetric outcomes .

During normal pregnancy, the composition of the vaginal microbiota changes as a function of
gestational age, with an increase in the relative abundance for Lactobacillus spp., such as L. crispatus,
L. jensenii, L. gasserii, L. vaginalis, and a decrease in anaerobe or strict anaerobe microbial species, such as
Atopobium, Prevotella, Sneathia, Gardenerella, Ruminococcaceae, Parvimonas, Mobilincus  Those authors
reported for the ﬁrst time, that the composition and stability of the vaginal microbiota of normal
pregnant women is diﬀerent from that of non-pregnant women. In fact, low risk pregnant women have
more stable vaginal ﬂora throughout the pregnancy than non-pregnant women. Normal changes in
the vaginal ﬂora during pregnancy are transitions to another Lactobacillus community, and this stability
would protect against ascending infections through the genital tract. In addition, they reported that
Lactobacillus communities vary depending on the ethnicity of the women conﬁrmed
that vaginal microbiota richness and diversity remained stable during the ﬁrst and second trimesters
of gestation in pregnancies ended at term, whereas in woman with preterm born, the richness and
diversity decreased early in pregnancy. Therefore, early pregnancy may be an important environment,
modulating preterm delivery. A meta-analysis reported signiﬁcant diversity diﬀerences in vaginal
microbiomes in the ﬁrst trimester, between women with term and preterm outcomes, indicating
a potential diagnostic utility of microbiome-related biomarkers  In addition, the increase of
pathogens in the vagina is associated with complications of pregnancy, in particular with an increased
risk of preterm birth and spontaneous abortion .

Nutrients 2020, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 21  determines the development of atopy and autoimmune phenotypes in the offspring     Nutrients 2020, 12, 133.

An increase in the microbial load in the oral cavity during pregnancy has been described. It has
been hypothesized that pregnancy creates a nutrient environment that is more favorable to some
sensitive strains  The presence of pathogenic bacteria Porphyromonas gingivalis and Aggregatibacter
actinomycotemcomitans in gingival sulcus were signiﬁcantly higher during early and middle stages
of pregnancy compared to non-pregnant women  The oral alpha-diversity index was higher
in the third trimester compared to non-pregnant women, and this may be related to the increase of
progesterone and estradiol.  One underlying mechanism refers to estrogens being substituted
for vitamin K in bacterial anaerobic respiration, especially for black-pigmented Bacteroides such as
Bacteroides melaninogenicus and Prevotella intermedia .

The classical paradigm of fetal environment as a sterile harbor has traditionally explained that
microbes, and thus microbiome, are acquired both vertically (from the mother) and horizontally (from
other humans or from the environment) during and after birth. However, recent data have questioned
the traditional accepted dogma of human microbiome acquisition, proposing that neither the placenta,
the amniotic ﬂuid, nor the fetus are sterile..

Several ﬁndings using both culture and metagenomic techniques have suggested the presence of
a low biomass microbial community in the healthy placenta  The abundance of diﬀerent species
of Lactobacillus, Propionibacterium, and members of the Enterobacteriaceae family have been detected
by DNA-based studies in placental tissue of pregnant women at term and it is under debate 
In addition, other authors have conﬁrmed a distinct microbiota in both the placenta and amniotic
ﬂuid of healthy women at the time of elective C-section, characterized by low richness, low diversity,
and the predominance of Proteobacteria  Similarly, other studies have found microbes in amniotic
ﬂuid and umbilical cord blood in healthy asymptomatic women, as well as in those with pregnancy
complications .

However, it is unclear where the fetal microbiota comes from, and when is the ﬁrst fetal exposition.
The presence of a diﬀerent placental microbiota compared to the vagina raises the possibility that
the infant may be ﬁrst seeded in utero from other sources. Microorganism may pass through the
placenta and colonize the fetus ascending from the vagina, from the oral cavity, from the urinary track,
or from the intestinal lumen of the mother. These microorganisms may reach via the hematogenous
route, the placenta, and then be transmitted to the fetus  Some of those oral bacteria, such as
Fusobacterium nucleatum, may be transmitted hematogenously during placentation by binding to
the vascular endothelium, and modifying its permeability and the translation of other common
commensals, such as Escherichia coli  In addition, Franasiak et al. observed that Flavobacterium and
Lactobacillus represent the majority of endometrial bacterium at the time of embryo transfer, supporting
a new hypothesis of the endometrial environment participation .

Diﬀerent studies have also detected microbiome in the ﬁrst baby fecal sample, the meconium,
supporting the in utero exposure to bacteria  Staphylococcus has been reported as the most
prevalent bacteria in meconium samples, followed by Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus,
and Biﬁdobacterium even in infants born by C-section  Modiﬁcation in placental microbiota may
be related with adverse pregnancy outcomes of pregnancy or symptoms of clinical infection .

in oral and vaginal samples, they did not ﬁnd a characteristic placental microbiota, evidencing a sterile
environment  Therefore, conclusions remain unachievable, and more studies are needed in
this area..

There is great controversy in the scientiﬁc community about the relationship of the meconium
and infant gut microbiota proﬁle, and the type of delivery. Microbiome studies on early infancy
have demonstrated a signiﬁcant inﬂuence of the mode of delivery on the microbiome composition,
suggesting the likely association of the infant gut bacteria with maternal vaginal or skin microbiome
habitats. A systematic review has concluded that the diversity and colonization pattern of the gut
microbiota were signiﬁcantly associated to the mode of delivery during the ﬁrst three months of
life, which is a critical period of life for immunological programming  However, the observed
diﬀerences disappear after 6 months of infants’ life, when solid foods are included in the diet 
It is important to clarify the inﬂuence of factors commonly accompanying C-section delivery on the
microbiome, due to the potential inﬂuence on some non-communicable diseases, such as neonatal skin
infection, asthma, allergies, obesity, inﬂammatory bowel disease, or type I diabetes mellitus .

Vaginally delivered newborn have shown bacterial communities resembling their own mother’s
vaginal microbiota, dominated by Lactobacillus, Prevotella, or Sneathia spp. In contrast, C-section-born
infants harbored bacterial communities similar to those found on the skin surface niche, dominated by
Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium, and Propionibacterium spp. or potentially pathogenic microbial
communities such as Klebsiella, Enterococcus, and Clostridium  Other authors have reported that
Biﬁdobacterium seem to be signiﬁcantly more frequent in vaginally compared
with C-section delivered infants, which were mainly colonized by Clostridium and Lactobacillus 
The high abundance of Biﬁdobacterium species in infants is considered to promote the maturation
of the healthy immune system, while high presence of Clostridium diﬃcile is considered as one of
the major intra-hospital hazards of severe gastrointestinal infections during infancy  Another
study proposed that some species of Propionibacterium were most abundant in the meconium of
vaginally delivered Chinese infants, whereas C-section-born children had higher amounts of Bacillus
licheniformis.
In addition, the diversity of the microbial composition was also higher in vaginal
than in C-section deliveries, although no correlation with maternal microbiome was reported 
Similarly, a metagenomic analysis found a Propionibacterium-enriched meconium in vaginal delivery
mothers, which may proceed from skin or fecal microbes through direct contact during the natural
labor  Therefore, there is no consensus regarding the most colonizable pattern of the ﬁrst
microbiota community in the ﬁrst three days after birth, although it seems that according to phyla,
vaginal deliveries are more related to Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes, while C-section deliveries are
more related to Firmicutes. In addition, it has also been suggested that the transfer of maternal vaginal
microbes plays a minor role in seeding infant stool microbiota since the overlap of maternal vaginal
microbiota and infant faecal microbiota is minimal, while the similarity between maternal rectal
microbiota and infant microbiota was more pronounced .

The discrepances of the results obtained could be due to diﬀerent factors associated to C-section
delivery such as antibiotic administration, but also to breastfeeding, maternal obesity, gestational
diabetes mellitus, and even the analytical methodology. In addition, the diversity from Firmicutes and
Bacteroides colonization levels on infants gut microbiota may be inﬂuenced by geographical variation
such as the latitude .

Some authors have proposed that the lower presence of Biﬁdobacteria and Bacteroides, and the
abundance of Clostridia and Lactobacillus, in infants delivered by C-section could be explained
by perinatal antibiotics administration  Mothers delivering by C-section receive antibiotic
prophylaxis before the beginning of surgery or, in some countries, after the cord clamping to minimize
the direct exposure of the neonate to antibiotics 
In addition, Azad et al. determined that
intrapartum antibiotics both in C-section and vaginal deliveries are associated with infant gut.

microbiota dysbiosis, although breastfeeding modiﬁes some of these eﬀects  Nevertheless,
Martinez et al. performed antibiotic-free C-section delivery in mice and determined that these mice
did not have the dynamic developmental gut microbiota changes observed in control natural born
mice, evidencing the involvement of maternal vaginal bacteria in a proper metabolic development
even in absence of antibiotics supporting the hypothesis of the antibiotic-modulated dysbiosis. It is
worth to take into account that perinatal antibiotic administration may be associated with increased
risk of developing morbidities such as asthma, allergies and obesity, which may be inﬂuenced by
dysbiosis. In accordance, epidemiological data show that atopic diseases appear more often in infants
born by C-section than after vaginal delivery .

Furthermore, bacterial richness and diversity were lower in the infant gut of babies born after
elective C-section and higher in emergency C-section, suggesting that colonization may be aﬀected
diﬀerently in both situations. It is important to highlight that emergency C-section and vaginal delivery
labor are frequently accompanied by rupture of fetal membranes, and exposing the fetus to maternal
vaginal bacteria .

Importantly, C-section may decrease the colonization of milk-digested bacteria including the
genus Lactobacillus in newborns during the ﬁrst months of life  In addition, the mode of delivery
has a relevant impact on the microbiota composition of colostrums and milk  which also may
be inﬂuenced by antibiotics administrated during C-section. It has been proposed that infants born
by C-section lacked the early provision of breast milk essential to attain a proper gut microbiota that
contains microbes such as Lactobacilli and Biﬁdobacteria. This could explain the higher colonization
rates of these genera in vaginal compared to C-section-delivered infants  In fact, Sakwinska et
al. reported that only vaginal delivered and fully breastfed infants had gut microbiota dominated by
Biﬁdobacteria .

Finally, there are several potential preventive intervention strategies to restore the gut microbiota
after C-section  The intervention could be focused on maternal administration of probiotics and
prebiotics during gestation. There is a great interest about “seeding approaches” as “vaginal seeding” to
reverse the eﬀects of C-section delivery mode on the microbiome in early life, but at the same time there
are critical voices concerned about safety and eﬃcacy of this practice  In addition, the intervention
could concentrate on the neonate using “seeding” methods such as encouraging breastfeeding instead
of formula feeding, or the use of infant enriched formulas.
In this sense, supplementation with
symbiotic, the combination of synergistic pre- and probiotics, might oﬀer an innovative strategy to
re-establish the delayed colonization of Biﬁdobacterium spp. in C-section-delivered children .

Maternal diet establishes long-lasting eﬀects on oﬀspring gut microbial composition, which may
have important clinical implications  Complex interactions between breast milk cytokines and
microbiota guide the microbiological, immunological, and metabolic programming of infants’ health,
which may explain the higher risk of obesity in infants with overweight and excessive weight gain
mothers  In addition, data supporting the notion of bacterial translocation from the maternal gut
to extra-intestinal sites during pregnancy are emerging and potentially explain the presence of bacteria
in breast milk .

Some authors have reported changes in meconium microbiota when delaying the collection of
meconium samples by one day, supporting that the type of feeding or the environment has an inﬂuence
after the birth, which may be more determinant to establish the intestinal microbiome during
childhood  The type
of feeding has an important impact on gut microbial composition in preterm infants. In preterm infants,
breast milk has been associated with improved growth and cognitive development and a reduced
risk of necrotizing enterocolitis and late sepsis onset  Occasionally, the absence of mother’s
own milk (MOM) requires the use of donated human milk (DHM). A prospective cohort study has been
launched to determine the impact of DHM upon preterm gut microbiota admitted in a neonatal intensive.

care unit. Despite the high variability of DHMs, no diﬀerences in microbial diversity and richness
were found, although feeding type signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced the preterm microbiota composition and
predictive functional proﬁles. Inferred metagenomic analyses showed higher presence of Biﬁdobacterium
in the MOM, a genus related to enrichment in the glycan biosynthesis and metabolism pathway, as well
as an unclassiﬁed Enterobacteriaceae and lower unclassiﬁed Clostridiaceae compared with the DHM
or in the formula fed groups. After adjusting for gender, postnatal age, weight, and gestational age,
the diversity of gut microbiota increased over time and was constantly higher in infants fed their MOM
relative to infants with other types of feeding. In addition, DHM favors an intestinal microbiome
more similar to MOM despite the diﬀerences between MOM and DHM  Preterm infants are
prone to develop free radical-associated conditions that may be inﬂuenced by the microbiota.
In a recent study, urine oxidative stress biomarkers such as 8-hydroxy-deoxyguanosine 
orto-tyrosine, and F2 isoprostanes, neuroprostanes, neurofurans, and di-homo-isoprostanes were
longitudinally measured in preterm infants fed either MOM or DHM using validated mass spectrometry
techniques. No signiﬁcant diﬀerences for any of the markers studied were found between preterm babies
fed MOM or DHM  However, exfoliated epithelial intestinal cells transcriptome of preterm infants
fed their MOM or a DHM induced a diﬀerential gene expression of speciﬁc genes which may contribute
to a more eﬃcient antioxidant response in the postnatal period  Therefore, using DHM could have
potential long-term beneﬁts on intestinal functionality, the immune system, and metabolism 
However, available pasteurization methods cause changes that may blunt many of the positive aspects
derived from the use of MOM  Further studies are needed to understand the complex links
between microbiome and breastfeeding, its impact on health programming, and to develop sensitive
methods capable of providing human milk as similar as possible to their MOM, when the latter is
not available..

Some studies have compared the fetal and mother microbiome in relation to adverse outcomes
such as prematurity or low birth-weight without reaching ﬁrm conclusions. Ardissone et al. 
compared the meconium microbiome in newborn before and after 33 weeks of gestation and concluded
that Enterococcus and Enterobacter negatively correlated with gestational age, and Lactobacillus and
Phortorhabdus were more abundant in newborns with less than 33 weeks of gestation. They indicated
that the composition of the microbiome may be involved in the inﬂammatory response that
leads to premature birth more than the colonization alone. Speciﬁcally, preterm subjects with
severe chorioamnionitis had higher abundance of Ureaplasma parvum, Fusobacterium nucleatum,
and Streptococcus agalactiae  The placental microbiome varies as a consequence of an excess
of gestational weight gain, but is not related to obesity among women with spontaneous preterm
birth. Indeed, this placental dysbiosis aﬀects diﬀerent bacterially encoded metabolic pathways that
may be related to pregnancy outcomes  Furthermore, it has been reported high abundance of
Burkholderia, Actinomycetales, and Alphaproteobacteria in placental samples from gravidae delivered
preterm, and of Streptococcus and Acinetobacter in placental samples from patients with a history of
antepartum urinary infection. In contrast, Paenibacillus predominated in term placental specimens 
Other authors have proposed that the fetal intestinal microbiota derives from swallowed amniotic ﬂuid,
and that they may trigger an inﬂammatory response which leads to premature birth  Considering
that some Lactobacillus strains may possess potential anti-inﬂammatory activities, and could regulate
blood glucose levels in diabetic humans  the low abundance of Lactobacillus in placentas of low
birth weight neonates reported by Zheng et al. might be related to a pro-inﬂammatory status in
these pregnancies. Thus, the higher sensitivity of fetal intestinal tissue to inﬂammatory stimuli may
induce labor due to an immune-mediated reaction. However, as mentioned previously, the presence
of placental microbiota is under discussion due to methodological doubts, and these data have to be
discussed with caution..

Finally, a number of bacteria, viruses, and protozoa infections have been associated with pregnancy
complications. Liu et al analyzed the gut microbiome in pregnant women aﬀected by preeclampsia.
They showed an overall increase in pathogenic bacteria such as Clostridium perfringens and Bulleidia
moorei and a reduction in probiotic bacteria Coprococcus catus. A correlation between periodontitis and
the risk of spontaneous abortion or miscarriage has also been described  More well-controlled
studies should be carried out in order to identify interactions between pregnancy microbiome and
mother and children health which might help to predict gestational and newborn complications and
search for new therapeutic targets in adverse obstetrical conditions..

Epidemiological evidence shows that 50% of women in childbearing age and 20%–25% of pregnant
women in Europe can be aﬀected by overweight or obesity  increasing the cardiometabolic risk in
mothers  Pregnancy-associated
changes are diﬀerent in overweight or obese women compared to normal-weight pregnant women.
Overweight pregnant women show a reduction in the number of Biﬁdobacterium and Bacteroides,
and an increase in the number of Staphylococcus, Enterobacteriaceae, and Escherichia coli  Additionally,
higher levels of Staphylococcus and Akkermansia muciniphila, and lower levels of Biﬁdobacterium were
detected in women with excessive weight gain during pregnancy as compared to normal-weight
ones  Consequently, this altered maternal microbiome will contribute to shape an altered
composition of the oﬀspring’s microbiome and thus inﬂuence their future health..

Vaginal-born neonates from overweight or obese mothers show increased numbers of Bacteroides
and depleted in Enterococcus, Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas, and Hydrogenophilus  When speciﬁcally
examining phyla level relative taxonomic abundance among preterm women by virtue of maternal
weight gain, other authors have reported an appreciable and signiﬁcant increased abundance of
Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Cyanobacteria, and decreased relative abundance of Proteobacteria 
Furthermore, this altered maternal microbiota composition may be transferred from mother to fetus
during the prenatal period .

In addition, gut microbiota can induce obesity in children by several mechanisms. For example,
lower amounts of Biﬁdobacteria can aﬀect weight gain in infants through mucosal host-microbe crosstalk,
and immune and inﬂammatory dysregulation. Moreover, higher presence of Bacteroides, Clostridium,
and Staphylococcus can stimulate greater energy extraction from food, combined with a reduced control
of inﬂammation during the ﬁrst six months of life in infants of overweight mothers  These ﬁrst
months of life are of great importance since rapid weight gain during this period is associated with
an increased risk of obesity during childhood, and this inﬂuence is even more important than the birth
weight .

Critical illness itself or its treatment can inﬂuence the composition of microbiota 
Although broad-spectrum antibiotics are probably the factor which further alters its composition,
other factors can alter the ecosystem in which develops the microbiota, such as enteral or parenteral
feeding, drugs administration, disease co-morbidities, central venous catheters, or intubation and
mechanical ventilation. These studies have shown that the intestinal microbiota of critical patients
has low diversity, with a shortage of key commensal bacteria and overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria
such as Clostridium diﬃcile, and some species of Enteococcus, Escherichia and Shigella 
In addition, the microbiota changes throughout the stay in the intensive care units (ICU)  and the
possibility of pathogenic colonization increases with the time of stay in the unit..

To our best knowledge, only one study has analyzed the microbiota in children in a pediatric ICU
(PICU)  These authors found that the skin, oral, and fecal microbiota diﬀers sharply from critically
ill children compared with healthy children and adults. They reported a PICU-associated dysbiosis
with less alpha-diversity, diﬀerent composition (beta-diversity), and the loss of body site-speciﬁcity,.

increasing the abundance of nosocomial pathogens across all body sites and reducing gut commensals
such as Faecalibacterium  A number of studies have shown an association between the microbiota
and the immune function 
the function of the central nervous system  and the digestive
system  Therefore, PICU-associated dysbiosis may contribute to malnutrition, nosocomial
infection, neurocognitive alteration, organ dysfunction, and sepsis associated to critical illness 
and may also have an eﬀect on the lung, the brain, and the kidneys .

Critically ill patient conditions may contribute to changes in the oropharynx microbiota, such as the
increase of Klebsiella or Pseudomonas proliferation. On one hand, sedation and endotracheal intubation
decrease mucociliary clearance and cough, reducing the elimination of microorganisms. On the other
hand, mechanical ventilation, pneumonia, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) favor
alveolar edema, increasing the amount of nutrients available and decreasing the amount of oxygen
in some areas. These facts stimulate bacterial proliferation  and increase the risk of nosocomial
infection and ARDS .

In addition to the critical patients, associated dysbiosis, hypoperfusion, and reperfusion of the
intestinal wall produce an intense inﬂammation of the digestive mucosa which alters the gradient of
oxygen concentration and increases the concentration of nitrates favoring the growth of pathogenic ﬂora.
Furthermore, the slowing down of intestinal transit, frequent drugs (sedatives, opioids, catecholamines),
and the alteration of the mechanisms of microbial elimination (decreased production of bile salts and
IgA, pharmacological alkalinization of pH, etc.) may also inﬂuence the alteration of the digestive
functions  Freedberg et al. observed that colonization by some microorganisms prior to admission
in ICU was associated with increased risk of infection by that same germ, and subsequently increased
mortality  This fact indicates that the gastrointestinal microbiome can help stratiﬁcation and early
identiﬁcation of the risk of ICU patient complications..

The modiﬁcation of the normal microbiota pattern can contribute to the development of
a systemic inﬂammatory response with increased cytokine production, sepsis, multi-organ failure,
and morbi-mortality  In spite of variation in net incidence, neonatal sepsis remains one
of the leading causes of preventable neonatal morbidity and mortality throughout the world. The main
agents responsible for sepsis are group B Streptococcus (GBS), Escherichia coli, and coagulase-negative
Staphylococci (CONS)  However, this scenario may be modiﬁed depending on the use of antibiotics
and/or the implementation of non-culture diagnostic techniques .

In recent years, there has been growing interest in the role of commensal bacteria in an individual´s
susceptibility to infection. A few studies have evaluated the maternal vaginal microbiota in relation
to GBS carrier status. Although it seems that some speciﬁc taxa might be associated with the
presence of GBS  there is no apparent parallel reduction of the predominant commensal bacteria
Lactobacilli  Indirect evidence suggests that the neonatal gut microbiome might be of relevance
in GBS infection, since diﬀerent colonizing species have been found in the stool of infants from
GBS positive and negative mothers, while the protective eﬀect of pre and probiotics has also been
suggested .

It seems that gastrointestinal microbiota might induce an increase in permeability, modulating gut
and systemic immune response, and decreasing the tight junction integrity  As a consequence,
intestinal bacteria can promote the systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome, facilitate bacterial
translocation, and cause late-onset sepsis and necrotizing enterocolitis, especially aﬀecting premature
neonates. Most, but not all, of the evidence suggests that premature newborns with low microbiome
gut diversity, or with predominance of Staphylococcus, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria are associated
with increased risk for late-onset sepsis compared to those premature infants at lower risk 
Furthermore, gut colonization with Biﬁdobacterium and increased presence of prebiotic oligosaccharides
in feces, has been related to less disruption of the mucosal barrier and gut epithelial translocation,.

providing an improved gut development and protection 
It remains unclear if invasion of
the bloodstream during sepsis is caused by the same microorganisms identiﬁed in stool or by
others  in which case the gut microbiota would act as a facilitating mechanism by interfering with
the gut barrier or intestinal immune function. Further studies are needed to tease out if the diﬀerences
observed in gut colonization in ICU patients predispose to sepsis or if they respond to other factors
such as the diet, site diﬀerences in initiating and advancing feeds, breastfeeding, the use of antibiotics,
or interpatient transmission within the neonatal intensive care units .

Allergy disorders represent an important global health burden with an increasing prevalence in
infants and children, mainly as food allergies, atopic eczema  and respiratory pathologies such as
rhinitis  Their causes are multifactorial and contemplate interactions between
genetic, environmental, and socioeconomic factors leading to diﬀerent symptoms or phenotypes 
Among this heterogeneity, a restricted microbial exposure at early life seems to play an important role
inﬂuencing allergic diseases, and asthma onset .

Eczema or atopic dermatitis (AD) is the ﬁrst typical allergic manifestation in newborns 
A recent study has reported a high proportion of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii on the gut microbiome
from AD subjects. The presence of these bacteria is lower in Crohn’s disease patients, as well as
anti-inﬂammatory fecal bacteria metabolites  Besides, it has been shown that infants with AD
improved their symptomatology when the abundance of fecal Coprococcus eutactus, a butyrate-producing
bacterium, is increased  Consequently, it has been proposed that dysbiotic gut microbiota and
subsequent dysregulation of the gut inﬂammation may promote an aberrant Th2-type immune response
to allergens altering the epithelial barrier in AD skin .

Available literature on animal models suggests that gut microbiome may have an important role
in the susceptibility to food sensitization and food allergy, mainly at early stages of life  Chen et
al. recently showed both lower microbiota alpha-diversity and altered gut microbiota composition
(an increased number of Firmicutes in detriment of Bacteroidetes) in children with food sensitization in
early life compared with children without these conditions. Among the causes, the increasing use of
antibiotics both in humans and in agriculture, and the lower intake of dietary ﬁber may have an impact
on these situations .

Allergies are the strongest risk factors for childhood asthma in Western countries  but the
relationship between asthma and the microbiota is not clear. Although it seems that the diversity
of the gut microbiota in infancy is even more determinant for asthma onset than the prevalence of
speciﬁc bacterial taxa, it has been suggested that there might be speciﬁc important bacterial species
related to the prevention of asthma, and that gut microbial diversity during the ﬁrst month of life
may be the most important factor associated with asthma development at school age than with other
allergic manifestations  In addition, another study has indicated that the neonatal gut microbiota
inﬂuences susceptibility to childhood allergic asthma via alterations in the gut microenvironment
that modulates CD4+ T-cell proliferation and functions. These authors have observed a characteristic
depletion of dihomo-γ-linoleate, a precursor of anti-inﬂammatory ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid and
prostaglandins that may be related .

As described previously, diﬀerent factors have been associated with infant microbiome and the
risk of asthma, such as furry pets exposure  gestational age, the mode of delivery (vaginal vs.
C-section), and antibiotic treatment (direct vs. indirect via mother) among others  However,.

there is no doubt that a key issue is the type of feeding. A systematic review addressing the eﬀect of
breastfeeding in the development of asthma concluded that children who were breastfed for a longer
time during the ﬁrst two years of life had a lower risk of developing asthma, and this eﬀect could be
mediated by an adequate and early shaping of the gut microbiota  although whether the
dysbiotic microbiota is the cause or the consequence of atopic and allergic diseases is still unknown 
Besides, interventional studies have suggested that pre- and probiotics could prevent or down-regulate
the severity of some diseases, such as asthma or allergies, but the biological mechanisms, as well as the
best taxa or type of intervention, require further research .

The role of microbiome diversity and its variations in the incidence and susceptibility to infection
has also aroused great interest beyond the neonatal period. In view of the interaction between the
microbiota and the immune system, the implications are probably major and remain challenging,
but for some authors, is even more attractive the idea of its usefulness as a diagnostic tool, a preventive
strategy, or even a therapeutic target. As described in the neonatal period, in most infectious diseases
scenarios, a decrease in alpha and beta diversity of the microbiota seems to be present. Regarding
respiratory infections, diversity of the oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal microbiota in children
with pneumonia was lower compared with healthy controls. Furthermore, a correlation between the
presence of certain taxa in sputum and the clinical course of community acquired pneumonia has been
described .

HIV infected children present reduced gastrointestinal microbial diversity  Modulation of
the intestinal microbiome through nutritional supplementation, with the aim of decreasing bacterial
permeability, has been attempted in the context of HIV infection with scarce success 
In addition, the microbiome has been suggested to impact the risk of diﬀerent infectious diseases.
Both vaginal and penile microbiotas modify the risk of sexual acquisition of HIV, due to their inﬂuence
on inﬂammatory pathways and metabolization of antiretroviral drugs  Recent studies have
shown how an altered vaginal microbioma increases the risk of vertical transmission of HIV 
These studies beautifully exemplify the potential inﬂuence of the microbiome on the risk of infections,
as well as its implications in pharmacokinetics modulating bacterial metabolism..

Finally, based on the potential role of the gut microbiota as a modulator of the immune function,
attempts of supplementation with pre and probiotics have also been carried out. Two randomized
controlled trials have analyzed the impact of probiotic supplementation on children with acute
gastroenteritis without proving any beneﬁcial clinical outcome  Supplementation with
prebiotics or probiotics may also enhance vaccine response and thus becomes a new tool for the
improvement of vaccine eﬃcacy  However, results have been controversial in this ﬁeld and
warrant further investigation. The evidence for a beneﬁcial eﬀect of probiotics on vaccine response was
strongest for oral vaccinations and for parenteral inﬂuenza vaccination, and depended on the choice of
probiotic, strain, dose, viability, purity, and the time and duration of administration .

38. Kornman, K.S.; Loesche, W.J. Eﬀects of estradiol and progesteroneon Bacteroides melaninogenicus and Bacteroides.

100. Hussen, H.I.; Persson, M.; Moradi, T. Maternal overweight and obesity are associated with increased risk
of type 1 diabetes in oﬀspring of parents without diabetes regardless of ethnicity. Diabetologia 2015, 58,
1464–1473. [CrossRef].

ﬁrst 6 months of life and obesity at 3 years of age. Pediatrics 2009, 123, 1177–1183. [CrossRef].

133. Bousquet, J.; Khaltaev, N.; Cruz, A.A.; Denburg, J.; Fokkens, W.J.; Togias, A.; Burnham, C.A.; Weinstock, E.S.;
Weinstock, G.M.; Wylie, T.N.; et al. Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA) 2008 update (in
collaboration with the World Health Organization, GA
8–160. [CrossRef] [PubMed].

138. Song, H.; Yoo, Y.; Hwang, J.; Na, Y.C.; Kim, H.S. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii subspecies-level dysbiosis
in the human gut microbiome underlying atopic dermatitis. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2015, 137, 852–860.
[CrossRef].

161. Schnadower, D.; Tarr, P.I.; Casper, T.C.; Gorelick, M.H.; Dean, J.M.; O’Connell, K.J.; Mahajan, P.; Levine, A.C.;
Bhatt, S.R.; Roskind, C.G.; et al. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG versus Placebo for Acute Gastroenteritis in
Children. N. Engl. J. Med. 2018, 22, 2002–2014. [CrossRef]