23_PARAGRAPHS

rates of cell turnover in germ-free animals compared with wild-type animals13. Gut bacteria
have been shown to direct the glycosylation of lumenally-exposed surface proteins of the
epithelium14. IECs have many immunological functions (Table 1): they can secrete and
respond to various cytokines and express molecules (such as major histocompatibility
molecules) that directly interact with lymphocytes. Expression and localization of pattern-
recognition receptors (e.g., Toll-like receptors; TLRs) by the epithelium is influenced by
bacterial colonization of the gut, and expression of defensins and other antimicrobial
proteins are deficient in germ-free animals (Table 1). Consistent with this notion, the Gram-
negative commensal organism Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, but not the Gram-positive
microbe, Bifidobacterium longum, induces the expression of the antimicrobial peptide,
RegIIIγ, by specialized IECs known as Paneth cells15, 16. Intriguingly, the specificity of
RegIIIγ is directed toward specific Gram-positive bacteria. It is therefore tempting to
speculate that symbiotic bacteria direct innate immune responses of the gut in an effort to
protect their environment. Collectively, these observations of developmental defects in
germ-free mice at the tissue, cellular and molecular levels suggest that ‘normal’ immune
function may be impaired in the absence of the microbiota..

Germ-free animals are more susceptible to infection by certain bacterial, viral and parasitic
pathogens. When challenged with the Gram-negative enteric pathogen Shigella flexneri,
germ-free animals showed decreased immune resistance to infection and increased mortality
compared with conventionally colonized animals17. Prior colonization with specific
commensal bacteria antagonized S. flexneri infections, whereas colonization with control
species such as E.coli did not, implying that some members of the microbiota provide
protection against intestinal bacterial pathogens18. Infection by the Gram-positive
intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes results in decreased bacterial clearance in
germ-free compared with colonized animals19.The mechanism for this increased
susceptibility has been attributed to a T cell trafficking defect in germ-free animals to the
site of Listeria infection. L-selectin and CD44 are known to be involved in homing of
lymphocytes to sites of inflammation. Listeria infected germ-free mice have decreased
accumulation of CD44+L-selectin+ T cells resulting in increased bacterial burden compared
to SPF animals20. Salmonella typhimurium is known to cause a more severe acute
gastroenteritis in germ-free animals21, however the reasons for this remain unclear.
Establishing an infection requires the initial task of colonizing the host. For intestinal
pathogens this can pose a difficult problem as all mammals are stably colonized by a
consortium of bacteria that can act as a barrier to infection (“colonization resistance”).
Recent studies suggest that inflammation induced in response to S. typhimurium changes the
composition of the microbiota and suppresses its regrowth. Moreover, S. typhimurium
exploits this deficiency in “colonization resistance” to establish infection and cause
disease22. While important for maintaining a barrier to the colonization of potentially
pathogenic organisms, it appears that the microbiota may also provide the host immune
benefits. Supporting this, germ-free animals show reduced antigen-specific systemic
immune responses to S. typhimuirum23. These studies support the idea that enteric pathogens
such as S. typhimurium may have developed strategies to counter both the immune system
and the microbiota during the infectious process..

The impact of the microbiota on human health is best exemplified by studies in IBD, such as
Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis24-26. Both represent serious medical disorders marked
by aberrant inflammation within the human gastrointestinal (GI) tract, resulting in severe
clinical outcomes in affected patients. The causes for these diseases are complex, and
include the contributions of genetic, geographic and habitual factors27. IBD (particularly
Crohn's disease) is generally thought to be driven by T lymphocytes. The disease has
classically been characterized by increases in pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumour-
necrosis factor (TNF) and interferon-γ (IFNγ). Recently, a new population of inflammatory
T cells, termed T helper 17 (TH17) cells, have been implicated in the pathogenesis of human
and experimental colitis28-33These cells are characterized by their expression of the pro-
inflammatory cytokine interleukin-17 (IL-17), and require IL-23 for their maintenance and
function. Specialized T cells, known as regulatory T (TReg) cells act to counter-balance these
pro-inflammatory responses. FOXP3 is a transcription factor believed to be the ‘master
regulator’ of TReg cells, and its absence results in massive multi-organ lymphoproliferative
disease34. The mechanisms by which Tregs are able to suppress inflammation are quite
diverse. These include the expression of inhibitory cytokines such as IL-10, TGF-β, and
IL-35; disruption of cellular metabolism by expression of the IL-2 receptor, CD25;
cytolysis, and targeting the maturation of DCs through surface expression of molecules such
as CTLA-4 and LAG-335. A population of intestinal dendritic cells expressing the surface
antigen CD103 have recently been demonstrated to be instrumental in the development and
function of intestinal Foxp3+ Tregs. CD103+ DCs, but not CD103− DCs are able to
‘convert’ CD4+Foxp3− T cells into CD4+Foxp3+ Tregs cells in a TGF-β and retinoic acid
dependent manner36, demonstrating that specialized mechanisms exist within the intestine to
promote induction and maintenance of Tregs..

studies have now begun to show evidence that the composition of the microbiota alone (and
not genetics or environment) may be important to the induction of disease. T-bet (tbx21) is a
T-box transcription factor that controls the type 1 pro-inflammatory response in both
adaptive and innate immune cells67. Loss of T-bet in mice lacking an adaptive immune
system (Rag−/−) develop spontaneous and penetrate intestinal inflammation that resembles
ulcerative colitis68. Treatment of these mice with broad spectrum antibiotics cured the
intestinal disease, demonstrating that inflammation was driven by the microbiota. Finally,
when wild-type animals are co-housed with T-bet−/−Rag−/− colitic mice, they develop a
comparable colitis like disease68. Therefore, the transfer of colitigenic microbes alone (the
identity of which is still uncertain) was sufficient to induce experimental ulcerative colitis.
The second study addressing the sufficiency of dysbiosis have come from metagenomic
analysis of the microbiota during obesity. Ob/ob mice display symptoms of obesity and are
used as a model system of human disease. Remarkably, transfer of the microbiota from
ob/ob animals into germ-free wild-type animals results in an increase in the mean body fat
of recipient animals69,70. Moreover, the proportion of Bacteroidetes is decreased in obese
people when compared to lean people, demonstrating the possibility that alterations in the
human microbiota may affect disease. Much like IBD, obesity appears to have a strong
genetic component71. The complex interplay between host genotype and its effects on the
microbiota are an area very worthy of further investigation. However, studies such as these,
where bacterial transfer into wild-type animals induces , argue for a prominent role for
dysbiosis..

In the early 1900s, Ilya Mechnikov was the first to propose the use of live microorganisms
to maintain bowel health and prolong life. Now, the term ‘probiotic’ is used to describe
dietary microbes that are able to confer a health benefit on the host76. As shown in Table 2,
many individual or combinations of bacterial species have been shown to ameliorate the
symptoms of IBD in humans and mouse models. Although many of these probiotic strains
decrease toxic microbial metabolic activities, more recent evidence demonstrates the
capacity of these organisms to modulate intestinal immune responses. The common feature
of almost all bacterial species used as probiotics is the ability of these organisms to control
inflammation. Bacterial species can act on several cell types (epithelial cells, dendritic cells
(DCs) and T cells), but recent evidence suggests that induction of regulatory T cells by these
organisms is crucial to limiting inflammation and disease. Treatment of colitic mice with the
probiotic cocktail, VSL#3, increased the production of IL-10 and the percentage of TGFβ-
expressing T cells77. More importantly, transfer of lamina propria mononuclear cells from
VSL#3-treated mice was able to prevent colitis in recipient mice, indicating the ability of the
VSL#3 cocktail to initiate the generation of a protective population of cells. Depletion of
TGFβ-bearing CD4+ T cells from probiotic treated mice before the transfer of lamina
propria cells abolished the protective capacity of these cells77. More recently, in a model of
pathogen-induced inflammation, treatment of mice with Bifidobacteria infantis led to a
downregulation of intestinal inflammation and increases in the number of CD4+CD25+ TReg
cells78. Adoptive transfer of the CD4+CD25+ TReg-cell population from mice fed with B.
infantis inhibited inflammation-induced activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) in recipient
mice..

The first demonstration that a single molecule made by a commensal microorganism could
shape beneficial immune responses was provided by the identification of polysaccharide A
(PSA) produced by the human symbiont Bacteroides fragilis (Figure 1). Colonization of
germ-free mice with B. fragilis or treatment with purified PSA directs the cellular and.

physical development of the immune system, including expansion and differentiation of
splenic CD4+ T cells81. The novel immunomodulatory activities of PSA during B. fragilis
colonization of germ-free mice include correcting systemic T-cell deficiencies, T-helper cell
imbalances and directing lymphoid organogenesis. The importance of B. fragilis in
maintenance of a healthy immune response was recently illustrated by the finding that
colonization by B. fragilis or treatment with purified PSA can protect from the induction of
experimental IBD66. Moreover, mice that are colonized by a mutant form of this
microorganism that lacks expression of PSA (B. fragilis ΔPSA) are no longer protected from
disease. Oral treatment of mice with purified PSA protects recipients from weight loss,
decreases levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNFα, IL-17 and IL-23, and inhibits
epithelial hyperplasia and neutrophil infiltration to the gut associated with disease induction
in these models66. To provide insight into the mechanistic basis for PSA-mediated
protection, it was shown that increases in local induction of IL-10 were required for the anti-
inflammatory properties of PSA. PSA is unable to protect from induction of colitis in IL-10-
deficient mice, demonstrating that PSA functions by inducing the production of IL-10..
Based on this observation, we tested the ability of PSA to induce IL-10 in CD4+ T cells.
Indeed, CD4+ T cells purified from MLNs during PSA-mediated protection of colitis
showed increased levels of IL-10 compared with PBS treated control mice. Finally, transfer
of IL-10-deficient CD4+ T cells into Rag−/− recipient mice abolished the ability of PSA to
protect from experimental colitis66. These data have identified a single molecule made by a
symbiotic microorganism that stimulates CD4+ T cells to make IL-10, required for the
suppression of the inflammatory process during colitis, and suggest that other beneficial
bacteria may produce factors that can positively shape the host immune response during
IBD..

Does harboring certain strains of bacteria predispose an individual to disease or protect from
it? B. fragilis has been shown to protect its host from inflammatory disease caused by H.
hepaticus in an animal model of experimental colitis66. As symbiotic bacteria seem to have
evolved mechanisms to promote protection from pathobionts found in the same microbiota,
does disease result from the absence of specific organisms and their beneficial molecules? In.

If improvements in hygiene and health care have altered the process by which a healthy
microbiota is assembled and maintained, then patients with these diseases in developed
countries should display signs of dysbiosis. This indeed appears to be the case, at least
according to a growing number of studies which are now linking ‘Western’ diseases to
alterations in the microbiota. The intestinal bacterial composition of IBD patients differs
greatly from that of healthy controls74. However, over many years, research to identify the
pathogenic organism(s) that elicit inflammation has repeatedly identified reactions only to
intestinal bacteria shared by all humans—healthy and ill. No infectious organisms have ever
been conclusively demonstrated to be involved in IBD, though various studies are still
ongoing. So, perhaps the targets of inflammation in IBD are not pathogens, but pathobionts
that are overrepresented during dysbiosis (Figure 2). When intestinal bacterial species were
analyzed as a factor in asthma development, reports concluded that allergic children from
both an industrialized nation (Sweden) and a developing country (Estonia) had lower levels
of colonization by Bacteroides spp. and higher levels of colonization by aerobic
microorganisms than did non-allergic children from either region85. Epidemiological studies
have linked an altered intestinal microbiota to other allergic disorders, such as atopic eczema
and rheumatoid arthritis86-88. Though cause or effect relationships still remain unresolved, it
seems that deviations in the composition of the gut microbiota may be an influencing
environmental factor underlying the development of disease in genetically predisposed
individuals..

Recent studies have launched a revolution in biology aimed at understanding how (and,
more importantly, why) mammals harbour multitudes of symbiotic bacteria. As discussed
above, the effects of the microbiota on the immune system are becoming increasingly
evident. Astonishingly, the immune disorders for which incidences have increased in
‘Western’ countries all seem to involve reduced TReg-cell activity. It has been shown in
animal models and some human studies that deficiencies in TReg-cell populations or
function underlie asthma, IBD, rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes and multiple sclerosis89.
CD4+CD25+FOXP3+ TReg cells can prevent, and in some cases, treat these disorders in
laboratory animals. The antagonism between pro-inflammatory TH17 cells and FOXP3+
TReg cells is well documented90. Most remarkably, the numbers and function of certain
TReg-cell populations are reduced in germ-free animals45,43. As mentioned above, germ-free.

From the Greek, pathos, meaning ‘suffering’. An opportunistic
organism that rarely comes in contact with the host, but causes acute
or chronic disease upon infection..

A chronic disease characterized by inflammation of the mucosa and
sub-mucosa of the large intestine.

A mixture of bacteria consisting of four strains of Lactobacillus (L.
casei, L. plantarum, L. acidophilus, and L. delbrueckii subsp.
bulgaricus), and three strains of Bifidobacterium (B. longum, B.
breve, and B.infantis), and one strain of Streptococcus salivarius
subsp. thermophilus..

Escherichia coli and Shigella flexneri. Am J Pathol. 1961; 39:681–95. [PubMed: 13915950]
18. Maier BR, Hentges DJ. Experimental Shigella infections in laboratory animals. I. Antagonism by
human normal flora components in gnotobiotic mice. Infect Immun. 1972; 6:168–73. [PubMed:
4631914].

20. Inagaki H, Suzuki T, Nomoto K, Yoshikai Y. Increased susceptibility to primary infection with
Listeria monocytogenes in germfree mice may be due to lack of accumulation of L-selectin+
CD44+ T cells in sites of inflammation. Infect Immun. 1996; 64:3280–7. [PubMed: 8757865]
21. Nardi RM, Silva ME, Vieira EC, Bambirra EA, Nicoli JR. Intragastric infection of germfree and
conventional mice with Salmonella typhimurium. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1989; 22:1389–92.
[PubMed: 2700668].

22. Stecher B, et al. Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium Exploits Inflammation to Compete.

39. Ivanov II, et al. Specific microbiota direct the differentiation of IL-17-producing T-helper cells in
the mucosa of the small intestine. Cell Host Microbe. 2008; 4:337–49. [PubMed: 18854238]
40. Atarashi K, et al. ATP drives lamina propria T(H)17 cell differentiation. Nature. 2008; 455:808–.

49. Elson CO, et al. Monoclonal anti-interleukin 23 reverses active colitis in a T cell-mediated model.

mucosa colonization in Crohn disease. J Clin Invest. 2007; 117:1566–74. [PubMed: 17525800].

80. Sokol H, et al. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-inflammatory commensal bacterium.

identified by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;
105:16731–6. [PubMed: 18936492] [These authors identify that the bacterium F. prausnitzii is
specifically reduced within the intestine of Crohns patients. They further demonstrate that this
bacterium has an anti-inflammatory capacity and can protect animals from disease when orally
administered, suggesting that symbiotic microbes may be directly mediating health.]
81. Mazmanian SK, Liu CH, Tzianabos AO, Kasper DL. An immunomodulatory molecule of
symbiotic bacteria directs maturation of the host immune system. Cell. 2005; 122:107–18.
[PubMed: 16009137].

100. Macpherson AJ, Geuking MB, McCoy KD. Immune responses that adapt the intestinal mucosa to.

Figure 1. Model for Bacteroides fragilis-mediated protection from disease induced by
Helicobacter hepaticus
B. fragilis produces an immunomodulatory polysaccharide (PSA) that induces an
immunoregulatory programme that provides protection from inflammation induced by H.
hepaticus. PSA is taken up by intestinal dendritic cells (DCs), which presumably migrate to
the local mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) where they initiate T-cell responses by presenting
PSA on MHC class II molecules to CD4+ T cells. This process helps to restore a balanced T
helper (TH) and regulatory T (TReg) cell profile. Subsequently, naive TH cells adopt anti-
inflammatory functions that include expression of interleukin-10 (IL-10). IL-10 is required
to suppress the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (such as IL-17, IL-23 and tumour-
necrosis factor (TNF) induced by H. hepaticus during experimental colitis. It is this balance
of the pro-inflammatory responses to H. hepaticus by regulation induced by B. fragilis that
results in the control of intestinal inflammation.