62_PARAGRAPHS

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

important contributor to preterm birth since many or-
ganisms isolated from the amniotic fluid/membranes of
women who experienced preterm birth are also found in
the lower genital tract of pregnant women  A
large number of studies support this hypothesis based
on the strong association between intra-amniotic bacter-
ial infection and preterm birth .

The microbiological diagnosis of a ‘normal’ or dis-
turbed vaginal microbiota has historically been based on
the Nugent score, the current gold standard diagnostic
method that relies on Gram stain of vaginal smears 
The ‘normal’ vaginal microbiota in non-pregnant repro-
ductive aged women is understood to be dominated by
Lactobacillus species, while an abnormal microbiota
(defined as bacterial vaginosis) is characterized by low
abundance of lactobacilli and an overgrowth of anaer-
obic bacteria, such as Gardnerella vaginalis, Prevotella
spp., Bacteroides spp., Mobiluncus spp. and Mycoplasma
hominis  In low-risk pregnant women, it has been
shown that the vaginal microbiota has reduced richness
lactobacilli
and diversity and increased abundance of
compared to those of non-pregnant women  An
abnormal microbiota has been previously associated
with preterm birth  but only a few in depth
culture-independent studies of the vaginal microbiota of
women who had preterm birth have been published,
with inconsistent conclusions .

The objective of this study was to assess whether there
are differences in the vaginal microbiota composition,
early in gestation, of women who had spontaneous pre-
term birth (sPTB) and term delivery that could be fur-
ther investigated as diagnostic indicators of preterm
birth risk. Microbiome profiling was based on sequen-
cing of the cpn60 universal target, which provides higher
resolution than 16S rRNA variable regions and al-
lows the resolution of Gardnerella vaginalis subgroups,
a hallmark bacteria in the disturbed microbiota .

Methods
Study population and sampling
This retrospective cohort study analysed the vaginal
microbiota of women who experienced spontaneous pre-
term birth (sPTB) and compared the resulting microbial
profiles to those of pregnant women who delivered at
term. The bacterial profiles of pregnant Canadian women
at low risk of sPTB who had term deliveries (n = 170) were
previously generated by our research group  The vagi-
nal microbial profiles of Canadian women who had pre-
term birth originated from samples of this previous study
(n = 7) and from the Ontario Birth Study (n = 39),
resulting in 46 samples. The Ontario Birth Study
(ontariobirthstudy.com) is an open longitudinal pregnancy
cohort at Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada. It is a
platform for studies of both pregnancy complications as.

Clinical and behavioural questionnaire data (pregnancy
history,
family and personal medical history, psycho-
social health, demographic factors and other lifestyle and
transferred to the
environmental
Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) database
protected by a secure server  For the PTB group,
eligible participants for this study were women who had
undergone preterm delivery at greater than 20 weeks but
less than 37 weeks gestational age, where onset of labour
occurred spontaneously or in association with cervical
incompetence or preterm premature rupture of mem-
branes (PPROM). Vaginal swabs collected from pregnant
women (both PTB and term groups) at 11–16 weeks of
gestational age were used for bacterial genomic analysis.
Total nucleic acid was extracted from swabs using the
MagMAX™ Total Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit (Life Tech-
nologies, Burlington, ON, Canada) as per manufacturer’s
instructions. Kit reagents are aliquoted to eliminate re-
peated accessing of open reagents, and samples are proc-
essed in small batches using filter tips to prevent
cross-contamination. Pipettes and other lab surfaces are
regularly treated with DNA surface decontaminant
(DNA Away, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).
Samples from both cohorts were processed in exactly
the same way in terms of swab type, storage temperature
(no stabilizer was used), DNA extraction, library prepar-
ation and sequencing..

Total bacterial DNA (qPCR) and detection of Mollicutes (PCR)
Quantitative PCR (qPCR)
Total bacterial DNA quantity in each sample was esti-
mated using a SYBR Green assay based on amplification
of the V3 region of the 16S rRNA gene. Primer se-
follows: SRV3-1 (5′-CGGYCCAG
quences were as
ACTCCTAC-3′),
(5′-TTACCGCGGCTGCT
SRV3-2
GGCAC-3′)  Reactions were run on a MyiQ ther-
mocycler using the following cycling parameters: 95 °C.

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

for 3 min, followed by 30 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 62 °C
for 15 s and 72 °C for 15 s, with a final extension at 72 °C
for 5 min .

Conventional PCR
Some Mollicutes (Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma) species
lack a cpn60 gene  Thus, we performed a family-
specific semi-nested PCR targeting the 16S rRNA gene
to detect Mollicutes  and a PCR targeting the
multiple-banded antigen gene to detect Ureaplasma spp.
PCR products from U. parvum and U. urealyticum can
be differentiated by size .

cpn60 universal target (UT) PCR and pyrosequencing
Universal primer PCR targeting the 549–567 bp cpn60
UT region was performed using a mixture of cpn60
primers consisting of a 1:3 M ratio of primers H279/
H280:H1612/H1613, as described previously  To
allow multiplexing of samples in a single sequencing
run, primers were modified at the 5′ end with one of 24
unique decamer multiplexing identification (MID) se-
quences, as per the manufacturer’s recommendations
(Roche, Brandford, CT, USA). Amplicons were pooled in
equimolar amounts for sequencing on the Roche GS
Junior sequencing platform. The sequencing libraries
were prepared using the GS DNA library preparation
kit, and emulsion PCR (emPCR) was performed with a
GS emPCR kit (Roche Diagnostics, Laval, Canada)..

Statistical analysis
Comparisons of socio-demographic characteristics of co-
horts and participants were based on analysis of variance
(ANOVA), t test and chi-square, performed in IBM SPSS
(Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, version 21)
at 5% level of significance. For analysis of associations
between socio-demographic characteristics and micro-
biota profiles (CST), a false discovery rate (FDR) correc-
tion for multiple comparisons was applied .

Alpha (Shannon diversity and Chao1 estimated species
richness) and beta diversity (jackknifed Bray–Curtis dis-
similarity matrices) were calculated as the mean of 100
subsamplings of 1000 reads (or all reads available when
less than 1000) in QIIME (Quantitative Insights Into
Microbial Ecology)  Plots of alpha diversity mea-
sures against bootstrap sample number were generated
in R and visually inspected to ensure that an adequate
sampling depth for each sample was achieved..

For community state type (CST) analysis, a Jensen–
Shannon distance matrix was calculated using the ‘veg-
dist’ function in the vegan package with a custom
distance function that calculates the square root of the
Jensen–Shannon divergence  This distance matrix
was used for hierarchical clustering using the ‘hclust’
function in R, with Ward linkage..

The function aldex.clr from the ALDEx2 package in R
was used to compare the differential relative abundance
of individual taxa in term and preterm groups  Sig-
nificant differences were determined based on the false
discovery rate (FDR), which is the result of a Benjamini–
Hochberg corrected p value from a Welch’s t test calcu-
lated within ALDEx2..

Results
Description of the study population and pregnancy outcomes
Socio-demographic characteristics of women who had
spontaneous preterm birth (n = 46) and women who had
term deliveries (n = 170) are summarized in Table 1.
There were no significant differences in maternal age,
BMI, ethnicity, smoking status, consumption of alcohol
or use of probiotics between term and preterm groups
(all p > 0.05). Average maternal
age was 33 for.

Underweight (< 18.50)
Normal weight 
Overweight .

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

Table 1 Socio-demographic and microbiological characteristics of subjects.

Term pregnancies (n = 170) Preterm pregnancies.

Shannon diversity (mean ± SD, range)1
Chao1 richness (mean ± SD, range)1
1t test; 2chi-square; 3MD = missing data.

higher than CAD 100,000 per year  A minority
of women who had preterm birth reported con-
sumption of substances without prescription prior preg-
nancy, of which 3/46 women consumed marijuana/
hashish, 1/46 woman consumed tranquilizers/nerve pills
and 1/46 woman consumed cocaine/crack. Approxi-
mately 74% of the participants in the preterm group re-
ported a pre-existing condition. A total of 12/46 women
had some condition related to mental health, such de-
pression or anxiety. Seventeen percent
had a
including migraine headaches,
neurological condition,.

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

and 24% had a genitourinary condition (corpus
luteal cyst, bicornuate uterus, cervical polyp, cervical
dysplasia  uterine polyp, ovarian cyst, polycystic ovar-
ian syndrome, urinary tract infections with and without
kidney stones .

Characteristics regarding pregnancy and neonatal out-
comes are described in Table 2. Pregnancy outcome infor-
mation was not available for one woman in the preterm
group as she was lost to follow-up. There were no signifi-
cant differences in gestational age at enrolment, mode of
conception or fetal sex between groups (all p > 0.05). Aver-
age gestational age at delivery was 39+3 weeks for the
women who delivered at term and 34+2 weeks for women
who had preterm birth, most of which were considered
late preterm, i.e. delivery between 32 and 36+6 weeks of
gestational age. Women in the preterm group were more
likely to have experienced preterm birth or miscarriage in
their previous pregnancy (chi-square, p < 0.001). They also
had higher percentage of caesarean sections than women
who delivered at term. Number of previous gestations also
differed between groups; women who had preterm birth
were more likely to be primigravida in comparison
with women who had term deliveries  There was.

a significant difference between term and preterm groups
regarding birth weight and number of infants admitted to
level 3 neonatal
intensive care unit (NICU) (Table 2).
Apgar score at 1 (term 8.75 ± 0.6; preterm 8.38 ± 1.1) and
5 min (term 8.97 ± 0.17; preterm 8.76 ± 0.7) between
groups also differed (t test, all p < 0.001). One preterm
infant died shortly after birth (20 weeks of gesta-
tional age)..

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

Microbiota profiles
Microbiota profiles were created by PCR amplification
and pyrosequencing of the cpn60 universal target region.
Hierarchical clustering of vaginal microbiota profiles
resulted in seven community state types
I
(CST):
(Lactobacillus crispatus dominated),
(Lactobacillus
gasseri dominated), III (Lactobacillus iners dominated),
IVA (Gardnerella vaginalis subgroup B or mix of differ-
ent species), IVC (G. vaginalis subgroup A dominated),
IVD (G. vaginalis
subgroup C dominated) and V
(Lactobacillus jensenii dominated) . Each CST is
defined by the dominance of one species of Lactobacillus (I,
II, III, V), Gardnerella vaginalis (IVC, IVD) or a mixture of
bacteria species (IVA), as previously described .

Overall microbiota profiles did not cluster together
based on gestational age at delivery (Figs. 1 and 2). Most
microbial profiles from the preterm group were
assigned to Latobacillus-dominated CST: CST I (37% of
profiles), CST III and CST II
were assigned to
CST IVA, IVC or IVD (Table 1). The CST IVA was the
most heterogeneous group, represented by the domin-
ance of Lactobacillus delbrueckii, Bifidobacterium den-
tium, Bifidobacterium infantis, Atopobium vaginae,
Bifidobacterium breve or a mixture of different bacteria
species. The CST IVC was dominated by G. vaginalis
subgroup A and Megasphaera spp., and CST IVD was
dominated by G. vaginalis subgroup C ..

assessed the relative abundance of each taxa (at the
OTU and species level) in term and preterm groups.
Eight OTU/species were more abundant in the term
group in comparison with preterm, all of which were
considered rare members of the bacterial community
. L. acidophilus represented 1% of the total reads
in the dataset and had a low relative abundance average
of 1.98% (range 0–69%) and 0.18% (range 0–0.87%) in
samples from term and preterm groups respectively. All
the other seven bacteria together represented only 0.4%
of the total reads in the dataset..

also
assessed (only species with at least 10 total reads were
included). A total of 60 taxa had significant differences
in prevalence between term and preterm groups; 11 spe-
cies had greater prevalence in the term cohort and 49
in the preterm cohort
species were more prevalent
(Table 3). Bifidobacterium infantis, for example, was two
times more prevalent in the term group in comparison
with preterm, and Prevotella timonensis was 1.58 times
more prevalent in the preterm group (Table 3). Several
Prevotella spp. were associated with both term and pre-
term. Prevotella amnii and P.
tannerae had greater
prevalence in the term cohort, whereas P. timonensis, P.
bivia, P. corporis and P. bucalis were more prevalent in
the preterm group (Table 3). It is important to note that
read depth distribution did not differ between term and
preterm cohorts (t test, p > 0.05); therefore, the differ-
ences observed here in bacteria prevalence were unlikely
to be driven by cohort sequencing bias..

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

Fig. 1 (See legend on next page.).

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

(See figure on previous page.)
Fig. 1 Vaginal microbiota profiles of women who had sPTB and term deliveries. a Hierarchical clustering of Jensen–Shannon distance matrices
with Ward linkage on the relative proportions of reads for each OTU within individual vaginal samples. b Community state type (CST). c Gestational
age at delivery. d Heatmap of relative abundances of bacterial species within each vaginal microbiota. Each column represents a woman’s vaginal
microbiota profile, and each row represents a bacteria species. Only species that are at least 1% abundant in at least one sample are shown.
e Shannon diversity indices calculated for each sample.

CST and microbiota richness, and CST and microbiota
diversity (ANOVA, p < 0.001). There was no significant
association between CST and the remaining following
metadata: microbiota richness and diversity (continuous
variable), presence of Mollicutes and Ureaplasma (yes/
log 16S rRNA gene copies (continuous variable),
no),
variable; 18–25, 26–35,
maternal
36–45), BMI category (underweight, normal, overweight,
obese; < 25, ≥ 25), ethnicity (White, East Asian, South
Asian, Black, Hispanic, Other), natural conception (yes/no),
parity  mode
of delivery (vaginal, C-section), pre-existing condition
(yes/no), folic acid intake before or during pregnancy
(yes/no), drinking alcohol (yes/no), neonate in high
level care (yes/no), birth weight (continuous variable)
and Apgar score at 1 and 5 min .

Discussion
In this study, we determined the composition of the va-
ginal microbiota of women who had spontaneous pre-
term birth and compared these profiles to those of
women who delivered at term, previously reported by
our research group  The availability of foundational
data on women who delivered at term and the infeasibil-
ity of collecting large numbers of samples at 11–16 weeks
gestation from women who would go on to deliver
pre-term, our study design included comparison of.

samples collected in a previously published study 
and from the OBS. To minimize any batch effects, we
were rigorous in implementation of consistent sample
processing and did extensive analysis of the clinical and
demographic characteristics to ensure they were well
matched (Table 1). The cohorts were comparable in
terms of maternal age, BMI, ethnicity, consumption of
tobacco, alcohol and probiotics, which is of
interest
given that several of these characteristics have been pre-
viously associated with preterm delivery. In particular,
previous described factors included low and high mater-
nal ages 
low BMI  high
levels of tobacco, alcohol and illicit drugs consumption.

and multiple gestation  This cohort is unique in that
it did offer the opportunity to have gestational age at de-
livery as the main characteristic distinguishing these two
groups recognizing that the majority of preterm births
occurred beyond 32 weeks gestation..

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

abundance of other Lactobacillus species as well as
Gardnerella .

Other known risk factors for sPTB include maternal
medical disorders like hypertension, asthma, diabetes
and thyroid disease  Although some women in both
cohorts
there were not
enough participants to stratify the data based on the in-
dividual disorder and therefore was not possible to in-
vestigate
those medical
conditions and gestation outcome. We were, however,
able to confirm previous reports of history of prematur-
ity as a risk factor for preterm birth .

Since many organisms isolated from the amniotic cav-
ity of women who experienced preterm birth are also
found in the genital tract  an intrauterine infec-
tion ascending from the vagina is one of the currently
hypothesized triggers of PTB  In this study, how-
ever, we did not identify a signature microbiota compos-
ition (CST)
associated with preterm birth. This
observation is consistent with the results presented by
others  CST assignments are largely driven by
the dominance of a single species, which may mask dif-
ferences in rare taxa that would differentiate term and
preterm groups, and indeed, further analysis revealed
that the vaginal microbiota of women who experienced
preterm birth was richer and more diverse than those of
women who delivered at
term. Also, most women
in our study were considered late preterm and.

although we cannot address this question, it is possible
that sPTB driven by an ascending infection would be
more evident in a high-risk cohort or extreme preterm
cases. A recent study of a high-risk pregnant cohort has
reported that L. iners was strongly associated with short
cervix and preterm birth, as L. crispatus was associated
with term deliveries  Those differences in study out-
comes indicate that the pathogenesis of sPTB in low-
and high-risk groups might be different. Identifying dif-
ferences in the causes of early and late sPTB and the
role of the vaginal microbiota in those processes will re-
quire further study..

One controversy that challenges the current hypoth-
esis of preterm caused by an ascending infection is that
antibiotic administration to pregnant women with a dis-
turbed vaginal microbiota does not improve outcome in
most cases, as demonstrated by study trials and
systematic reviews  One explanation for the in-
efficacy of antibiotic treatment in the prevention of pre-
term birth relies is the high rates of antibiotic resistance
among bacterial-vaginosis-associated bacteria  In
this case, antibiotics not only do not kill the targeted
bacteria, but might also reduce the vaginal Lactobacillus
population leading to an even more disturbed micro-
biota, as recently demonstrated .

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. lactis.

Actinomyces neuii subsp. anitratus.

Mobiluncus curtsii subsp. curtsii.

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

identified. The ALDEx2 analysis indicated that eight rare
taxa were more abundant in the term group, which does
not necessarily mean they are associated with a ‘health-
ier’ state or implicated in preventing sPTB. Since these
bacteria are detected at very low abundance within the
microbiota profiles, their biological significance in the
vaginal microbiome is questionable. Differences in the
prevalence of several other taxa between groups were
also observed. For example, more women in the term
group had Prevotella amnii and P. tannerae detected in
their vaginal samples, whereas P. timonensis, P. bivia, P.
corporis and P. bucalis were more frequently detected in
samples from women in the preterm group (Table 3).
Prevotella spp. have been previously associated with bac-
terial vaginosis and preterm labour  and our
results indicate that different Prevotella species might
have different roles in sPTB. Several of the taxa that
were significantly different in their prevalence among
women in the two groups also had low sequence read
counts (Table 3). Further investigation would be re-
quired to determine if these rare members of the micro-
bial community play a yet unknown role in sPTB..

It is also important to note that the number of bacterial
species with greater prevalence in the preterm was
higher than in the term  which is.

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

compare different study designs (based on different co-
horts and barcode gene) that addressed the same re-
search question. Hyman and colleagues described
the vaginal microbiota of 83 pregnant women (term n =
66, preterm n = 17) based on Sanger sequencing of
cloned 16S rRNA genes. Samples were collected at each
trimester and preterm was defined as delivery before
37 weeks of gestation. There was no correlation between
preterm and absence/low abundance of Lactobacillus in
the microbiota; in other words, preterm outcome could
not be predicted based on CST. Similar to our results,
they found an association between increased microbiota
diversity and preterm delivery among women of white
ethnicity (n = 40) (data from women of others ethnicities
was not included in the analysis because of small sample
sizes). Although there was no association between CST
and ethnicity, it is important to note that most women
enrolled in this study described themselves as being
white, and it is possible that an increased sample size of
participants of other ethnicities could result in a differ-
ent conclusion..

Romero and colleagues also investigated the vaginal
microbiota of pregnant women who experienced preterm,
defined as delivery before 34 weeks of gestation (term
n = 72, preterm n = 18). The profiles were created by
16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, and samples were col-
lected every 4 weeks until 24 weeks of gestation and then
every 2 weeks. They found no differences in the frequency
of different CST between women who had term and pre-
term deliveries. Likewise, no differences in bacteria rela-
tive abundance were observed between the two cohorts,
although only bacteria that were present in at least 25% of
samples were included in the analysis. These results are
consistent with our findings of bacterial abundance based
on the ALDEx analysis since we only found significant dif-
ferences in relative abundance for eight rare bacteria. Un-
like Hyman et al. 
did not find differences in microbiota diversity between
women who delivered preterm and at term. One possible
explanation for this contradictory result might be related
to differences in participant ethnicity among these studies.
While most women in our study and the Hyman et al.
study described themselves as white, the majority of par-
ticipants in the Romero et al. study described themselves
as African American. It has been reported that the com-
position of the vaginal microbiota is strongly associated
with a woman’s ethnicity  Other studies have also
demonstrated that black ethnicity is associated with an in-
creased microbiota diversity in comparison with white
ethnicity  which could have masked differences in
bacterial diversity between term and preterm cohorts in
the Romero study..

non-Lactobacillus-dominated CST IV and preterm birth
in a case–control study based on the 16S rRNA ampli-
con sequencing. Pregnant women (preterm n = 34, term
n = 15), mostly of white ethnicity, were sampled weekly
throughout gestation. Interestingly, the authors pointed
out that if samples had been collected less frequently,
short-term ‘excursions’ to CST IV would have been
missed and probably the association between CST IV
and preterm birth would have been less obvious. The de-
tection of a temporary microbiota disturbance repre-
sented by a change from a Lactobacillus-dominated CST
to CST IV may have been missed in our study since
samples were not collected longitudinally. Moreover, a
recent study has demonstrated that PTB–microbiota as-
sociations
lower
population-dependent
Lactobacillus and higher Gardnerella abundances were
associated with PTB in a low-risk predominantly
Caucasian cohort, but not in a high-risk predominantly
African American cohort. These population-dependent
associations might contribute to explain contradictory
conclusions among different studies and emphasize the
importance of investigating the vaginal microbiota of dif-
ferent populations with varying ethnic backgrounds and
from different geographical locations..

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

urealyticum containing both serovar-specific and serovar-cross-reactive
epitopes. Infect Immun. 1990;58:3679–88..

Trichomonas vaginalis in pregnancy: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol.
2005;105:857–68.
Thinkhamrop J, Hofmeyr GJ, Adetoro O, Lumbiganon P, Ota E. Antibiotic
prophylaxis during the second and third trimester to reduce adverse
pregnancy outcomes and morbidity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;1:
CD002250..

Freitas et al. Microbiome  6:117 .

72. Donders GG, Van Calsteren K, Bellen G, Reybrouck R, Van Den Bosch T,
Riphagen I, et al. Predictive value for preterm birth of abnormal vaginal
flora, bacterial vaginosis and aerobic vaginitis during the first trimester of
pregnancy. BJOG An Int J Obstet Gynaecol. 2009;116:1315–24.
Kwak D-W, Hwang H-S, Kwon J-Y, Park Y-W, Kim Y-H. Co-infection with
vaginal Ureaplasma urealyticum and Mycoplasma hominis increases adverse
pregnancy outcomes in patients with preterm labor or preterm premature
rupture of membranes. J Matern Neonatal Med. 2014;27:333–7.