45_PARAGRAPHS

 at Yeshiva Univ Libraries AECOM Cardozo YU on October 19, 2016.

the commonality that relates both BV and vaginal pH to HPV
infection (independent of HIV) is the RA of certain Lactobacil-
lus species, most notably L. crispatus. Consistent with this, a
high RA of L. crispatus has been associated with reduced risks
of BV and STIs in several studies  However, data
regarding the cervicovaginal microbiota and its speciﬁc relation
with HPV infection are limited. In particular, there is a paucity
of longitudinal studies of the cervicovaginal microbiota and
HPV  and even among cross-sectional studies few have
involved HIV-infected women. Last, despite considerable spec-
ulation that cervicovaginal pH may mediate the effects of the
microbiota on HPV infection, no studies have, to our knowl-
edge, assessed whether statistical control for pH weakens the
HPV-microbiota association, which would be expected if pH
was part of the causal pathway..

WIHS Background
The WIHS is an ongoing multiinstitutional cohort investigation
of the natural history and pathogenesis of HIV/AIDS in women
 Brieﬂy, HIV-infected and at-risk HIV-uninfected women
were enrolled through similar sources at 6 sites (Bronx, NY;
Brooklyn, NY; Chicago, IL; Los Angeles, CA; San Francisco,
CA; and Washington, DC). Enrollment was conducted in
1994–1995 (2054 HIV-infected women and 569 HIV-uninfect-
ed women) and again in 2001–2002 (737 HIV-infected women
and 406 HIV-uninfected women). Participants undergo a semi-
annual clinical visit that involves performance of a Papanico-
laou test and collection of a cervicovaginal lavage (CVL)
specimen. Written informed consent was obtained from all par-
ticipants, and the study was approved by each local institutional
review board..

WIHS Substudy Population
As described previously  women included in the micro-
biome substudy were selected from among premenopausal
African American participants at the Chicago WIHS site,
with at least 8 years of observation and a minimum of 6 annual
CVL specimens, with further selection based on their HIV sta-
tus and CD4+ T-cell count over time. Speciﬁcally, 3 study
groups were deﬁned: HIV-uninfected women (n=22); HIV-
infected women with rapidly progressive immunosuppression,
deﬁned as an initial CD4+ T-cell count of >500 cells/mm3 fol-
lowed by a drop to <200 cells/mm3, with a poor immunologic
response to therapy (<100 cells/mm3 increase over a year) dur-
ing the observation period (n = 20); and HIV-infected women
with a stable immune status, deﬁned as a CD4+ T-cell count.

of >500 cells/mm3 throughout the observation period, who
were frequency matched at the index visit to those with rapidly
progressive immunosuppression (n = 22). Matching was con-
ducted using MatchIt, based in the R programming language
and statistical software  The matching criteria included
age (<40 years, 40–49, and >50 years), cigarette smoking, sexual
activity (frequency and number of partners), and male condom
use. The exclusion criteria were current laboratory detection of
gonorrhea, syphilis, trichomoniasis, or chlamydial infection at
the index visit or exchange of sex for drugs or money at >5 visits
during the observation period. These inclusion/exclusions
criteria were intended to limit the factors that needed to be
addressed while studying the original scientiﬁc question, name-
ly, the inﬂuence of HIV on the cervicovaginal microbiota. In a
separate independently conducted study, the presence of HPV
DNA in CVLs was longitudinally assessed semiannually in all
WIHS women with available specimens over a similar period
of 8–10 years or more .

Detection of HPV DNA
HPV DNA was detected with a L1 consensus primer MY09/
MY11/HMB01 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay. Primer
set PC04/GH20, which ampliﬁes a 268–base pair cellular β-glo-
bin DNA fragment, was included as an internal control to assess
the adequacy of ampliﬁcation, as previously described 
Ampliﬁcation products were probed for the presence of any
HPV DNA with a generic probe mixture and then with ﬁlters
individually hybridized with type-speciﬁc biotinylated oligonu-
cleotide probes for HPV 6, 11, 13, 16, 18< 26, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35,
39, 40, 42, 45, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 62, 64, 66, 67,
68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, and 89. Oncogenic
HPV types were deﬁned according to the recommendations of
the International Agency for Research on Cancer .

 at Yeshiva Univ Libraries AECOM Cardozo YU on October 19, 2016.

concurrent multitype infection by HPV, while accounting for
the intraindividual correlation of the repeated observations.
This approach made it possible to incorporate all the available
type-speciﬁc HPV data at each person-visit, as well as time-up-
dated covariates. It is a highly efﬁcient analytic method, widely
used in HPV research  In addition to CSTs, we conduct-
ed a priori–planned analyses of the RA of lactobacilli (at the
genus and species level), modeled as both continuous and ordi-
nal data. Histograms of Lactobacillus species as a group (Fig-
ure 1) and individual species suggested similar cut points of
low (<7.5%), medium RA.
Vaginal pH was also examined as a continuous and an ordinal
variable (with cut points based on the Amsel criteria for diag-
nosis of BV . All covariates except study group were time
dependent. Furthermore, to study temporal associations related
to changes in CSTs and HPV detection over time, we used
continuous-time multistate Markov models ﬁt using maximum
likelihood, as described in an earlier article  All tests were
2-sided, with a P value of .05 used to deﬁne signiﬁcance..

Select characteristics of the cohort at the index visit are shown in
Table 1. The average age of participants was 32.1 years, and by
design all subjects were African American and premenopausal
(see “Methods” section). Women with rapidly progression of
HIV-associated immunosuppression had a lower CD4+ T-cell
count than HIV-infected women with stable immune status
and HIV-uninfected women (P < .001). A majority of the
women in all 3 groups had a lifetime number of male sex part-
ners of >10, were current or former smokers, and had not used
oral contraceptives in the past 6 months. HIV-uninfected
women were less likely than HIV-infected women to use con-
doms in the past 6 months (P = .001). Self-report of Trichomo-
nas vaginalis infection, BV, candidiasis, or STIs within the past.

performed as described previously  Brieﬂy, universal
primers 27F and 338R were used for PCR ampliﬁcation of the
V1-V2 hypervariable regions of 16S rRNA genes from genomic
DNA extracts. The 338R primer included a unique sequence tag
to barcode each sample. Barcoded amplicons were pooled in
equimolar concentration and pyrosequenced on a Roche/454
Life Sciences FLX instrument. QIIME software was used
to bin the sequences based on their barcode, trim the primers
and barcodes, and remove sequences with homopolymeric runs
longer than 8 base pairs and those with ambiguous base calls
and run shorter than 100 base pairs. Detection of chimeric se-
quences was performed using the UCHIME component of
UCLUST, and chimeric sequences were removed. Taxonomic
assignments were performed using the Ribosomal Database
Project (RDP) Classiﬁer trained on version 10 of the RDP da-
tabase  The presence of ampliﬁcation in subject samples
was conﬁrmed by gel electrophoresis, while negative controls
(no template) were also subjected to PCR and showed no am-
pliﬁcation. In general, each sample was run once since our pre-
vious studies indicated that duplicates of the PCR ampliﬁcation
and pyrosequencing have low variability  Nonetheless,
repeat testing of several current samples across batches and
runs was conducted and showed little variability in results be-
tween these runs. For the 398 samples in the current study, we
obtained 2 387 346 high-quality sequences, with an average of
6266 sequences (range, 183–40 627) from each sample. Despite
these several steps and results, as in other microbiome studies,
we cannot fully exclude the possibility of bias due to sequencing
variability, primer bias, and sequencing platform biases..

Statistical Methods
We characterized demographic and risk factor data at the index
visit for each of the 3 study groups, with statistical differences
between groups assessed using analysis of variance (ANOVA;
for continuous variables), the Kruskal–Wallis test (for continu-
ous variables with nonnormal distributions), or the χ2 test (for
categorical data). Correlations between vaginal pH and the RA
of Lactobacillus species were measured using Spearman correla-
tion. To cluster pyrosequencing 16S rRNA results into corre-
sponding community state types (CSTs), we used hierarchical
clustering based on RA with Euclidean distance and Ward link-
age. The number of clusters was determined by the Milligan
point-biserial criterion  The Shannon diversity index
(SDI) was calculated for the microbiome at each patient visit
in the data set .

The primary outcomes were detection of any HPV and
any oncogenic HPV. The associations of SDI or CST with
prevalent HPV detection were assessed using generalized esti-
mating equation (GEE) logistic regression, as previously de-
scribed  These models address serial testing of women
over time (ie, repeated cross-sectional measures of association
with prevalent HPV detection at each visit) and potential.

 at Yeshiva Univ Libraries AECOM Cardozo YU on October 19, 2016.

Oral contraceptive use in past 6.

Self-reported T. vaginalis
infection in past 6 mo.

HIV Infected, Stable Immune
Status (n = 22).

HIV Infected, Rapid
Immunosuppression (n = 20).

Data are no. (%) of participants or median value (interquartile range). See “Methods” section for details (substudy population). Briefly, 3 study groups were defined: HIV-uninfected women
(n = 22); HIV-infected women with stable immune status, defined as a CD4+ T-cell count of >500 cells/mm3 throughout the observation period, individually matched at the index visit to HIV-
infected women with rapidly progressive immunosuppression (n = 22); and HIV-infected women with rapidly progressive immunosuppression, defined as an initial CD4+ T-cell count of >500
cells/mm3 followed by a decrease to <200 cells/mm3, with a poor immunologic response to therapy (<100 cells/mm3 increase over a year) during the observation period (n = 20). However, as
the case definition in the current substudy is related to HPV and not HIV risk group, the matched-pairs were no longer relevant, and we instead controlled for these factors as covariates in our models..

 at Yeshiva Univ Libraries AECOM Cardozo YU on October 19, 2016.

6 months did not differ between the 3 groups, although by de-
sign subjects were excluded if laboratory testing at the index
visit detected gonorrhea, syphilis, trichomoniasis, or chlamydial
infection. The median number of CVLs tested for both micro-
biome and HPV in the current study was 6 (range, 2–11); the
median follow-up time was 82.8 person-months (range, 15.6–
137.7 person-months)..

Table 2 shows Spearman correlations between Lactobacillus
species RA and pH. The RA of each Lactobacillus species was
inversely associated with pH. The correlation coefﬁcients for
any individual species of Lactobacillus was greatest for L. crisp-
atus (r = −0.48), although the highest correlation we observed
was for Lactobacillus species (ie, at the genus level; r = −0.67).
Hierarchical clustering found 6 CSTs, with 5 dominated by
an individual Lactobacillus species, whereas CST IV-B com-
prised a variety of genera (eg, Prevotella, Atopobium, Mega-
sphaera, and Sneathia) with a low RA of Lactobacillus species.
Figure 2 displays a heat map of the RA data for the 25 most
abundant genera or species and how they cluster within each
CST. L. crispatus dominated CST I, CST II was dominated by
Lactobacillus gasseri, both CST III and IV-A were dominated
by Lactobacillus iners, and CST V was dominated by Lactobacil-
lus jensenii. Figure 2 additionally shows the SDI for each study
visit, and as expected CSTs I through IV-A and V (each dom-
inated by a single Lactobacillus species) had a low SDI, com-
pared with CST IV-B. The ﬁgure also presents the proportion
of oncogenic HPV–positive women-visits for each CST..

Table 3 shows multivariate GEE logistic regression models of
the associations between CSTs and the prevalent detection of
HPV. These models adjusted for HIV study group, time-updat-
ed covariates, and intra-individual correlations between repeat-
ed cross-sectional measures of association with prevalent HPV
(see “Methods” section). While CST I (L. crispatus dominated)
had an inverse association with detection of any HPV and espe-
cially with any oncogenic HPV, the relationship was of border-
line statistical signiﬁcance (eg, odds ratio [OR] for oncogenic
HPV was 0.30 [95% conﬁdence interval {CI},
.08–1.11];
P = .07). In contrast, when we assessed the RA of individual Lac-
tobacillus species, characterized in an ordinal fashion (Table 4),
we observed stronger, statistically signiﬁcant associations with
detection of HPV. Brieﬂy, high (vs low) RA of L. crispatus
was signiﬁcantly associated with a lower relative odds of any.

HPV (OR, 0.48; 95% CI, .24–.96; Ptrend = .03) or any oncogenic
HPV (OR, 0.14; 95% CI, .01–1.59; Ptrend = .03). However, no as-
sociations were found between any HPV or oncogenic HPV de-
tection and the RA of L. iners, L. gasseri, or L. jensenii (data not
shown). In addition, no association between pH and HPV de-
tection was observed in any of the above multivariate models,
regardless of how pH was parameterized, including as a contin-
uous or as an ordinal based on Amsel criteria. Nor did exclusion
of pH from the above models discernibly alter any ﬁndings
(data not shown). When we assessed SDI tertile instead of
CST or Lactobacillus species in multivariate GEE logistic regres-
sion models, we found signiﬁcantly higher oncogenic HPV de-
tection in women in the highest SDI tertile (OR, 2.04; 95% CI,
1.18–3.52; Ptrend = .01), relative to those in the lowest SDI tertile.
Last, in an exploratory analysis, we used continuous-time
multistate Markov models ﬁt using maximum likelihood meth-
ods to assess whether transition to a CST dominated by L. crisp-
atus was associated with a change in the risk of incident
detection of HPV (ie, HPV type[s] not found in any earlier
CVLs from the same woman). The transition rate ratio
(TRR), a value that can be thought of as similar to a hazard
ratio  was 0.17 after adjustment
for study group, and this effect estimate was little changed
(TRR, 0.20; 95% CI, .03–1.14; P = .07) by adjustment for addi-
tional covariates, indicating that the most appropriate model
was the parsimonious model adjusted only for study group..

In the current study, high L. crispatus RA was associated with
decreased prevalence of oncogenic HPV in HIV-infected and
HIV-uninfected women across multiple serial annual visits,
even after statistical adjustment for multiple cofactors, includ-
ing host immune status (as deﬁned by HIV study group) and
vaginal pH. We predicted these results, because earlier (largely
cross-sectional) studies had found inverse associations between
L. crispatus abundance and the risks of several STIs 
Further, the one previous longitudinal study of cervicovaginal
microbiota and HPV, as well as cross-sectional studies in Rwan-
da and South Africa, each reported inverse associations of HPV
prevalence with CSTs dominated by L. crispatus or with L. crisp-
atus RA  To our knowledge, the current study is the ﬁrst
investigation involving serially repeated molecular characteriza-
tion of the vaginal microbiome and its relation with oncogenic
HPV in HIV-infected women. This allowed us to conduct an
exploratory analysis in which we prospectively assessed transi-
tions between CSTs over time and found that transition to an
L. crispatus–dominated CST was associated with a statistically
signiﬁcant reduction in the risk of a new ( previously undetect-
ed) HPV type. If correct, these data could reﬂect either a reduc-
tion in the rate of newly acquired (incident) HPV infection or
reduced recurrence/reactivation of previously acquired HPV..

 at Yeshiva Univ Libraries AECOM Cardozo YU on October 19, 2016.

Figure 2. Heat map of microbiome relative abundances and Shannon diversity index. A, Heat map of the relative percent abundance of bacterial taxa, by community state
type (CST) and the presence of oncogenic human papillomavirus (oncHPV). The results reflect the 25 most abundant bacterial taxa. Each vertical line represents a person-visit,
with relative abundance indicated by the shade of green as shown in the key. Results for CST (multicolor) and oncHPV (dark gray, present; light gray, absent) are shown across
the top. The CST categories (CST I–V) used are similar to those in prior reports and ordered in the figure in a similar manner  B, Shannon diversity index calculated for each
of the 398 observations..

These ﬁndings have potential clinical implications, since they
raise the possibility that promoting high cervicovaginal levels of
L. crispatus (eg, via a vaginal suppository) may help reduce the
burden of oncogenic HPV in women. The implications may be
especially important for HIV-infected women, since the inverse
L. crispatus–oncogenic HPV associations we observed were
independent of HIV and host immune status and therefore
indicate similar potential beneﬁt among those with a low
CD4+ T-cell count..

 at Yeshiva Univ Libraries AECOM Cardozo YU on October 19, 2016.

IV-B, lowa Lactobacillus
I, L. crispatus.

IV-B, lowa Lactobacillus
I, L. crispatus.

All models were adjusted for age, study group, highly active antiretroviral therapy use, number of recent sex partners, smoking status, condom use, lifetime sex partners, Trichomonas vaginalis
infection in the past 6 months, Candida infection in the past 6 months, or other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) in the past 6 months. Those with an STI on the day of the index visit were
excluded from this substudy..

Lactobacillus species against STIs, most of that research
preceded widespread use of methods for comprehensively
assessing the cervicovaginal microbiome  The growing ev-
idence of species-speciﬁc (eg, L. crispatus–related) relationships
between the cervicovaginal microbiome and HPV infection ar-
gues against a signiﬁcant role of pH, since production of lactic
acid is a common attribute of lactobacilli as a group, and our
data showed that the greatest association with pH was with
the RA of Lactobacillus species, not for L. crispatus RA or
CSTs dominated by L. crispatus. Thus, biologic mechanisms
other than pH are likely involved in the anti-HPV activity of
L. crispatus..

For example, recent data suggest that the 2 isoforms of lactic
acid, D-lactic acid and L-lactic acid, might differ in their micro-
bial effects. D-lactic acid (but not L-lactic acid) levels have been
inversely associated with the ability of HIV to transverse cervi-
covaginal mucous  An antiviral effect of D-lactic acid would
be consistent with our results for oncogenic HPV, since L. crisp-
atus produces D and L isoforms of lactic acid, whereas L. iners.

produces only L-lactic acid  L. gasseri and L jensenii also
produce D-lactic acid, and their RAs were nonsigniﬁcantly in-
versely associated with HPV detection in the current study.
Thus, high D-lactic acid levels but not acidity per se could be
associated with reduced infection and/or transmission of
certain viruses, including HPV..

While production of H2O2 has been observed in the major-
ity of L. crispatus isolates, prior data from our group suggest
that the levels of H2O2 produced are likely too limited to great-
ly affect the risk of STIs  especially HPV infection, since
HPV is a nonenveloped virus and, therefore, likely to be resis-
tant to H2O2. On the other hand, bacteriocins produced by
L. crispatus may have antiviral effects. Bacteriocins are riboso-
mally synthesized antimicrobial peptides and proteins 
Relatively little has been written regarding the bacteriocins
produced by cervicovaginal Lactobacillus species, with most
of the bacteriocin literature to date focused on Lactobacillus
species inhabiting the gut. L. crispatus has additionally been
noted to have potential immunomodulatory activity. For.

 at Yeshiva Univ Libraries AECOM Cardozo YU on October 19, 2016.

Table 4. Relation of Lactobacillus crispatus Relative Abundance to Detection of Human Papillomavirus (HPV).

L. crispatus relative abundance.

L. crispatus relative abundance.

All models were adjusted for age, study group, highly active antiretroviral therapy use, number of recent sex partners, smoking status, condom use, lifetime sex partners, Trichomonas vaginalis
infection in the past 6 months, Candida infection in the past 6 months, or other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) in the past 6 months. Those with an STI on the day of the index visit were
excluded from this substudy..

example, Candida albicans growth in vitro was inhibited via
modulation of Toll-like receptors 2/4 by L. crispatus in epithe-
lial cell culture .

While the current study contributes data suggesting a possi-
ble protective effect of L. crispatus against cervicovaginal HPV
infection in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected women (inde-
pendent of pH), several limitations need to be considered.
These include the relatively small number of HIV-infected
and HIV-uninfected subjects, even though longitudinal testing
of nearly 400 CVLs was performed. This was addressed in part
by the use of efﬁcient analytic methods able to incorporate all
available serial HPV and microbiome data. However, larger pro-
spective studies will be needed to more comprehensively study
the relation of the cervicovaginal microbiome to the full natural
history of HPV, including the presence and development of
cervical disease. These clinical/pathologic end points were too
infrequent in the current data set to adequately study. Nor
did we have sufﬁcient data to assess statistical interaction (eg,
by immune strata), and it may require subanalyses among sex-
ually inactive women to help differentiate reactivation of previ-
ously acquired from newly acquired (incident) HPV. The study
also focused on only premenopausal African American women,
which was done to reduce the number of factors being studied..

In summary, our results suggest a beneﬁcial effect of L. crisp-
atus on the burden of HPV in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected
women that is unrelated to pH. Further research to better un-
derstand these relationships is strongly warranted, including
large prospective cohort studies and laboratory research to un-
derstand the mechanisms that underlie the relation of the cer-
vicovaginal microbiota with HPV infection. However, if the
current data are conﬁrmed in large prospective cohort studies,
randomized clinical trials of L. crispatus (eg, as a probiotic
vaginal suppository) to reduce HPV and cervical disease
might be appropriate, even if the mechanisms remain uncertain.
The clinical implications could be especially important for
HIV-infected women, as the oncogenic HPV–L. crispatus rela-
tionship appeared to be independent of host immune status..

 at Yeshiva Univ Libraries AECOM Cardozo YU on October 19, 2016.

39. Rizzo A, Losacco A, Carratelli CR. Lactobacillus crispatus modulates epithelial cell
defense against Candida albicans through Toll-like receptors 2 and 4, interleukin 8
and human beta-defensins 2 and 3. Immunol Lett 2013; 156:102–9.