Zhou and Gallins

Host Trait Prediction

levels of taxonomy, with intriguing thoughts about the
of
interplay and use of molecular function descriptors vs. taxonomic
descriptors, the reader is referred to Knights et al. First, OTU
tables are sparse, with a large proportion of zero counts (Hu
et al., However, the content-knowledge required
to implement these methods is high, presenting a barrier to
data scientists looking to get started in microbiome analysis and
prediction. The remainder of this paper is written in several sections. Section 3 provides a quick
overview of the most commonly-used machine learning (ML)
methods, as well as the most commonly used performance
criteria. 2003),
with prior probabilities reﬂecting those in the general population. An ensemble of decision trees (or regression trees
for continuous y) is built by performing bootstrapping on the
dataset and averaging or taking the modal prediction from trees
(a process known as “bagging”)(Figure 1C), with subsampling
of features used to reduce generalization error (Ho, 1995). An ancillary outcome of the bootstrapping procedure is that
the data not sampled in each bootstrap (called “out of bag”)
can be used to estimate generalization error, as an alternative
to cross-validation. Each neuron j receiving an input pj(t) from
predecessor neurons consists of the following components: an
activation aj(t), a threshold θj, an activation function f
that
computes the new activation at a given time t + 1, and an output
function fout computing the output from the activation. This process continues until the last hidden layer is connected

Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org

5

June 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 579

Zhou and Gallins

Host Trait Prediction

TABLE 1 | Review of published prediction accuracy comparisons. 2012

Type II diabetes

344

170

174

572

Species Random forest

Karlsson et al., 2016

Post-mortem
interval (PMI)

67

NA

NA

52

Phylum Ridge

Ditzler et al., 2017

Microbial
abundance from
sponges (high/low)

1,232

NA

NA

30

Phylum random forest

Accuracy

0.97

76

Class

Random forest

2,322

Various

Random forest

Ai et al., 2018

Oral malodour

90

45

45

37

Genus

Asgari et al., In most cases, having
just one hidden layer with one neuron is reasonable to ﬁt
the model. We conducted a
literature review of published host-trait microbiome prediction
studies that used cross-validation and reported a measure of
prediction accuracy. where microbial
abundance in sponges was the trait. evaluated

supervised

addition, we

4.2. Analyses of Data Using Competing
Methods
learning
In
the
methods ourselves using datasets
from MicrobiomeHD
(https://github.com/cduvallet/microbiomeHD), a standardized
database of human gut microbiome studies in health and
disease. for each of

For our analyses, we analyzed four traits (three binary and
one continuous) from three datasets with varying sample sizes

FIGURE 3 | ROC curves after collapsing OTUs to the genus level (A) the Singh dataset, (B) the Vincent dataset, and (C) the Goodrich dataset. Following the ﬁltering recommendations applied by Duvallet
et al. google.com/ncsu.edu/zhouslab/home/software?, and here we list
the packages and settings used. The Lasso, Ridge,
and Elastic Net approaches used the package and method
glmnet, with lambda=seq The k-NN
approach used caret with k = 5 and default (equal) neighbor
weighting. In the datasets
analyzed by Ditzler et al. The results for discrete traits

Summarizing the results after using BMI as a continuous trait
in the Goodrich dataset, the bar graph (Figure 2D) shows the

FIGURE 5 | Scatterplot comparing the average AUCs between the full dataset and the HFE subset. ( The one prediction
method that was not improved demonstrably by HFE was k-
NN (with k = 5). In our analysis,
the HFE OTU feature reduction method brought a substantial
performance improvement for nearly all methods. Other uses of dynamical systems have concentrated mainly on
observable phenotypes/experiemental conditions, rather than
using microbiome status for prediction (Brooks et al., FUNDING

This work gets support from the NC State Game-changing
Research Initiative Program and CFF KNOWLE18XX0. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

for this article can be found
at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fgene.