Zhou and Gallins

Host Trait Prediction

levels of taxonomy, with intriguing thoughts about the
of
interplay and use of molecular function descriptors vs. taxonomic
descriptors, the reader is referred to Knights et al. Second, the role of taxonomy
in prediction is often unclear – similar sequences are often
correlated across samples, which is a property that can be readily
assessed directly without taxonomic knowledge. Third, as with
many omics technologies, library sizes (essentially column sums
of the OTU table) vary considerably, and normalization methods
must be used to account for this variation (Weiss et al., The target
audience of this paper is those seeking a brief review and tutorial
for trait prediction, and who will beneﬁt from accessible code. The remainder of this paper is written in several sections. Feature
selection methods that use host
information belong
in the next section, as they must be included inside a
cross-validation procedure. Commonly a trait will be a binary outcome (e.g.,
case/control status, coded 1/0), or a continuous trait, such as
body mass index (BMI). REVIEW OF MACHINE LEARNING
METHODS FOR PREDICTION

in the data, but without

Machine learning deals with the creation and evaluation of
algorithms to recognize, classify, and predict patterns from data
(Tarca et al., The python code for implementation is on our site
(https://sites.google.com/ncsu.edu/zhouslab/home/software?). Since HFE was reported to outperform other
methods (Oudah and Henschel, 2018) and resulted in higher
prediction performance overall, we apply it in the real data
analysis section to extract OTU features before applying machine
learning methods of trait prediction. An ensemble of decision trees (or regression trees
for continuous y) is built by performing bootstrapping on the
dataset and averaging or taking the modal prediction from trees
(a process known as “bagging”)(Figure 1C), with subsampling
of features used to reduce generalization error (Ho, 1995). Neural Networks
Neural networks
to an interconnected feed-forward
network of nodes (“neurons”) with weights attached to each
edge in the network, which allows the network to form a
mapping between the inputs X and the outcomes y (Ditzler
et al., This process continues until the last hidden layer is connected

Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org

5

June 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 579

Zhou and Gallins

Host Trait Prediction

TABLE 1 | Review of published prediction accuracy comparisons. 2014

Liver cirrhosis

232

118

114

542

Species Random forest

Zeller et al., 2011

Three body sites

1,967

NA

NA

500

Various

Error rate

0.17

Reiman et al., We conducted a
literature review of published host-trait microbiome prediction
studies that used cross-validation and reported a measure of
prediction accuracy. for each of

For our analyses, we analyzed four traits (three binary and
one continuous) from three datasets with varying sample sizes

FIGURE 3 | ROC curves after collapsing OTUs to the genus level (A) the Singh dataset, (B) the Vincent dataset, and (C) the Goodrich dataset. We also removed OTUs
which were present in <1% of samples from the Vincent et al. Finally, we ran the
hierarchical feature engineering (HFE) algorithm introduced by
Oudah and Henschel which results fewer informative
features, including individual OTUs and aggregated elements of
the taxonomy. For binary traits, the estimated group probability ˆP(Y = 1|X)
was used to estimate the group assignment. The Lasso, Ridge,
and Elastic Net approaches used the package and method
glmnet, with lambda=seq The k-NN
approach used caret with k = 5 and default (equal) neighbor
weighting. The results for discrete traits

Summarizing the results after using BMI as a continuous trait
in the Goodrich dataset, the bar graph (Figure 2D) shows the

FIGURE 5 | Scatterplot comparing the average AUCs between the full dataset and the HFE subset. ( For the Vincent dataset, again most prediction methods were
improved by HFE feature-reduction, but the results were less
uniform. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Thanks to Mr. Chris Smith for the IT support in Bioinformatics
Research Center. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

for this article can be found
at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fgene.