The aim of the present study was to utilize Illumina
sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene and inferred meta-
genomics by open source software PICRUSt (Phyloge-
netic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of
Unobserved States  to investigate differences in
microbiome composition and function in the fecal and
colonic mucosa of mice treated with 5% DSS for 5 days. For colonic
samples, the tissue was cut open and approximately
50 mg of mucosa scrapings were taken. DNA extraction
from colonic mucosa samples was done using ZR Tissue
and Insect DNA kit (Zymo Research Corp.). Both DNA
extraction kits included a bead-beating step for the
mechanical lysis of microbial cells. Principle coordinate analysis (PCoA) of weighted UniFrac distances, a measure of b-diversity of bacterial community. ( The p values were determined using
PERMANOVA. DSS, dextran sulphate sodium..

Of the 86 taxa, 56 had abundance greater than or equal
to 0.01% of community, whereas 30 were below 0.01%. Microbiota composition at the phylum and lower
taxonomic levels in colonic mucosa samples
A total of 199,057 sequences were generated after quality
ﬁltering steps with an average of 24,882 high-quality
sequences per sample, which resulted in identiﬁcation
of 14 phyla and 151 taxa. Results of the
relative abundances of various phyla are summarized
in Fig. 5b, Lactobacillus reuteri, Bacteroides ovatus; g. rc4-4,
Rikenellaceae, Biﬁdobacterium, YS2, Clostridium; f. Bacter-
oidaceae, Clostridiaceae; o. RF32, RF39, Bacteroidales,
Clostridales; and p. Proteobacteria were positively. DSS, dextran sulphate sodium..

The indigenous gut microbiota are thought to play a key
role in the pathogenesis of IBD. Part of the evidence for
the involvement of intestinal bacteria in IBD comes from
studies with murine models of the disease supporting
the hypothesis that a deregulated immune response. colitis and may reveal bacterial shifts at lower taxonomic
levels that could otherwise be missed. In this regard, it
was worth noting that more taxa were signiﬁcantly
associated with the DSS treatment in fecal samples
compared to the colonic samples; however, several
taxa including: Bacteroides ovatus, g. Clostridium, rc4-4;
f. Clostridiaceae, Bacteroidaceae; and o. Bacteroidales,
RF39, and RF32 were positively associated with the DSS
treatment in both fecal and colonic mucosa samples. Lending support to these results,
Berry et al. Given that the microbial analysis of diversity, commu-
nity composition and also changes at phylum level for
colonic samples did not show any signiﬁcant difference
between the DSS and control mice, the results suggest
that analysis at microbial functional level might reveal
important colitis-related changes in gut microbiome
that are otherwise not noticeable at higher phylogenetic
or community levels.