the dysbiosis of host gut microbiota and modulating of gut microbiota may be beneficial for
PCOS treatment. In this experiment, 32 female SD rats were randomly assigned into 4
groups of 8 rats each, including a control group that received a gavage of normal saline, and
three treatment groups (PCOS, PCOS FMT and PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation groups)
administered a gavage of letrozole (Novartis Pharma Schweiz AG, Switzerland) at a concentra-
tion of 1 mg/kg once daily for 21 consecutive days. On day 36, all rat fecal samples were collected for real-time PCR analysis. The specific primers were
showed in S1 Table. Plasmid DNAs were obtained by PCR products cloning with the specific
primer sets and used as positive controls. The
weak bands in PCOS group were identified as Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC533 and Ruminococ-
cus torques L2-14 (Table 1)..

Enterococcus, Bacteroides, Enterobacteriaceae, Bifidobacterium and Clostridium genus in fecal
samples were chosen for further quantitative analysis on the basis of their important status in. As shown in Table 2, on day 36, the copy number of Lac-
tobacillus and Clostridium were increased in both FMT group and Lactobacillus
transplantation group, to levels similar to that of the control group. Lactobacillus treatment group
(Mean±sem). All control rats had regular
estrous cycles of 4–5 days, comprising proestrus, estrus, metestrus and diestrus. The estrous cycle changes occurred twice in 2 rats, once in 4 rats,
and not at all in 2 rats (Fig 3)..

Under light microscopy, the control rat ovaries exhibited follicles in various stages of develop-
ment including secondary follicles, graafian follicles, and fresh corpora lutea. The granulosa
within the follicles showed multiple layers. However, the dif-
ferences were still statistically significant when compared with the control..

Fig 3. Morphological changes of ovarian tissues. ( There is a limi-
tation of our study: ELISA sensitivity can fail to detect low levels of sex steroids and could not
analyze the serum steroids in female rodents according to estrus cycle stage  However, the
available data indicated that sex steroids concentrations could be regulated by microbiota inter-
ventions in PCOS rat model..

Gut microbiota such as Bifidobacteria and Lactobacillus are often referred to as “good bacte-. ria” as they exert health-promoting properties. These data suggested that FMT and Lactoba-
cillus transplantation were helpful for the treatments of PCOS rats..

and found that dysbiosis of gut microbiota was associated with sex hormone levels, estrus
cycles and ovarian morphological changes.