The human vaginal microbiome maintains low diversity in low-pH conditions and
depends on host sugars as carbon sources, with less access to dietary and exogenous
nutrients than the gut, skin, or oral cavity. Historically, vaginal microbial communities
have been stratiﬁed based on hierarchical clustering of the taxa composition 
Keystone species include Lactobacillus crispatus and Lactobacillus gasseri, which have
been associated with maintenance of a simple vaginal microbiome by their production
of bacteriostatic and bactericidal compounds (e.g., lactic acid and hydrogen peroxide)
and maintenance of a low pH numerically and functionally dominating their
respective vaginal communities. Sixteen individuals produced suf-
ﬁcient sequence reads for taxonomic assignment using the 16S rRNA gene. The
bacterial taxa in samples with abundant Lactobacillus spp. were signiﬁcantly less evenly
distributed (linear mixed-effects [LME] modeling; P (cid:2) 0.001; Fig. A nonmetric multidimensional scaling (nMDS) plot of Bray-Curtis
dissimilarities showed that vaginal communities clustered by their most abundant
bacterium . This association between the most abundant bacterial taxa and
microbial composition of the sample was signiﬁcant and explained more than half
of the variance using permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA)
(R2 (cid:2) 56%; P (cid:2) 0.0001). Detected
ions by MALDI were compared to those identiﬁed by GC-MS and LC-MS, and we found
that (cid:4)55% of the metabolites identiﬁed had corresponding ions in the MALDI analysis
(Table S1)..

Metagenomics and functional potential of communities. Genes involved in mannitol metabolism were enriched in
communities where L. crispatus was highly abundant . In
this study, we followed the vaginal microbiome through the trimesters of pregnancy for
18 women, tracking changes in the bacterial communities with longitudinal samples
and capturing their functional potential with metagenomic sequencing and multiple
platforms to assess metabolomic proﬁles. The resolution provided by shotgun metag-
enomic sequencing allowed us to identify species and characterize the functional gene
content of CVF microbiomes. In our study, most healthy pregnant women exhibited
a relatively stable vaginal microbiota throughout the trimesters of pregnancy, domi-
in some cases, more diverse, Biﬁdobacterium-dominated
nated by Lactobacillus or,
microbiota. Indeed,
L. crispatus has been shown to have anti-Candida activity of
samples that were Candida positive came from individuals whose vaginal microbiota
were dominated by an organism other than L. crispatus..

A few metabolites were highly indicative of the bacterial community present in each
subject and may be useful biomarkers for the type of vaginal microbiota present. use to prevent other species from colonizing
the vagina, perhaps these organisms also use ILA in a similar or supplementary
capacity. One pathway particularly enriched in Gardnerella
communities was the ammonia assimilation cycle . To this end, reducing fructose 6-phosphate to
mannitol-1-phosphate may be an alternative and vital way L. crispatus regenerates
NAD(cid:5) for glycolysis  We did ﬁnd the gene mannitol-1-phosphate dehydroge-
nase, responsible for converting fructose 6-phosphate to mannitol-1-phosphate, was
highly correlated (R2 (cid:2) 0.9) with the relative abundance of L. crispatus.