Downloaded from 

http://mbio.asm.org/

 on September 9, 2020 by guest

Oliver et al. RESULTS

Description of the cohort and data obtained from samples. Saliva, urine, and
cervical vaginal ﬂuid (CVF) were collected from 18 women at early, middle, and late
pregnancy with the gestational age range of the included women at each time point
. had the highest abundance, a single
taxon comprised 50% or more of the sequencing reads  L. iners was the
most abundant taxon detected in 14 samples from 7 subjects, with a median relative
abundance of 79%. A) Nonmetric multidimensional scaling (nMDS) of Bray-Curtis dissimilarity between vaginal
microbiomes (n (cid:2) 42 samples) of mothers. Highly abundant bacterial taxa were signiﬁcantly associated with community
composition. In parallel, we found that
a pathway for mannitol-1-phosphate production is also more abundant in shotgun
metagenomic data sets of CVF samples dominated by L. crispatus . This linear
model identiﬁed the top 10 annotated GC-TOF MS metabolites that were associated
with variation in the microbial community composition, which are shown in Fig. PERMANOVA analysis of
lipidomics data from saliva samples showed the largest difference between mothers
and offspring (PERMANOVA; R2 (cid:2) 69%; P (cid:2) 0.001; Fig. Maternal metabolomics proﬁles

July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20

mbio.asm.org 8

Downloaded from 

http://mbio.asm.org/

 on September 9, 2020 by guest

Microbiome Composition in Healthy Pregnancy

®

(both GC-TOF MS and LC-MS/MS lipidomics) have a strong individual signature, while
infants do not (see PERMANOVAs; Table S2). The infant metabolome for saliva and urine
had little variance attributed to which subject donated the sample, but GC-TOF MS was
able to detect a signiﬁcant change between the infant urine metabolome at birth
versus 6 and 12 months of age (PERMANOVA; R2 (cid:2) 34%; P (cid:2) 0.0007; Table S2). Lastly, vaginal microbiota com-
position predicted which metabolites were present in the CVF samples but not urine or
saliva samples from the mothers or infants, suggesting that local microbial metabolism
may represent the dominant contributor to the metabolic milieu of the vaginal tract
during pregnancy. Studies have pointed out
Gardnerella’s preference for ammonia as a nitrogen source  moreover, this ability to
assimilate ammonia and produce amino acids has been implicated in mutualistic
interactions between species of Prevotella, in the context of BV  Together, these
BV-associated organisms contribute to genital inﬂammation, which may play a role in
the susceptibility of certain diseases, such as HIV 

Increased abundance of mannitol when L. crispatus was present is an important and
unexpected ﬁnding . Strikingly, the ability of lipidomics to differentiate mothers from

July/August 2020 Volume 11 Issue 4 e01851-20

mbio.asm.org 11

Downloaded from 

http://mbio.asm.org/

 on September 9, 2020 by guest

Oliver et al. Future work will focus on
conﬁrming these metabolite identiﬁcations, but the initial results are promising and
indicate that rapid analysis of microbial metabolites using MALDI, an analysis platform
routinely used in clinical microbiology laboratories, is feasible 

Overall, we provide a broad look at the metabolome during pregnancy and early life,
detailing the utility of GC-TOF MS, lipidomics, and MALDI-MSI for saliva, urine, and CVF. Mothers were
instructed to place the cotton rolls in their mouths until saturated with saliva (approximately 1 to 3 min)
and then reseal the swabs in plastic Salivette tubes. Maternal urine was collected using a sterile collection cup. GC-TOF MS metabolites were extracted with a mixture of 3:3:2 acetonitrile-isopropyl
alcohol-water according to standard operating procedures from the Fiehn Lab at the WCMC 
LC-MS/MS samples were extracted using a variant of the Matyash method  Data were acquired for
complex lipids in positive and negative electrospray mode on a Waters CSH column and an Agilent 6530
QTOF mass spectrometer  Metabolites were identiﬁed by retention time MS/MS matching using
MassBank of North America (http://massbank.us) and NIST 17 libraries. The instrument was controlled
using the MALDI-MSI 4800 imaging tool. An additional 500 (cid:2)l of CTAB buffer was added to the lysing matrix E tubes,
the previous steps were repeated, and the aqueous phases from paired extractions were combined. The amplicon
library was concentrated using the Agencourt AMPure XP system (Beckman-Coulter), quantiﬁed using
the Kapa library quantiﬁcation kit (Kapa Biosystems), and diluted to 2 nM. Equimolar PhiX was added at
40% ﬁnal volume to the amplicon library; the 16S rRNA amplicon pool was sequenced on the Illumina
NextSeq 500 platform on a 153-bp by153-bp sequencing run, and the ITS2 amplicon pool was sequenced
on the Illumina MiSeq platform on a 290-bp by 290-bp run. After PCR, the libraries were cleaned of smaller DNA fragments, using
AMPure XP magnetic beads (Beckman-Coulter), and pooled by concentration. Raw sequences (mean 2,977,881 paired-end reads per sample from 35/38
successfully sequenced samples) were ﬁltered using PRINSEQ v0.20.4 to ﬁlter out sequences that had
a mean quality score of 30 or less. SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

Supplemental material is available online only. We thank Dan Cooper for enthusiasm and strategic advice. We declare that we have no competing ﬁnancial interests.