All epithelial surfaces that interface with the external world harbor microbes, but the most
dense microbial communities are those in the distal intestinal tract. The
phylum Proteobacteria contains the gram-negative enterics that despite being well known to
clinicians, represent only a fraction of the gut microbial community  The dominance of
these four bacterial phyla and the relative absence of all other phyla suggests that, under
normal circumstances, the human-microbe relationship is highly selective and highly stable. Throughout most of a person’s life, this relationship is either symbiotic (mutually beneficial)
or commensal (providing benefit to one member without harming the other); pathogenic
host-microbe interactions are indeed the exception rather than the rule . They proceeded to provide
convincing evidence that the microbiota plays an integral role in fasting-induced hepatic
ketogenesis, an important energy source during stress and starvation. In GF animals,
ketogenesis was markedly reduced, and it was shown that myocardial metabolism was
redirected towards glucose utilization. To understand further how microbial ecology is
altered during fasting, Costello, et al. Species that were enriched in
the post-prandial state included Clostridium and Lactobacillus. In theory, manipulation of the gut microbiota could be used to improve energy
balance and decrease the incidence of infectious complications. As a result, interventions in this
field have been introduced with a limited scientific foundation. As a result, a precise understanding of
how decontamination protocols work is lacking. Much of the early work in the field was
performed at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, where Nobel laureate Eli Metchnikoff and others
advanced the notion of a differential gut microbiota in health and disease  These
scientists hypothesized that the protective effects of specific diets in some regions of Europe
could be attributed to the diet-induced growth of beneficial microbes. Interestingly, this led
almost instantly to commercial attempts to capitalize upon these ideas, hence the
development of probiotics. The most commonly used probiotic species are nonpathogenic
yeasts and organisms from the genera Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium  The most
commonly used prebiotics are the naturally occurring oligosaccharides known as fructans
that are normally found in foods such as garlic, artichokes, and bananas  Another well-
studied class of prebiotics is resistant starches, such as those found in unripe bananas and
raw potatoes. As knowledge of the intestinal microbiome expands, it is likely that many
more potential probiotic species and prebiotic supplements will be identified..

Another possible approach to improve outcomes for critically ill patients is to manipulate the
intestinal microenvironment to maintain the local microbial ecology of the GI tract
indirectly. Most recently
we have shown that surgical injury causes a rapid depletion of mucus phosphate, thereby
inducing certain strains of pathogenic bacteria to upregulate their virulence against the
intestinal epithelial barrier  Most bacteria that cause serious infections in ICU patients
are equipped with exquisite sensory mechanisms to detect the level of local phosphate
concentration. Phosphate concentration is a key trigger by which bacteria activate their
virulence machinery to, in some cases, cause lethal sepsis.