Page 2

MICROBES AND NUTRITION DURING CRITICAL ILLNESS

It has been known for decades that intestinal bacteria make important contributions to
human metabolism and physiology. The implications of this research for
assessing and meeting the nutritional needs of critically ill patients are substantial. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Morowitz et al. In this section, we summarize what is known about how
microbes directly impact human nutrition. Page 4

Utilization of complex polysaccharides via fermentation by anaerobic bacteria in the large
intestine results in the accumulation of short chain fatty acids (SCFA)  The principal
SCFAs seen in the colon, acetate, propionate, and butyrate, have inherent nutritional value,
but also impact gut epithelial physiology in other ways. Propionate metabolism is poorly
understood but appears to involve transport to the liver by the portal circulation. Mechanistic studies in gnotobiotic animals further demonstrated that, when B.
thetaiotaomicron senses a scarcity of fucose in the intestinal lumen, it actually induces the
gut epithelium to upregulate expression of fucosylated glycans that can be used by the
bacteria as an energy source without harming the host  This body of work illustrates
how the remarkable host-microbe symbiosis can be teased apart by pairing genomic
sequencing efforts with creative in vivo laboratory studies. This is partly because
conventional wisdom states that all essential amino acid requirements in humans must be
supplied by the diet  however, emerging evidence indicates that gut microbes can
impact nitrogen balance by de novo synthesis of amino acids and intestinal urea recycling. Some of the ammonia
can be utilized for microbial synthesis of amino acids. By use of x-ray absorptiometry and epididymal fat pad weight analysis, it
was demonstrated that wild-type (WT) animals contained 42% more total body fat than GF
animals, despite a higher metabolic rate and a reduced daily consumption of standard chow
 To mechanistically evaluate this finding, the authors transferred the microbiota of WT
animals to GF animals. Intriguingly, colonization of GF mice with just a single gut microbe (B. thetaiotaocmicron,
discussed above) also yielded a significant increase in total body fat content, although the
increase in fat content was less than that seen with transfer of the complete mouse
microbiota. Even more between group differences were detected in the liver lipid profiles. Vitamins

Page 6

Most human diets provide a robust supply of vitamins, the essential human nutrients that
must be obtained from exogenous sources. Likewise, it has been
estimated that up to half of the daily Vitamin K requirement is provided by gut bacteria 
Interestingly, the molecular structure of bacterially synthesized vitamins is not always
identical to the dietary forms of the vitamins. LESSONS LEARNED FROM STUDIES OF NUTRIENT EXCESS AND

DEPRIVATION

Obesity

Studying the relationship between the gut microbiota and energy balance in the extreme
states of obesity and starvation may improve our ability to assess and satisfy nutritional
needs in the ICU. Subsequently, several studies have contrasted gut microbes in newborn animals

Surg Clin North Am. Page 8

WHAT HAPPENS TO THE MICROBIOME DURING CRITICAL ILLNESS? receiving either enteral or parenteral nutrition. These studies suggest that TPN-fed animals
have an increased relative abundance of potential pathogens, such as Clostridium
perfringens, that can forage on glycans lining the gut epithelium  However, it is not
known if these findings can be extended to critically ill adults that have shifted abruptly
from the fed to the fasting state. To understand further how microbial ecology is
altered during fasting, Costello, et al. To date, evaluations of the microbial ecology of the ICU have largely been restricted to
culture-based studies. Although we lack a comprehensive molecular readout of gut microbes in the ICU, several
human and animal studies provide clues about how the microbiota is altered by common
ICU exposures. Page 9

SELECTIVE MANIPULATION OF THE GUT MICROBIOTA IN THE ICU

hypoxia, are also known to perturb the microbiota and encourage the overgrowth of
pathogens  Some of the most commonly used pharmaceutical agents in the ICU,
including acid suppression therapies, vasopressors, and opioids, are known to impact the
human microbiota  Finally, our group was the first to demonstrate that the use of
total parenteral nutrition or enteral nutrition with processed liquid diets dramatically alters
the intestinal microbiota such that bacterial translocation to extraintestinal sites is promoted. As a result, interventions in this
field have been introduced with a limited scientific foundation. Nonetheless, several
strategies to optimize the microbiome have now been evaluated clinically. Others with obvious relevance to nutrition are discussed. As a result, a precise understanding of
how decontamination protocols work is lacking. Most mechanistic studies in this area have centered upon production of
antimicrobial substances to inhibit colonization by pathogens, enhance the mucosal barrier
function, and downregulate mucosal inflammation  It is particularly interesting that,
despite the growing awareness of how gut microbes contribute to energy balance and despite
the administration of probiotics/prebiotics as nutritional supplements, little research on this
topic has focused on how these agents specifically impact nutrition, metabolism, or energy
balance. The increased mortality was attributed to a high incidence of
intestinal ischemia, although a direct link between the probiotic and bowel ischemia was not
proven  A subsequent meta-analysis concluded that probiotics do not influence
mortality in the treatment of acute pancreatitis  however, the results of the Dutch study
have raised important questions about the whether and how probiotics should be
administered to vulnerable populations. Most recently
we have shown that surgical injury causes a rapid depletion of mucus phosphate, thereby
inducing certain strains of pathogenic bacteria to upregulate their virulence against the
intestinal epithelial barrier  Most bacteria that cause serious infections in ICU patients
are equipped with exquisite sensory mechanisms to detect the level of local phosphate
concentration.