Nutrients 2019, 11, 330

2 of 13

The crucial role of the intestinal microbiota in modulating insulin resistance and the inﬂammatory
response in GDM pregnancies has been reported by a few studies  It is well known that diet is
able to modulate the microbiota composition rapidly, within a few days  Emerging evidence
has shown a differential role of speciﬁc nutrients on metabolic outcomes, based on the individual
microbial pattern. The potential impact of speciﬁc
dietary interventions on the gut bacteria composition and function is of considerable interest in the
search for the optimal strategy to prevent and treat GDM. Herein, we examine the updated evidence about this emerging topic. Methods

The following electronic databases were queried: PubMed (National Library of Medicine),
the Cochrane Library, EMBASE, and Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature
(CINAHL). The search strategy was performed using database speciﬁc subject headings and keywords;
restrictions to human studies were placed. A different microbiota composition was found to precede the onset of
GDM in early pregnancy, since both reduced microbial richness and increased abundance of
Ruminococcaceae family with a supposed subsequent increased energy harvest, pro-inﬂammatory
status, and impaired insulin signaling, have been reported 

A few studies described a different microbiota within 3–16 months after delivery in women with
a previous GDM (GDM+) compared to those with a previous normoglycemic pregnancy (GDM−). Nutrients
are able to interact directly with microbes by promoting or inhibiting their growth. Only a few studies have evaluated the role of nutrition on maternal gut microbiota
during pregnancy. Higher intakes of vitamin
D were associated with reduced microbial α-diversity. In pregnancy, different nutrients were found to be related with gut microbiota diversity and
composition. Diet-Microbiota Interactions in GDM

The impact of diet on the microbiota of GDM patients was recently addressed by an observational
study  Forty-one overweight women with GDM diagnosed at 24–28 weeks of gestation
received dietary recommendation from a registered dietitian, and their nutritional intakes and
microbiota were evaluated after the diagnosis of GDM (enrolment) and at the 38th week of gestation. Adherents showed a signiﬁcant
decrease in Bacteroides  which is a genus that has been associated with high-fat animal-based
diets  Moreover, at enrolment, total fat intake was associated with higher abundance of Alistipes
and protein intake with Faecalibacterium genus, while, at the end of the pregnancy, ﬁber intake was
associated with the genus Roseburia  However, none of these bacteria were associated with the
changes in metabolic variables occurring during pregnancy in patients with GDM 

Therefore, the meaning of these associations remains unclear. Microbiota: A Novel Potential Therapeutic Target in GDM? First of all, the terminology used needs to be clariﬁed. In a recent study, 3 days of barley kernel-based bread supplementation improved the
glucose metabolism only in subjects with higher Prevotella/Bacteroides ratios  conﬁrming the role
of arabinoxylans and β-glucans in the P-type individuals. Limitations and Future Perspectives

The key points of this review are reported in Table 1. At present, we are still far from ﬁnding a personalized dietary
treatment for GDM patients. The microbiota of GDM
patients can be transmitted
to the offspring. Diet can shape the gut
microbiota and the microbiota
can use nutrients to produce
bioactive compounds. However, it
generally reverts to the
original status with
short-term dietary changes. Uncertainty about the causal
relationship between gut
dysbiosis and GDM. Randomized controlled trials
are lacking. S.B. participated in the conception of the
paper, collection and interpretation of the references, manuscript writing and revision. All authors have read and
approved the ﬁnal manuscript. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.