in

use

symptomatic

including preterm birth (PTB).1–4 Antibiotics are effective
in eradicating BV during pregnancy5 and are recommended
The
for
consequences of antibiotic use during pregnancy have been
poorly studied,7 but
there are concerns that antibiotic-
related changes in the vaginal microbiota8 are associated
with short- and long-term morbidity in infancy and later
years.9

pregnant women.6

Probiotics might be a safe and effective alternative to
antibiotics in restoring the imbalance of the vaginal micro-
biota found in BV. We therefore performed a randomised trial of a com-
available probiotic preparation in pregnant
mercially
women to assess its biological effects on the vaginal micro-
biota. The probiotic preparation selected
has been shown to be safe when taken during preg-
nancy.14,15

Methods

conducted using an analysis plan agreed in advance with
the independent trial steering and data monitoring com-
mittee. All par-
ticipants provided written informed consent. We excluded those unable to provide
written informed consent or who had a poor understand-
ing of verbal or written English. These were then packaged into tamper-proof
boxes. Microbiology methodology
The double-headed swab was separated in the laboratory. Gram-stained glass slides prepared from the swabs were
examined by microscopy and scored between 0 and 10
based on bacterial morphotypes according to the Nugent
method.27 Stored samples were thawed and diluted through
a series of 10-fold dilutions in saline before being inocu-
lated onto a range of selective and non-selective culture
media (Unipath). From
each DNA extract, variable regions V1 and V2 of the 16S
rRNA gene were ampliﬁed by PCR using fusion primers
incorporating
27F-YM
(AGAGTTTGATYMTGGCTCAG) and 338R-R (TGCTG
CCTCCCGTAGRAGT) and MiSeq adapters and barcodes
to achieve a double indexing system. Sequence reactions
were spiked with 10% 12.5 pM PhiX DNA. The ﬁltered sequences were analysed using the mothur
pipeline
at https://
www.mothur.org/wiki/MiSeq_SOP. The alpha diversity of the samples was estimated by calcu-
lating the Inverse Simpson index and compared between
groups by the Wilcoxon test. Otherwise, we reported the model without adjusting for
confounders. Prior to this
trial, a qualitative study was conducted to obtain input
from women.32 The available core outcome set for PTB33
had an inﬂuence on data collected. A
total of 997 women were excluded from the trial either
because they did not meet the inclusion criteria 
or they declined to participate. Of

the women who provided a swab sample at 18–
20 weeks’ gestation, vaginal samples were available in 70%
of women at 34–36 weeks’ gestation (72% (83/
115) in the placebo group and 68% in the probi-
otic group. Previous observational studies and small-scale
randomised controlled trials in non-pregnant populations
have suggested that oral administration of probiotics can
alter the vaginal microbiota in a signiﬁcant number of
women where microbial imbalance exists.18–21 It is on this
basis that several commercial probiotic products are mar-
keted for the restoration and maintenance of a healthy
vaginal microbiota in both non-pregnant and pregnant
women.19,20 Our ﬁndings have not shown any effect on the
vaginal microbiota with the probiotic preparation used in
this trial. Strengths and weakness of the study
This study was a large and pragmatic multicenter, ran-
domised trial carried out in pregnant women to assess the
effect of probiotic supplementation on the vaginal micro-
biota. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists

Probiotics and vaginal microbiota in pregnancy

Figure 3. Our ﬁndings
those recently reported by Gille
et al.44 In a randomised, controlled trial, 320 women at
<12 weeks’ gestational age were allocated to once-daily oral
capsules of L. rhamnosus GR-1 or L. reuteri RC-14 or pla-
cebo for 8 weeks. Contribution to authorship
The trial was conceived by MM and MW, and designed by
SH and KK. EP and WW carried out the DNA sequencing. ST, CC, and BMT provided overall support to the conduct
and delivery of the trial. All participants provided
informed consent to take part in the trial. Data sharing
The research team will consider reasonable requests for
sharing of patient level data. Funding
This report summarises independent research funded by
Barts Charity (grant reference 1082/2243) under its Large
Programme Grant
funding stream.