The EUB338 probe
used to determine total counts was labeled with uorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC), while the group- or genus-specic probes
were labeled at the 50-end with indocyanine (Cy3; Sangon
Biotech, Shanghai, China)..

FISH analysis, as a quantitative molecular-based technique, was
applied to assess the microbiota composition. Moreover, the principal coordinate analysis scores plot
in Fig. In addition, a
negative correlation was found between the body weight and the
ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes (r ¼ (cid:4)0.805, P ¼ 0.002)
..

Gut microbes, as environmental factors, may regulate fat
storage and aﬀect energy metabolism homeostasis, by acceler-
ation of the processing of dietary polysaccharides and induction
of de novo lipogenesis.6,28 In the present study, both the relative
abundance of the major bacterial divisions and principal coor-
dinate analysis showed that, the HF diet induced the gut
microbiota dysbiosis. These ndings are in line with Cani et al. Resveratrol
treatment signicantly improved the gut microbiota dysbiosis
induced by the HF diet . In addition, there was a decrease in the Lactobacillus
and Bidobacterium frequencies and an increase of Enterococcus
faecalis in HF mice compared with CT mice, which agree with
our previous studies that a high-fat diet signicantly decreases
the number of Lactobacillus and increases the number of
Enterococcus faecalis.30 Aer resveratrol intake, the numbers of
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium were signicantly increased. Similar results were reported by Larrosa et al. 2 Microbial proﬁling analysis of the intestinal contents. ( D) The
Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes ratios contributed by the indicated target
bacterial populations (n ¼ 8). Mean values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
compared with those of the CT group: * P < 0.05. CT, normal chow diet-fed mice; HF, high-fat diet-fed mice; HF-RES,
mice fed with HF supplemented with RES..

Fig. 3 Correlation between the body weight and the colonic bacterial content of (A) the Lactobacillus group, (B) the Biﬁdobacterium group, (C)
Enterococcus faecalis, and (D) the ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes. Bacterial quantities are expressed as relative abundance (%). Body weight values (g) are pre-
sented as means (n ¼ 8 animals per group), with standard errors represented by vertical bars..

and the Bacteroides phylum. These ndings are consistent with
previous studies. and Lactobacillus
acidophilus, and Neyrinck et al.40 demonstrated that a poly-
phenol-rich extract of pomegranate peel increased the caecal
content weight and caecal pool of Bidobacteria spp.