of intravaginal nonoxyl-9 (an ingredient in spermicide and a commonly used cytotoxic control) and univer-
sal placebo gel (isotonic) found that both have inflammatory effects on cells of the cervix and endometrium12. Over six hours of co-culture, the growth of one laboratory and 6 clinical strains of E. 
coli were significantly inhibited in coculture with all vaginal products tested (Table 1) except coconut oil (p < 0.02 for 
all), with an effect seen as soon as 2 hours . However, in the presence of human vaginal 
epithelial cells, E. coli demonstrated no inhibition in the presence of KY Jelly, and increased growth with Replens 
Long-Lasting and Trimo-San compared to control (p < 0.05, Fig. L. crispatus growth was stimulated by Replens Silky Smooth (p < 0.01). in an in vitro co-culture model 
without vaginal epithelial cells. None of the products inhibited the growth of Lactobacillus spp. Inhibitory effects of vaginal lubricants could be due to several of the ingredients, including glyc-
erin, parabens, sorbic acid, chlorhexidine gluconate, all of which have been shown to have antimicrobial prop-
erties. www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/Lactobacillus spp.16. Both formulations of 
Replens, and all products except coconut oil inhibited E. coli, suggesting that L. crispatus may be less susceptible 
than E. coli to antimicrobial effects of these products..

When we added cultured, immortalized vaginal epithelial cells to the model, we demonstrated less inhibition 
of E. coli by the products that had been most inhibitory in the co-culture without vaginal cells. One possible explanation for the difference in E. coli inhibition 
in the presence of cells involves the ability of bacteria to adhere to and proliferate on epithelial cell surfaces17. In a 96-well microplate, the following were added to each well: 75 µL fresh nutrient broth, 
50 µL test product, 25 µL E. coli broth culture at 0.5 OD, adapted from Kalyoussef et al.21. The plates were incubated anaerobically at 37 °C without agitation 
for 12 hours. Supernatants were serially diluted and plated on MRS agar to count colony forming units (CFU) at 
both the start and end of incubation. Bacterial broths 
were prepared as described previously, and then centrifuged at 1000 RPM for 5 minutes. However, because the growth of the Lactobacillus 
spp. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.