Brief Reviews

  e
Th

Journal of

Immunology

The Impact of Maternal Microbes and Microbial
Colonization in Early Life on Hematopoiesis

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

function of the immune system at distal tissues, including
primary lymphoid organs, such as the bone marrow (BM) and
thymus. However, recent evidence suggests that coloni-
zation may, in fact, precede birth. It
has been suggested that a placental microbiome, seeded from
the mother’s intestine and oral cavity, may develop to initiate
fetal colonization during gestation. 2

Copyright (cid:1) 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc. 0022-1767/18/$35.00

Kathy D. McCoy and Carolyn A. Thomson

All body surfaces are colonized by microbes, which oc-
curs through a dynamic process over the ﬁrst few years
of life. Microbes
are passed vertically from mother to child during birth and are
subsequently obtained via horizontal transfer from the envi-
ronment. Accepted for publication February 12,
2018. As a result,

these pups rapidly succumbed to experimental infection with
Escherichia coli or Klebsiella pneumoniae. In the experiments above, the effects of antibiotics could
reﬂect an inﬂuence on the microbiota of the mother, the
neonate, or both. To assess the impact of the maternal
microbiota alone, without any inﬂuence from microbial col-
onization of the pups after birth, Gomez de Ag€uero et al. This study revealed that
maternal Ab-mediated vertical transfer of maternal microbial
components vastly altered gene expression in the intestine of

The Journal of Immunology

2521

Downloaded from 

http://www.jimmunol.org/

 by guest on June 25, 2020

FIGURE 1. Microbial signals in early life shape the repertoire of immune cell development in the BM. A child’s immune system can be modulated by microbial
signals at various stages in development. This has been shown to impact the immune cell repertoire in the intestine and may affect susceptibil-
ity to intestinal pathogens. ( If the
normal processes of establishing a microbiota are disrupted
during this period, it may have life-long consequences for the
host, leading to increased susceptibility to a number of dis-
orders, including autoimmune diseases, IBD, asthma, allergy,
obesity, and autism. Although multiple pathways are likely to
be involved, it is possible that alterations in hematopoiesis in
the developing BM or other tissues may result from decreased
or altered microbial signals. Whether early B cell development can occur in the
intestines of humans is not clear, although pre-B cells have
been found in the human fetal small intestinal lamina propria

 In mice, although early B cells that express RAGs are
absent from the small intestine at birth, they are found to
accumulate in the gut mucosa at weaning, coincident with
increasing microbial colonization in early life  This
suggests that microbes (and potentially dietary Ags) may play
an important role in shaping the primary Ab repertoire in
early life  and this may occur outside of the BM. Nevertheless, recognition of
microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) is likely to be
important; indeed, intestinal colonization of germ-free mice
with a combination of E. coli, Staphylococcus xylosus, and
Enterococcus faecalis stimulates myelopoiesis in a MyD88 and
TRIF–dependent manner  Although it was unclear what
cell types mediated this response, one possibility is that it
reﬂects regulation of secondary mediator production by in-
testinal enterocytes stimulated by MAMPs from the com-
mensal bacteria. Recent
work showed that microbial dysbiosis caused by feeding mice
a high-fat diet was associated with a shift in hematopoiesis in
favor of myelopoiesis at the expense of the lymphoid lineage
 These changes appeared to reﬂect an increase in MPPs
and common myeloid progenitors and a concomitant re-
duction in common lymphocyte progenitors (CLPs) and
immature B cells. Similarly, Ver-
rucomicrobia are Gram-negative and increased during van-
comycin treatment; in contrast to Proteobacteria, members of
this phylum, such as Akkermansia muciniphila, promote a
healthy gut, possibly through colonizing the outer mucous
layer and producing SCFAs  In contrast, Actinobacteria
are Gram-positive and depleted by vancomycin treatment. Thus, deﬁned changes in the microbiota,
resulting from antibiotic use or changes in our diet, may have
drastic effects on how our immune system tackles challenges
as a result of effects on hematopoiesis. By triggering a downregulation of
CXCL12, a surface-bound chemokine expressed by BM
stromal cells, and by activating neutrophil proteases, G-CSF
breaks the chemokine ligand–receptor bond that usually re-
tains neutrophils within the BM niche  Further,
G-CSF triggers the release of the neutrophil chemoattractants
CXCL1 and CXCL2 from vascular endothelial cells  By
binding to CXCR2 on neutrophils, these chemokines recruit
newly differentiated neutrophils to the bloodstream. shows that preformed CCL2 is stored in the
vesicles of stromal cells within the BM itself, from where it is
rapidly released after TLR4 ligation. 2

Impact of microbial signals on HSC function and leukocyte longevity

The microbial factors that regulate myeloid cell production
and differentiation in the BM may also control their subse-
quent expansion and longevity after their export to the pe-
riphery. However, recent work cou-
pling functional studies with transcriptional and epigenetic
modiﬁcation assays suggests that HSCs are biased in their
differentiation potential and that speciﬁc HSC clones
may be impaired in their ability to differentiate down a par-
ticular lineage pathway by cell-autonomous epigenetic con-
straints generated the
transgenic HUe mouse strain, which allowed fate mapping of
endogenous HSCs in vivo, as well as isolation of distinct HSC
clones and transplantation into new hosts. In addition to these effects in adults, it is becoming in-
creasingly clear that early life is a particularly critical period
during which disruption of normal microbial colonization can
have life-long effects on immune function. Disclosures
The authors have no ﬁnancial conﬂicts of interest.