in  phylum-  or  genus-level  relative  abundance  between  diet  arms, 
with the exception of the Verrucomicrobia phylum which was sig-
nificantly  increased  during  UF  (Extended  Data  Fig. Samples 
were  selected  from  18  individuals  at  four  key  time  points  includ-
ing a baseline  sample,  midpoint samples  during  each 3-d UF and 
OF period, a sample during the washout period in between and a 
sample during the vancomycin or placebo arm. Differentially  abundant 
bacteria  on  each  diet  arm  (independent  of  order)  were  identified 
using  a  paired  Wilcoxon  test. Analysis 
using unpaired Wilcoxon tests revealed 41 bacterial species with a 
significant difference (false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05) in relative 
abundance  ,  with  a  skew  towards  decreased  abundance 
in the vancomycin group  Consistent 
with  our  16S  rRNA  gene  sequencing  data,  these  vancomycin-
depleted  bacteria  spanned  multiple  gram-positive  (Actinobacteria 
and  Firmicutes)  and  gram-negative  (Bacteroidetes)  phyla. Three 
Veillonella  species21  were  significantly  enriched  in  vancomycin-
treated  individuals. We  also  detected  an  enrichment  for  multiple 
Lactobacillus  and  Klebsiella  species  in  the  vancomycin  group,  in 
addition  to  a  virulent  bacteriophage  that  infects  lactobacilli  (Lc-
Nu)22,  consistent  with  evidence  in  mouse  models  that  antibiotics 
induce phage production23..

Despite increased stool calorie loss with both UF versus OF and 
vancomycin  versus  placebo,  we  found  markedly  different  effects  of 
these interventions on the gut microbiota. Consistent with our taxonomic analyses (Fig. Lactobacillus phage Lc_Nu
Lactobacillus salivarius
Klebsiella oxytoca
Megasphaera micronuciformis
Odoribacter splanchnicus
Parabacteroides merdae
Alistipes putredinis
Erysipelotrichaceae bacterium 21_3
Lachnospiraceae bacterium 7_1_58FAA
Ruminococcus sp 5_1_39BFAA
Clostridium leptum
Oscillibacter sp. 5 | changes in the gut microbiome in response to oral vancomycin. Each data point represents the mean value of samples from each subject (n = 70 samples from 24 
subjects). c, Principal coordinate analysis of Bray–Curtis dissimilarity for 
ordination of microbial communities of subjects on vancomycin or placebo. e, Venn diagram of 16S rRNA sequence variants 
significantly different between vancomycin and placebo, or UF and OF, respectively (FDR < 0.1, two-sided unpaired or paired Wilcoxon test). Two bacterial 
species consistently changed in response to both perturbations: A. muciniphila and an unidentified species belonging to Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group..

Our  results  provide  insights  into  potential  mechanisms  that 
could explain the increased stool calories loss. In  humans,  a  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  pilot 
study revealed a trend towards decreased body weight and fat mass . in  response  to  A.  muciniphila  supplementation45. Additional studies are 
warranted to elucidate the role and mechanisms of A. muciniphila 
in nutrient absorption.