IAP treat-
ment was shown to have more of an impact on the developing
microbiome than direct exposure to antibiotics  This study
reported higher proportions of Leuconostaceae 
and Micrococcaceae and Propionibacteriaceae 
in infants born to antibiotic-treated mothers. It is important to emphasize that the antibiotic-
mediated effects in this model must reﬂect vertical transfer
from the mother to the pup, because the treatment was started
during pregnancy and discontinued prior to weaning. These
studies indicate that caution needs to be applied when con-
sidering the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics during labor or
the perinatal period and perhaps suggest potential beneﬁts of
coadministering probiotics under these circumstances..

FIGURE 1. Microbial signals in early life shape the repertoire of immune cell development in the BM. A child’s immune system can be modulated by microbial
signals at various stages in development. This has been shown to impact the immune cell repertoire in the intestine and may affect susceptibil-
ity to intestinal pathogens. ( B and C) From birth onward, children are exposed to microbes in the environment (i), which
(Figure legend continues). Nevertheless, recognition of
microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) is likely to be
important; indeed, intestinal colonization of germ-free mice
with a combination of E. coli, Staphylococcus xylosus, and
Enterococcus faecalis stimulates myelopoiesis in a MyD88 and
TRIF–dependent manner  Although it was unclear what
cell types mediated this response, one possibility is that it
reﬂects regulation of secondary mediator production by in-
testinal enterocytes stimulated by MAMPs from the com-
mensal bacteria. This would be consistent with experiments
showing that epithelial cell–derived CXCL5 can regulate the. The identity of the organisms mediating the effects of the
steady-state microbiota on hematopoiesis is largely unknown,
as are many of the mechanisms that might alter these processes
during pathogenic infection or after treatment with antibiotics. Recent
work showed that microbial dysbiosis caused by feeding mice
a high-fat diet was associated with a shift in hematopoiesis in
favor of myelopoiesis at the expense of the lymphoid lineage
 These changes appeared to reﬂect an increase in MPPs
and common myeloid progenitors and a concomitant re-
duction in common lymphocyte progenitors (CLPs) and
immature B cells. As a result, the host mice were less able to
regenerate leukocytes following BM ablation with 5-ﬂuoro-
uracil. Microbial dysbiosis in mice fed a high-fat diet was
characterized by an increased abundance of Verrucomicrobia,
Actinobacteria, and Proteobacteria species in the cecum and
ileum, with a relative decrease in Bacteriodetes and Firmicutes. Exactly which bacteria may be playing a role is not clear,
because Actinobacteria are the third most dominant bacterial
phylum in humans and can be pathogens, like Mycobacterium,
or commensals, such as Biﬁdobacterium. Another study found
that feeding mice with a ﬁber-rich diet led to an outgrowth of
Bacteriodetes at the expense of Firmicutes, leading to an in-
crease in the levels of the SCFAs propionate and acetate in the
circulation  When challenged intranasally with house
dust mite Ag, mice on the high-ﬁber diet developed less severe
airway inﬂammation than mice fed regular chow.