of intravaginal nonoxyl-9 (an ingredient in spermicide and a commonly used cytotoxic control) and univer-
sal placebo gel (isotonic) found that both have inflammatory effects on cells of the cervix and endometrium12. While these products 
have been shown to negatively impact cells of the female reproductive tract, little is known about how vaginal 
lubricants impact potentially protective Lactobacillus spp. After six hours of co-culture, both the laboratory strain and a representative clinical strain of E. coli (from a 
postmenopausal woman with cystitis) were similarly impacted by the tested products . When exposed to a 
1:100 dilution of KY Jelly, Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer, or Trimo-San in KSF, the laboratory strain of E. coli 
was inhibited compared to a KSF media control (p = 0.01, Fig. However, in the presence of human vaginal 
epithelial cells, E. coli demonstrated no inhibition in the presence of KY Jelly, and increased growth with Replens 
Long-Lasting and Trimo-San compared to control (p < 0.05, Fig. L. crispatus growth was stimulated by Replens Silky Smooth (p < 0.01). in an in vitro co-culture model 
without vaginal epithelial cells. None of the products inhibited the growth of Lactobacillus spp. Change in bacterial growth with exposure to vaginal products. ( b) Final change in growth of 
L. crispatus, as measured in CFU (in 1:100 diluted product and MRS/KSF cell culture media as control), 
demonstrating a lack of inhibition by KY Jelly, Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer and Trimo-San, regardless of 
the presence of human vaginal epithelial cells (p > 0.05). Previously, parabens in mouthwash and vaginal moisturizer have been found to decrease or inhibit oral 

Scientific RepoRtS  |         10:7625  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-63652-x

3

www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/Lactobacillus spp.16. An inspection of the 
surface of bovine intestinal epithelial cells showed that adherent bacteria were digesting sloughed dead epithelial 
cells, suggesting another resource for bacterial survival and proliferation18. This suggests factors in 
addition to concentration of product may contribute to bacterial survival or growth. In addition, the negative 
impact of some vaginal products on Lactobacillus spp. Our study is limited by the lack of a better human vaginal model. Materials and Methods
Bacterial culture preparation. Two negative control conditions were used: sterile phosphate buffered saline 
(PBS, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and diluted ethanol to match the ethanol content in the methylparaben 
condition (Table 1). In a 96-well microplate, the following were added to each well: 75 µL fresh nutrient broth, 
50 µL test product, 25 µL E. coli broth culture at 0.5 OD, adapted from Kalyoussef et al.21. Plates were incubated at 37 °C 
with agitation for 6 hours. The plates were incubated anaerobically at 37 °C without agitation 
for 12 hours. Bacterial broths 
were prepared as described previously, and then centrifuged at 1000 RPM for 5 minutes. Vaginal epithelial cells were incubated overnight to achieve >90% 
confluence. Cell death was assessed with a lactate dehydro-
genase cytotoxicity assay (Fisher Scientific, MA). was inhibited in the KSF media alone, a 1:1 mixture of MRS/KSF medium was utilized for that portion of the 
experiment, which was found to have a minimal impact on human cell viability (Supplemental Fig. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05. Received: 13 December 2019; Accepted: 21 March 2020;
Published: xx xx xxxx