In this review, we describe the pronounced microbial
changes
female, as well as
in the pregnant
provide an overview of the initial exposure of the fetus to
microbiota—from the placenta,
through birth and infancy. 2015), are signiﬁcantly decreased in the. The vaginal microbiome is dominated by many species
including Lactobacillus and members of
the Clostridiales,
Bacteriodales, and Actinomycetales (Aagaard et al., Speciﬁcally, these lactic acid producing
bacteria can create a barrier against pathogen invasion by
maintaining a low pH (< 4.5) and by secreting metabolites
that play an important role in inhibition of bacterial and viral
infection in the urogenital tract (Martin et al., This may
be due to the fact that some Lactobacillus species have bactericidal
activities against other species, ensuring their predominance and
low variability, which may help in protection against infections
during pregnancy (Spurbeck and Arvidson, 2010)..

vaginal communities were more similar to the gut microbiota
communities, with Lactobacillus being replaced by various
including Peptoniphilus, Prevotella, and
anaerobic bacteria,
Anaerococcus. The
postpartum vaginal microbiome was also characterized by
gradual depletion of Lactobacillus species,
increased alpha-
diversity, and enrichment of bacteria associated with vaginosis,
such as Actinobacteria, in 40% of the subjects at 6 weeks after
birth (as opposed to only 2% of the subjects during pregnancy;
MacIntyre et al., These results were further
reinforced in an additional study, showing higher levels of
A. actinomycetemcomitans in the second and third trimesters
of pregnancy compared to non-pregnant women (Borgo
et al., and
and Ureaplasma,
higher alpha diversity. However, several studies suggest that the
colonization of the fetus begins prior to birth. However, direct proof for microbial colonization of the
fetus, as well as the potential mechanisms by which bacteria pass
from the mother to the fetus are still unknown. 2014)..

several additional studies have shown distinct eﬀects of delivery
mode on the gut microbiota composition of newborn babies. This, together with a higher abundance of
Staphylococcus in C-section newborns compared to vaginal
births, may explain why 64–82% of reported cases of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) skin infections in
newborns occur in C-section delivered infants (Centers for
Disease Prevention, 2006)..

Interestingly, the mode of delivery has an eﬀect on the infant’s
oral microbiome, as well (Lif Holgerson et al., Moreover, the administration of probiotics (including
Lactobacillus sp.) Maternal weight was found to be a major inﬂuencing factor in
shaping milk bacterial composition. The
remaining small sugars can be further metabolized by glycolytic
microbes present in the infant,
including lactate-producing
bacteria such as Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, and Enterococcus..

The weaning period with transition to solid foods has
a signiﬁcant role in shaping the gut bacterial composition. Additionally, levels of fecal short chain
fatty acids were shown to be higher after introducing solid
foods to infants (Koenig et al.,