Hullar and Fu

Page 2

Here, we present below examples of the role of the microbiome in dietary metabolism, an 
overview of eukaryotic epigenetic mechanisms, and microbially-derived metabolites that are 
relevant to eukaryotic epigenetic changes in gene expression that may be linked to colon 
cancer. In particular, we focus on the following microbial metabolites: the short chain fatty 
acids (SCFA), isothiocyanates, lipids, and select polyphenols. Diet shapes the microbiome

Diet helps shape the composition of the intestinal microbiota. Modification of histone proteins loosens the chromatin, making it more available for 
transcription. Post-translational modifications of the N-termini of histone 3 or histone 4, 
occur by acetylation, methylation, ubiquitination, phosphorylation, or sumoylation. HATs catalyze the addition 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. miRNAs are generated by a complex protein system involving 
transcription of miRNA genes by RNA polymerase II and processing of the pre-miRNA by 
Drosha and Dicer ribonucleases.33 Mature miRNA are part of an active RNA-induced 
silencing complex (RISC). miRNAs regulate post-transcriptional expression by either 
imperfect base-pairing to mRNA or by affecting mRNA stability. Each miRNA controls 
several genes in related pathways. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 4

The fluxes through these pools vary by fiber source and microbial pathways dictated by 
microbial community composition of the lumen. showed 
that while F. prausnitizii and Roseburia spp derived about 85% of butyrate carbon from 
external pools of acetate, Coporcoccus spp. Propionate is also formed via microbial fermentation of 
carbohydrates. Normal cells near the lumen experience higher levels of butyrate which accumulates in the 
nucleus and inhibits HDAC. Cell proliferation is inhibited, apoptosis is induced, and the 
cells are exfoliated into the lumen. While inhibition of HDACs is a common mechanism to inhibit cancer growth, the effect of 
SCFA on the prevention of colorectal cancer has been inconsistent. This may be due to 
differences in response among eukaryotic cell lines or effects of other SCFA. Cooking cruciferous vegetables deactivates the plant 
myrosinases, and given that most cruciferous vegetables consumed by humans are cooked, 
gut bacteria play a critical role in converting glucosinolates to ITC. isolated from the human gut or feces can convert glucosinolates into 
ITCs and other derivatives.53-55 Controlled feeding studies in humans have shown 
significant inter-individual differences in urinary ITC excretion after participants consumed 
the same amount of cruciferous vegetables that had been either heated or microwaved prior 
to consumption to remove the plant myrosinase activity.56-58 Similar effects have been 
found in studies with rats.59, 60 This suggests inter-individual differences exist in the activity 
or composition of the intestinal bacteria involved in ITC formation. Recent studies have shown that sulforaphane is an HDAC inhibitor 
and leads to an increase in global and local histone acetylation.62, 63 Similar to butyrate, 
SFN causes p21 upregulation and cell cycle arrest. They include phenolic acids (hydroxybenzoic acids 
and hydroxycinnamic acids), anthocyanins, flavonoids (flavanols, flavonols, flavones, 
flavonones, and isoflavones), stilbenes, lignans, and curcuminoids. Polyphenols have exhibited differential selection for different species in the microbial 
community by either acting as an antibiotic or a prebiotic which may influence human 
exposure to microbial metabolites of polyphenols. The gut microbiome 
metabolizes ellagitannins to urolithins by removal of one of the lactone rings and subsequent 
dehydroxylation in the colon. Bile is secreted from the gall bladder into the small intestine to help emulsify fats 
during digestion. Listed below are two examples of microbial metabolism of fats 
that may influence epigenetics. Fish oil from cold water fish and plants provides dietary sources of ω 3 long chain 
polyunsaturated fatty acids  Epidemiologic studies have shown that these 
fats are protective against colon and prostate cancer although there are conflicting results. Azoxymethane (AOM) tumor 
induction in rats fed either fish showed that the 
fish oil intervention produced fewer tumors and the lowest number of differentially express 
miRNAs.95 The anaerobic bacteria, Roseburia, Bifidobacteria, and Lactobacillus, found in 
the distal gut, metabolize 3ω LC-PUFA from dietary intake to conjugated linolenic (CLnA) 
acids.96, 97 Although 3ω LC-PUFA are not produced by bacteria, the availability of 3ω LC-

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. ,112 Recent mechanistic studies suggest that, in contrast to butyrate, 
UDCA induced cell differentiation and senescence in colon cancer cells via histone 
hypoacetylation.113

Transformation of dietary compounds by the gut microbiome results in additional 
environmental exposures that may influence epigenetic mechanisms of gene expression. Summary and Future Directions

Acknowledgments