The fluxes through these pools vary by fiber source and microbial pathways dictated by 
microbial community composition of the lumen. While acetate is a dominant end product of 
glycolysis, cross-feeding between groups of bacteria occurs and can influence SCFA 
pools.38 Butyrate forming bacteria condense acetate from butyrl CoA and external pools of 
acetate.39, 40 Use of external pools of acetate varies among bacterial species and may alter 
the amount of acetate and butyrate available to the host. showed 
that while F. prausnitizii and Roseburia spp derived about 85% of butyrate carbon from 
external pools of acetate, Coporcoccus spp. only derived 28%.41 In addition, different 
sources of carbohydrates produce different amounts of butyrate ranging from 56% with 
pectin to 90% for xylan. Propionate is also formed via microbial fermentation of 
carbohydrates. After formation of pyruvate, depending upon the microbial composition, 
propionate is formed via the succinate or the more minor acrylate pathways from 
carbohydrates that reach the colon.42 While butyrate supplies the majority of energy to 
colonic epithelial cells primarily through beta-oxidation, concentrations of SCFA in the 
colon are also high enough to influence regulation of colon epithelial gene expression.43-45. Glucosinolates are converted into isothiocyanates (ITC) by either the plant myrosinases, or 
bacterially produced thioglucosidases. Cooking cruciferous vegetables deactivates the plant 
myrosinases, and given that most cruciferous vegetables consumed by humans are cooked, 
gut bacteria play a critical role in converting glucosinolates to ITC. Previous studies have 
shown that certain species of bacteria, such as Escherichia coli, Bacteroides 
thetaiotaomicron, Enterococcus faecalis, Enterococcus faecium, Peptostreptococcus sp. isolated from the human gut or feces can convert glucosinolates into 
ITCs and other derivatives.53-55 Controlled feeding studies in humans have shown 
significant inter-individual differences in urinary ITC excretion after participants consumed 
the same amount of cruciferous vegetables that had been either heated or microwaved prior 
to consumption to remove the plant myrosinase activity.56-58 Similar effects have been 
found in studies with rats.59, 60 This suggests inter-individual differences exist in the activity 
or composition of the intestinal bacteria involved in ITC formation. In support of this 
hypothesis, we showed recently that the fecal bacteria from individuals who excrete higher 
amounts of ITC in their urine after a standard meal of cooked broccoli metabolize more 
glucoraphanin in-vitro.61. In particular, there was a positive association with DCA and colorectal 
adenomas, a precursor to colorectal cancer.103-109 In contrast, UDCA has been shown in 
animal and in vitro studies to reduce the risk of cancer dysplasia and cancer 
development110, 111 and, in a phase III clinical trial, UDCAs reduced the degree of dysplasia 
in colonic polyps. ,112 Recent mechanistic studies suggest that, in contrast to butyrate, 
UDCA induced cell differentiation and senescence in colon cancer cells via histone 
hypoacetylation.113