Hullar and Fu

Page 2

Here, we present below examples of the role of the microbiome in dietary metabolism, an 
overview of eukaryotic epigenetic mechanisms, and microbially-derived metabolites that are 
relevant to eukaryotic epigenetic changes in gene expression that may be linked to colon 
cancer. In particular, we focus on the following microbial metabolites: the short chain fatty 
acids (SCFA), isothiocyanates, lipids, and select polyphenols. Differences in the distribution 
of bacteria are associated with dietary patterns and this influences host exposure to microbial 
metabolites. Modification of histone proteins loosens the chromatin, making it more available for 
transcription. Post-translational modifications of the N-termini of histone 3 or histone 4, 
occur by acetylation, methylation, ubiquitination, phosphorylation, or sumoylation. HATs catalyze the addition 

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. Hypermethylation of genes involved 
in pathways identified as the hallmarks of cancer: cell cycle regulation, DNA repair, 
apoptosis, hormone response, carcinogen metabolism, angiogenesis and metastases are 
found in several human cancers 2, 23-26

Methylation of DNA in the coding region of a gene, especially the conversion of cytosine to 
5-methylcytosine, leads to CpG dinucleotides that affect expression of target genes. miRNAs are generated by a complex protein system involving 
transcription of miRNA genes by RNA polymerase II and processing of the pre-miRNA by 
Drosha and Dicer ribonucleases.33 Mature miRNA are part of an active RNA-induced 
silencing complex (RISC). Each miRNA controls 
several genes in related pathways. showed 
that while F. prausnitizii and Roseburia spp derived about 85% of butyrate carbon from 
external pools of acetate, Coporcoccus spp. Propionate is also formed via microbial fermentation of 
carbohydrates. Cell proliferation is inhibited, apoptosis is induced, and the 
cells are exfoliated into the lumen. This may be due to 
differences in response among eukaryotic cell lines or effects of other SCFA. Cooking cruciferous vegetables deactivates the plant 
myrosinases, and given that most cruciferous vegetables consumed by humans are cooked, 
gut bacteria play a critical role in converting glucosinolates to ITC. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hullar and Fu

Page 5

Bifidobacterium sp., In support of this 
hypothesis, we showed recently that the fecal bacteria from individuals who excrete higher 
amounts of ITC in their urine after a standard meal of cooked broccoli metabolize more 
glucoraphanin in-vitro.61

Studies suggest that the exposure to ITCs in-vivo may well translate to prevention or 
reduction in tumor growth through the effects on DNA methylation, histone modification, 
and miRNA. Recent studies have shown that sulforaphane is an HDAC inhibitor 
and leads to an increase in global and local histone acetylation.62, 63 Similar to butyrate, 
SFN causes p21 upregulation and cell cycle arrest. They include phenolic acids (hydroxybenzoic acids 
and hydroxycinnamic acids), anthocyanins, flavonoids (flavanols, flavonols, flavones, 
flavonones, and isoflavones), stilbenes, lignans, and curcuminoids. The gut microbiome 
metabolizes ellagitannins to urolithins by removal of one of the lactone rings and subsequent 
dehydroxylation in the colon. Bile is secreted from the gall bladder into the small intestine to help emulsify fats 
during digestion. Listed below are two examples of microbial metabolism of fats 
that may influence epigenetics. Fish oil from cold water fish and plants provides dietary sources of ω 3 long chain 
polyunsaturated fatty acids  Epidemiologic studies have shown that these 
fats are protective against colon and prostate cancer although there are conflicting results. Case-control studies and experimental studies which focused 
on a defined dietary intake support the hypothesis of CRC risk reduction by 3ω LC-PUFA. Azoxymethane (AOM) tumor 
induction in rats fed either fish showed that the 
fish oil intervention produced fewer tumors and the lowest number of differentially express 
miRNAs.95 The anaerobic bacteria, Roseburia, Bifidobacteria, and Lactobacillus, found in 
the distal gut, metabolize 3ω LC-PUFA from dietary intake to conjugated linolenic (CLnA) 
acids.96, 97 Although 3ω LC-PUFA are not produced by bacteria, the availability of 3ω LC-

Cancer J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01. ,112 Recent mechanistic studies suggest that, in contrast to butyrate, 
UDCA induced cell differentiation and senescence in colon cancer cells via histone 
hypoacetylation.113

Transformation of dietary compounds by the gut microbiome results in additional 
environmental exposures that may influence epigenetic mechanisms of gene expression. Summary and Future Directions

Acknowledgments