the German pediatrician Teodor Escherich in 1885 (Shul-
man et al., Slackia piriformis, AB601000
Slackia exigua, AF101240. Brevibacterium casei, EU652099
Brevibacterium masseliense, JN381553
Brevibacterium ravenspurgense, EU086793. are still considered to be opportunistic
pathogens, several decades of research have testiﬁed that
many Bacteroidetes species are highly adjusted to the gas-
trointestinal tract, where they live in high abundance (up
(cid:1)1 of intestinal material; Eggerth & Gagnon,
to 1011 cells g
1933; Moore & Holdeman, 1974a; Benno et al., GenBank Accession Numbers of the
SSU rRNA gene sequence are provided for each species and the family names are indicated. 2013)..

complex: while the reduced abundance of the Bacteroide-
tes in some cases is associated with obesity (Ley, 2010)
and irritable bowel syndrome (Rajili(cid:1)c-Stojanovi(cid:1)c et al., Staphylococcus pasteuri, AB269765
Staphylococcus warneri, L37603
Staphylococcus hominis, L37601
Staphylococcus lugdunensis, AB009941. Anaerostipes butyraticus, AB616134
Parasporobacterium paucivorans, AJ272036
Anaerostipes caccae, AB243986. which can be utilized by Blautia spp..

An interesting group within the Lachnospiraceae family
is the misclassiﬁed Ruminococcus spp., have been recognized as gastrointestinal
inhabitants, although a number of other species that are
ofﬁcially classiﬁed within different genera (predominantly
Clostridium) belong to the Peptostreptococcaceae family
according to their SSU rRNA gene sequence . Not much is known about the role of this
group of strictly anaerobic bacteria in the human gastro-
intestinal tract, but it is noteworthy that bacteria that
belong to the Christensenella/Catabacter group were
reported to be dramatically depleted in fecal
samples of ulcerative patients relative to controls (Rajili(cid:1)c-
Stojanovi(cid:1)c
(ﬁvefold)
depleted in fecal samples of patients with postinfectious
irritable bowel syndrome (Jalanka-Tuovinen et al., 1975), and this property that
may be detrimental to health as described below for the
Deltaproteobacteria..

Finally, Halanaerobaculum tunisiense has been identiﬁed
by pyrosequencing of the V6 variable region of the SSU
rRNA gene in a recent study that compared efﬁciency of
culturomics and pyrosequencing approach for studying
the gastrointestinal microbiota diversity (Lagier et al., The human gastrointestinal tract-associated
Fusobacteria also include representatives of the Leptotri-
chia genus and the misclassiﬁed C. rectum ..

Fusobacteria are
frequently
another phylum of
detected gastrointestinal bacteria, the majority of which
belong to the genus Fusobacterium . Based on
their low prevalence in the gastrointestinal tract,
it is
most likely that Xanthomonadaceae are transient members
of the gastrointestinal microbiota..

Sulfate-reducing bacteria that cluster within the d class of
the phylum Proteobacteria inhabit the human gastrointes-
tinal
tract where they utilize sulfate that can be diet
derived or released from mucins. In an early cultivation study,
which dates from 1968, a single methanogenic species,
isolated from four of ﬁve individuals, was identiﬁed as
Methanobrevibacter ruminantium (Nottingham & Hun-
gate, 1968). Molecular studies of the Euk-
arya as part of the ecosystem in the human gastrointestinal
tract already conﬁrmed the presence of two Entamoeba spe-
cies: Entamoeba coli (Scanlan & Marchesi, 2008) and Ent-
amoeba
the
gastrointestinal tract of a healthy man..

Members of the phyla Micosporidia, Parabasalia and
Metamonada are micro-eukaryotic organisms that contain
ﬂagella and are often commonly termed as ﬂagellates.