Diseases 2018, 6, 56

2 of 10

between the gut microbiome and CVDs to promote an understanding of the latest perspectives of the
role of the gut microbiome in CVDs. Moreover, we have raised several issues that should be considered
when interpreting previous evidence. Trimethylamine-N-oxide and CVDs

A close relationship between the gut microbe-dependent production of trimethylamine-N-oxide
(TMAO), derived from speciﬁc dietary nutrients such as choline and carnitine, and future
cardiovascular events has been widely recognized  Trimethylamine (TMA), which is produced by
the gut microbial enzymes TMA lyases, is a precursor of TMAO. TMAO can be measured by liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry. 2015 J. Card Fail

Patients who were undergoing elective
diagnostic cardiac catheterization

Stable heart failure patients underwent
elective coronary angiographic evaluation

Chronic systolic heart failure with
comprehensive echocardiographic evaluation

112 in USA

Adverse clinical events
(death/transplantation)

2016 Heart

Acute heart failure

972 in UK

All-cause mortality (death) and a
composite of death or re-hospitalization
due to heart failure (death/HF)

2016

Am. These metabolites have
also been reported to have a link to CVDs. Indoxyl sulfate is produced by gut microbial tryptophanases
that convert dietary tryptophan into indole, which is then converted to indoxyl and indoxyl sulfate in the
liver by the sequential actions of cytochrome P450 enzymes and sulfotransferase 1A1. Last year, a metagenome-wide association
study of fecal samples from 218 CAD patients and 187 healthy subjects from China was reported 
The abundance of Enterobacteriaceae was signiﬁcantly higher in the CAD patients compared to the
healthy subjects. was also signiﬁcantly higher in the patients
with CAD than in the healthy subjects. are known to have an important role in maintaining a
healthy gut ecosystem  and that the abundance of Bacteroides spp. may
have the potential to regulate atherosclerosis progression. Furthermore, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii,
which exhibits anti-inﬂammatory effects  was also signiﬁcantly depleted in the CAD patients. Of note, the co-abundance network structure differed between the two groups. The negative

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

5 of 10

correlations between Streptococcus spp. On the other hand, the positive correlation between Bacteroides spp. and Erysipelotrichaceae bacterium
was seen only in the healthy subjects. Year

Study Population

Country

Analysis

Results

2012 Nat. 12 patients with symptomatic atherosclerosis
(myocardial infarction or cerebrovascular events)
and 13 age- and sex-matched healthy individuals. Sweden

Gut metagenome

Collinsella ↑, Eubacterium ↓, Roseburia ↓ in patients
with symptomatic atherosclerosis. China

Gut metagenome

Enterobacteriaceae (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., and Enterobacter aerogenes),
Streptococcus spp., have investigated the metabolic patterns of the gut microbiome
in patients with chronic HF to provide direct evidence and a comprehensive understanding of
gut microbial dysbiosis  Fifty-three chronic HF patients (ischemic cardiomyopathy, n = 29;
dilated cardiomyopathy, n = 24) and 41 controls with risk factors were enrolled. This result provides a convincing explanation for the increased
plasma lipopolysaccharide levels in HF patients  because the main source of lipopolysaccharides
is the gut/gut microbiome. In such cases, an in vitro fermentation
system simulating the human intestinal tract may help to evaluate the functionality or safety of these
interventions under highly reproducible conditions without the ethical issues  Speciﬁcally, we can
culture feces from patients with prebiotics or probiotics in an in vitro fermentation system and analyze
how the gut microbiome, and its metabolites and functions, are changed after the intervention. Of note,
we have observed some discrepancies between the ﬁndings in humans and mice. With increasing awareness of the relationship between the
gut microbiome and CVD, we have high expectations for the clinical application of gut microbiome
modulation. Further studies, focusing on a more speciﬁc and mechanistic understanding of the gut
microbiome in the pathogenesis of CVD, are necessary to develop novel diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies for CVD. Author Contributions: T.Y. conceived and wrote the manuscript and made critical revisions. K.H. searched the bibliography and made critical revisions. Funding: This research was funded by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 24591114, 16K09516 (T.Y.) and 17K09497
(K.H.), The Japanese Circulation Society Translational Research Foundation (K.H.), Uehara Memorial Foundation
(K.H.), Takeda Scientiﬁc Foundation (T.Y.), Senshin Medical Research Foundation (T.Y.), Yakult Bioscience Research
Foundation (T.Y.), Hyogo Science and Technology Association (T.Y. and K.H.), and Kondou Kinen Medical
Foundation (T.Y.). Article Processing Charges was sponsored by MDPI.