Variance and abundance of taxa across three microbiota
phases
Taxonomic analysis of all samples identified 16 phyla, 38
classes, 73 orders, 158 families, and 383 genera. Compos-
itional differences across the phases at all taxonomic levels
were characterized and pairwise comparisons were made
between phases. The average composition of the samples
in each phase at the genus level is shown in Fig. 1f, which
represents the abundance of genera relative to bar size. The most significantly differentially abundant taxa between
P2 and P3 were a variety of Clostridiales elevated in P3, in-
cluding the genera Veillonella, Finegoldia, Clostridium, and
Anaerococcus. The most significant differences between P1
and P3 were observed among Staphylococcaceae which
were elevated in P1, and among Clostridiales genera Fine-
goldia and Veillonella which were elevated in the P3. Using a multivari-
ate mixed-effects regression model
that accounts for
subject-specific variations, we assessed changes in taxa
abundance at each phase, with PMA, gestational age at
birth, total calories per kilogram in the past week, propor-
tion of enteral calories in the past week, ratio of lipids,
carbohydrates and protein in the past week, antibiotics
and corticosteroid received during the past week, and add-
itional medications as covariates. At the phylum level, Actinobac-
teria and Proteobacteria are significantly associated with
lipid intake, Firmicutes with protein and Actinobacteria,
Proteobacteria, and Firmicutes with carbohydrates. Abun-
dance of Bifidobacterium, an Actinobacterium most com-
monly linked with development and maintenance of the
healthy infant gut microbiota  is significantly asso-
ciated with lipid and protein intake in P3, with increased
Bifidobacterium abundance associated with increased lipid
in the diet and decreased abundance with greater amounts
of protein. Among the commonly used NICU medica-
tions, increased abundance of Bifidobacterium was signifi-
cantly associated with use of corticosteroids and H2
receptor antagonists in the past week in P3. A complete
list of nutrition and medication variables significantly
associated with changes in microbiota taxa in all the three
phases can be found in in Additional file 7: Table S6..

sought to identify dynamic aspects of host biology that
correspond to phase transition. Emerging evidence sug-
gests that the initial newborn infant gut microbiota is
partially acquired by maternal transmission from the
amniotic fluid and placenta before birth  In
utero, the fetus swallows large quantities of amniotic
fluid that is colonized with bacteria in those mothers
who deliver prematurely  Genera in common
between amniotic fluid and the meconium, the earliest
fecal material passed by infants, suggests that pioneer
colonizers of
the infant gut are from this maternal
source. The succession of gut microbiota in our preterm co-
horts revealed a low level of initial diversity in P1, which
is dominated by facultative anaerobes, followed by in-
creasing diversity and abundance of obligate anaerobes
and a shift to fermentation based metabolism in P3. 16S ribosomal
RNA (rRNA) was amplified with Phusion High-Fidelity
polymerase (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and
dual indexed primers specific to the V3-V4 hypervari-
able regions (319F: 5′ ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG
3′; 806R: 3′ ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG 5′) 
Amplicons were pooled and paired-end sequenced on
an Illumina MiSeq (Illumina, San Diego, CA) in the
University of Rochester Genomics Research Center. Each sequencing run included positive controls con-
sisting of a 1:5 mixture of Staphylococcus aureus, Lacto-
coccus lactis, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Streptococcus
mutans, and Escherichia coli and negative controls
consisting of sterile saline.