Defects in host genes controlling bacterial homeostasis or al-
terations of the gut microbiota composition have been associ-
ated with complex diseases, including inflammatory bowel dis-
ease (IBD), diabetes mellitus (Pflughoeft and Versalovic 2012)
and asthma (Maslowski et al. Likewise, disease phenotypes
can be transferred by microbiota transplantation. 2013)..

light on bacterial functionality. In
addition, the exact impact of the microbial presence on the host
can be studied using other ‘-omic’ approaches, providing a mul-
tifaceted view by combining metagenomics with metatranscrip-
tomics, metaproteomics or metabolomics (Raes and Bork 2009;
Holmes et al. Important mechanistic insights in colonization resistance, the
mechanism whereby a microbial community is protected from
colonization of new and often harmful bacteria, were raised by
the use of sequential introduction of Bacteroides species into GF
mice (Lee et al. As in humans, the two most abundant bacte-
rial phyla in C57BL6/J mice are the Firmicutes (60–80% of se-
quences) and the Bacteroidetes  however, 85% of the
murine sequences represent species that have not been detected
in humans (Ley et al. However,
microbial species seem to be critically adapted to specific hosts. Transplantation has also been used in
mouse models of enteric infections. 2012), in accordance with the successful treatment
of human relapsing C. difficile colitis. Conse-
quently, randomly distributing and cohousing mutant and wild-
type mice in cages before the experiment could lead to loss of
phenotype as a result of microbiota transfer (Brinkman et al. In addition, TLR-MyD88 signaling in response to commen-
sal bacteria critically regulates defensin production by Paneth
cells (Menendez et al. As in-
nate sensors, they respond and divide rapidly upon stimulation. Essentially, the
strong protection observed in Casp1-null mice against a lethal
lipopolysaccharide challenge was found to be mainly due to this
inactivating passenger mutation in the Casp11 gene..

Besides strain and gender differences, investigators have
studied the effects of the allelic absence of specific genes on
the intestinal microbiota by comparing knockout with wild-type
mice. For example, phenotypic differences between TLR-
deficient C57BL/6J mouse colonies mainly reflected a diver-
gence of the microbiota after extended isolated breeding of the
colonies (Ubeda et al. Taken together, microbiota composition in genetically modified
mice may superimpose on the genetic effect causing a change
in host physiology..

Variation in the microbiological environment between research
institutions or commercial breeding facilities is a confounding
factor; however. the exact contribution to experimental out-
comes is poorly understood.