Among all mammals, the microbiota is extensively conserved at high taxonomic levels7, but
variation increases at progressively lower taxonomic levels30. Consequently, 85% of the
sequences obtained from the distal mouse gut represent genera that are not detected in
humans31. Indicator organisms such as Helicobacter pylori32 and
reptococcus mutans33 highlight some differences across the microbiota34 and
S
t
metagenome35 among human ethnic groups; however, the extent of ethnic variation in
overall metagenomic composition is unknown. Until
the amniotic sac ruptures, a fetus is considered to be sterile, or essentially sterile. Immediately after vaginal delivery, founding microbial populations in the baby closely
resemble that of their mother’s vagina54, with lactobacilli predominating. In the gut, the ratio of Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes changes
with age78..

These concepts are particularly relevant to oncogenesis, which is generally age-related. Genes may have alternative effects at different life
stages, illustrating the idea of antagonistic pleiotropy81. A related hypothesis is that co-evolved microbiota are
adaptive for the human species both by supporting early-in-life host functions and by
leading to later-in-life host demise 86..

The cutaneous microbiome is an obvious target in specific diseases, such as psoriasis, a
chronic, idiopathic inflammatory dermatologic condition87. Studies to
explore these findings using HTS are currently underway89. Classic atopic dermatitis occurs in areas, such as the ANTECUBITAL and POPLITEAL FOSSAE,
with similar microbial populations89, suggesting a microbiome role. Similarly,
Propionibacterium acnes has been implicated in the common dermatologic condition, acne. Chronic skin ulcers, often secondary to venous stasis or diabetes, lead
to substantial morbidity. The enrichment of Fusobacterium species (not
limited to F. nucleatum) was confirmed when evaluating the mucosal microbiome of
colorectal cancers compared to adjacent normal tissues from 99 subjects101. The microbial patterns observed for the conditions described above are preliminary and their
specificity and causal direction have not been established..

Genetically obese (ob/ob) mice have decreased Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratios compared
with lean (ob/+ and +/+ wild-type) siblings31. Despite substantial taxonomic variation, functional
metagenomic differences were minor37. Antibiotic use in human
infancy, before age 6 months, was significantly associated with obesity development123.