First we explored in detail the in vitro inhibitory effects of a selection of LGC strains against growth and 
pathogenic properties (adhesion to vaginal cells and hyphae formation) of Candida albicans. We examined the vaginal microbiome over four weeks: before, during, and after the 
use of the probiotic gel and compared the group requiring rescue medication (RM; 3 × 200 mg fluconazole) with 
the group not requesting this antifungal treatment..

Concentrations of produced lactic acid  to 20.22 g/L (L. 
pentosus KCA1). Finally, we 
compared the capacity of the lactobacilli to inhibit the formation of hyphae, a key virulence factor of C. albicans 
that enables invasion of host tissue. 1e)..

formulation of lactobacilli in silicone gel to preserve viability and promote topical applica-
tions. Plate count viability assays confirmed that the lactobacilli remained viable over multiple 
months of storage at 5 °C and 25 °C (Supplementary Fig. Subsequently, we evaluated whether L. plantarum 
WCFS1, L. pentosus KCA1 and L. rhamnosus GG formulated in the gel were able to modulate the vaginal micro-
biome over a four-week period in 20 patients suffering from acute VVC . The participants were asked to 
administer 2.5 ml of gel by use of an applicator in recumbent position at bedtime. Of the twenty women included in the study, nine women did not need the RM. www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/Figure 1. The regular growth medium without 
any added microorganisms was used as a negative control. ( e) Adhesion of C. albicans to VK2/E6E7 cells either 
alone or in co-incubation with lactobacilli as percentage of adherent cells to total applied cells. ( We also investigated the bacterial community present in the samples. The other ASVs belong to the genera Gardnerella, Atopobium, Prevotella, Aerococcus and 
Streptococcus. This first ASV likely corresponds to L. pentosus KCA1, L. plantarum WCFS1 or 
both, which were supplemented in the gel, as this ASV was only found at visit 2 (16/20 samples, during treatment 
with the gel) and visit 3  Similarly, LGC 7, found in 12 of the 20 visit 2 samples and one visit 3 
sample, likely corresponded to L. rhamnosus GG, also supplemented in the gel. In most women the lactobacillus that 
dominated the bacterial community before treatment (visit 1) was also dominant at the end of the study, after the 
treatment (visit 4), indicating the applied lactobacilli had a temporary effect on the microbiome (Supplemental 
Fig. If confirmed, selection of new probiotic targets active against these two path-
ogenic forms would definitely benefit the chances of success for future probiotic VVC studies..

formulation of gel containing selected lactobacilli.