Ananthakrishnan
 
 

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

FIGURE 1. Conceptual framework for incorporation of microbiome-based biomarkers in the management of IBD. Analysis of both 16s rRNA and metagenomic sequencing 
has traditionally relied on comparing the relative abundance of 
various  genera,  species,  and  strains  between  different  groups. Fecal  samples  were  obtained  at  therapy  cessation,  2  months, 
6 months, and the end of follow-up. Cross-sectional compari-
sons  were  also  made  with  29  healthy  control  patients. Over 
follow-up, 19 patients relapsed and 14 remained in remission. Interestingly, although all patients were 
in clinical remission at study entry, a lower baseline abundance 
of F. prausnitzii (P = 0.014) and Bacteroides (P = 0.030) pre-
dicted relapse after therapy cessation in addition to biochem-
ical markers such as an elevated serum C-reactive protein. Note  that  the  culture  supernatant  also  had  a  similar  effect  in 
reducing the severity of this particular colitis, suggesting that 
the  effect  of  F.  prauznitzii  may  be  mediated  in  part  through 
the  production  of  anti-inflammatory  metabolites. A small 
study of 12 patients with CD examined the microbiota profile 

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

Abbreviations: GA-map, genetic analysis; qPCR, quantitative polymerase chain reaction; RT-PCR, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Consistent with other observations, 
responders  had  a  less  dysbiotic  microbiome  at  baseline  than 
nonresponders. In a study by Michail and colleagues, pa-
tients who were steroid-responsive showed greater diversity at 
baseline than nonresponders.44

The  author  and  colleagues  previously  performed 
metagenomic  sequencing  from  fecal  samples  of  85  patients 
with  IBD  initiating  treatment  with  vedolizumab.25  The  study 
cohort included 43 patients with UC and 42 patients with CD. The primary outcome, remission at week 14, was attained by 31 
patients. This  difference  was  noted  primarily  at  the 
species  level. At  month  6,  several 
phyla were reduced in patients who had endoscopic recurrence 
(many  belonging  to  Firmicutes,  including  Ruminococcaceae 
and  Lachnospiraeceae),  and  there  was  an  expansion  of 
Proteobacteria. During  in-
duction,  patients  who  responded  (defined  by  a  reduction  in 
fecal  calprotectin)  showed  increasing  diversity  and  similarity 
to  healthy  control  patients,  whereas  a  similar  effect  was  not 
observed  among  those  who  were  nonresponders. Some  of  these  metabolite  exchanges, 
such as with butyrate, resolved posttreatment and most other 
exchanges  persisted. Patients  in  remission  at  week  6 
also had a higher alpha diversity at baseline than did those with 
active disease. The  PROTECT  cohort  recruited  400  children 

did not (q = 0.09 and 0.06, respectively). A  model  of  gut  mi-
crobial  composition  at  baseline  predicted  infliximab  response 
at  week  30  with  an  87%  accuracy,  which  was  superior  to  the 
predictive  value  of  the  Crohn’s  Disease  Activity  Index  (58% 
accuracy) and calprotectin levels  The most in-
formative features in this model were the abundance of various 
Clostridiales and the abundance of Veillonella, Bacteroides, and 
Anaerostipes. Aden et al24 performed a prospective study of 12 patients 
with  IBD,  17  patients  with  rheumatic  disease,  and  19  healthy 
control  patients  who  provided  fecal  samples  at  baseline  and 
2,  6,  and  30  weeks  after  treatment  with  anti-TNF  therapy. Twenty-three  patients  who  were  treated  with  either  anti-TNF 
drugs  or  vedolizumab  acted  as  control  patients. None of the taxa profiled 
predicted response to anti-TNF therapy. Limitations of Existing Data and Suggestions for 
Future Research

1. For example, 
although genetic association studies in IBD could make rapid strides in 
identifying potentially causal gene variants by the relative ease and con-
sistency of defining a disease state (CD, UC, or control), microbiome-
based  prediction  studies  have  required  more  nuanced,  time-varying 
definitions of outcomes (such as treatment response) that have differed 
between cohorts, limiting the ability to pool data. Similar to what has been achieved 
and is highly critical for advancing science in other fields (such 
as  genetics),  multicenter  collaborations  of  relatively  homoge-
neous populations and uniform accepted definitions controlling 
for  confounders  are  essential  to  move  such  microbiome-based 
biomarkers from a research endeavor to clinical practice. Ananthakrishnan
 
 

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ibdjournal/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ibd/izaa071/5822885 by Bibliotheque interuniversitaire de sante user on 21 April 2020

7

Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 
Inflamm Bowel Dis • Volume XX, Number XX, Month 2020 

Microbiome-Based Biomarkers