Gut microbiota are composed of several species of microorganisms, including bacteria, yeast,
and viruses. The Firmicutes phylum is composed of more than 200 different genera such
as Lactobacillus, Bacillus, Clostridium, Enterococcus, and Ruminicoccus. abundance in preterm than term pigs was found . Indeed, an analysis of the meconium of newborn infants revealed a
strong correlation between the microbiota of the newborn digestive tract and the microbial communities
of the mother’s vagina: Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Sneathia. 24,
29]. Escherichia, Shigella, and Bacteroides species are underrepresented in infants born by cesarean
delivery  The intestinal microbiota of neonates delivered by cesarean delivery are less diverse in
terms of bacteria species than the microbiota of vaginally delivered infants . Studies have demonstrated that formula-fed infants are more often colonized with Escherichia coli,
Bacteroides, and Clostridium difﬁcile compared with breastfed infants  Regarding Actinobacteria
abundance, Biﬁdobacterium spp. Enterobacteriaceae *↑
Enterococcus spp.↑.

Lachnospiraceae *
Ruminococcaceae *. Understanding the origins and functions of enterotypes may improve the knowledge of the
relationships between gut microbiota and human health..

Bervoets et al. Results showed that AN intestinal microbiota
showed a signiﬁcant increase in Enterobacteriaceae and Methanobrevibacter smithii compared with healthy
controls  On the contrary, the genera Roseburia, Ruminococcus, and Clostridium were depleted in
line with the observed reduction in AN of the total SCFAs . and in Proteobacteria (Enterobacteriaceae spp.). indicated a diminution of Lachnospiraceae and Bacteroidetes
microbial populations and an increase in Proteobacteria families in IBD patients compared to control
gut microbiota..

Gut microbiota variations appear to be different between UC and CRD. Indeed, patients with CD show a reduction in beneﬁcial
species (Lactobacillus and Biﬁdobacterium) and an increase in those potentially pathogenic (Bacteroides
and E. coli) as compared to healthy subjects  The mucosal layer of CD patients fails to stabilize the
gut microbiota and fails to prevent the host from the invasion of harmful antigens and pathogens 
This dysbiosis is reduced, but may still remain, after a gluten-free diet . and lower proportions of Bacteroides spp. and an increase in various opportunistic pathogens (Clostridium spp., Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic, rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated
with impaired cognition and cerebral accumulation of amyloid-beta peptides. These ﬁndings demonstrated that
gut microbiota dysbiosis has close relationships with gastrointestinal and behavioral manifestations
of autism..

The bidirectional interactions of gut–brain mean that the brain can also alter gut microbiota
composition demonstrated that exposure
to stress results in substantial changes in gut microbiota composition: a decrease in Bacteroides spp.