There are several recent reviews on sequencing and anal-
ysis  of  the  microbiome,  although  a  full  discussion  of  these 
methods  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  review.28-31  In  brief,  com-
monly  used  methods  to  study  the  microbiome  use  either 
amplicon sequencing methods that analyze the partial genome 
or whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing. A limitation of this method is that closely related bacte-
rial families may share 99% of the hypervariable region, thereby 
precluding  identification  of  individual  species  and  strains. investigators obtained fecal samples from 33 patients with CD 
who  stopped  infliximab  therapy  (as  part  of  an  interventional 
study  to  assess  the  rate  of  relapse  after  biologic  cessation). Fecal  samples  were  obtained  at  therapy  cessation,  2  months, 
6 months, and the end of follow-up. Cross-sectional compari-
sons  were  also  made  with  29  healthy  control  patients. Over 
follow-up, 19 patients relapsed and 14 remained in remission. Note  that  the  culture  supernatant  also  had  a  similar  effect  in 
reducing the severity of this particular colitis, suggesting that 
the  effect  of  F.  prauznitzii  may  be  mediated  in  part  through 
the  production  of  anti-inflammatory  metabolites. Two OTUs affiliated with Faecalibacterium and Bacteroides were more abundant at . CD  differed  in  the  median  abundance  of  14  (out  of  45)  gen-
eral bacteria, including reductions in Prevotella, Akkermansia, 
Roseburia, Alistipes, Coprococcus, and Ruminococcus and an in-
creased abundance of various members of Enterobacteriaeceae 
including Escherichia and Klebsiella. At the end of the study, 
responders’ microbial composition was closer to that of healthy 
control  patients  than  nonresponders’  microbial  composi-
tion, an effect that was also separately observed for anti-TNF 
therapy and exclusive enteral nutrition. The primary outcome, remission at week 14, was attained by 31 
patients. This  difference  was  noted  primarily  at  the 
species  level. Two  species,  Roseburia  inulinivorans 
and Burkholderiales, were significantly more abundant at base-
line in CD patients who achieved remission than in those who . The  PROTECT  cohort  recruited  400  children . Twenty-three  patients  who  were  treated  with  either  anti-TNF 
drugs  or  vedolizumab  acted  as  control  patients. Interestingly, 
patients with IBD but not with rheumatic disease demonstrated 
a shift in diversity toward that of the control patients with anti-
TNF therapy, suggesting that this effect was likely mediated in 
part  by  resolution  of  intestinal  inflammation  rather  than  di-
rect effect of the biologic agent.24 When compared to healthy 
control patients, 14 indicator phylotypes, notably Coprococcus 
and  R.  inulinivorans,  were  differentially  distributed  between 
patients with IBD and healthy control patients.