Feeding mode interacts with other perinatal factors to 
influence the infant gut microbiota. Dietary pat-
tern 2, defined by intake of grains, dairy and legumes, nuts 
and seeds, was associated with higher Cyanobacteria and 
Phascolarctobacterium abundance and lower Dorea and 
Eubacterium abundance  Additionally, the intake of . Greater Bifidobacterium abundance in 1- to 4-year-olds 
compared to adults has been reported  and recent stud-
ies have shown that the relative abundance of Bifidobac-
terium in older children is related to dietary intake and is . Studying  Dutch 
children in the KOALA Birth Cohort Study, Zhong and col-
leagues documented higher levels of Bifidobacterium at 6 
to 9 years of age compared to adults  They also classi-
fied children into three enterotypes and observed that cor-
relations between dietary and metabolic phenotypes were 
dependent on fecal microbial enterotype. Additionally,  children  may  also  be 
more similar to each other than adults are. For example, administration of wheat bran extract (5 g/d 
for 3 weeks) increased fecal Bifidobacterium  while 
consumption of soluble corn fiber (SCF; 10 or 20 g/d for 
4 weeks) modulated the overall microbiota, increased the 
alpha diversity and altered the relative abundances of some 
bacterial genera, including Parabacteroides and unclassi-
fied Lachnospiraceae  This same group also showed 
that GOS increased calcium absorption 
in adolescent girls and boys, demonstrating a health benefit 
for this age population. ↔ counts of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus, C. 
↑ Bifidobacterium level
↔ fecal pH and stool consistency. perfringens, C. difficile, and Enterobacteriaceae. lactis BB-12 from 36-week 
gestation until 3 months postnatal during breastfeeding did 
not affect the proportions of bacteria classes and genera of 
the infants at 3 months and 2 years  In contrast, a Finish 
study evaluated the effect of administration of L. rhamnosus 
LPR and B. longum BL999 to mothers 2 months before and 
2 months after delivery. ↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and Bacte-. lus La-5 + BB-12 
LGG + L. acidophi-
Fermented milk
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. breve M16V + B. longum BB536
Powder in water, milk or formula
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d. and amount
Nutrition base and probiotic strain . qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, V vaginal delivery, wk week, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
in situ hybridization, FOS fructooligosaccharides, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-Pro interspace profiling, mo month, OTU operational taxonomic unit, qPCR quantitative PCR, RT-
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. 6 mo of intervention
and Staphylococcus after 3 and . 10 d
coccus and Garnulicatella after 
linsella, Turicibacter, Entero-
Sutterella, ↓ Allobaculum, Col-
↑ proportions of Prevotella and . 1.6 × 1010 CFU/d
L. paracasei A
Fermented milk.