Gut microbiota are composed of several species of microorganisms, including bacteria, yeast,
and viruses. The Firmicutes phylum is composed of more than 200 different genera such
as Lactobacillus, Bacillus, Clostridium, Enterococcus, and Ruminicoccus. Indeed, an analysis of the meconium of newborn infants revealed a
strong correlation between the microbiota of the newborn digestive tract and the microbial communities
of the mother’s vagina: Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Sneathia. 24,
29]. Escherichia, Shigella, and Bacteroides species are underrepresented in infants born by cesarean
delivery  The intestinal microbiota of neonates delivered by cesarean delivery are less diverse in
terms of bacteria species than the microbiota of vaginally delivered infants . The introduction of high-ﬁber and carbohydrate foods (traditional foods)
causes an increase in Firmicutes and Prevotella, whereas the introduction of high-ﬁber and animal
protein foods causes an increase in Bacteroidetes demonstrated
that northern European countries are associated with a higher proportion of Biﬁdobacteria in the
infant gut microbiota, whereas higher levels of Bacteroides and Lactobacilli characterize southern
European countries..

At one year old, a child’s microbiota composition has a characteristic abundance of Akkermansia. and an increase in Clostridium and Proteobacteria have been observed 
Given the role of Biﬁdobacterium spp. Enterobacteriaceae *↑
Enterococcus spp.↑.

Lachnospiraceae *
Ruminococcaceae *. Results showed that AN intestinal microbiota
showed a signiﬁcant increase in Enterobacteriaceae and Methanobrevibacter smithii compared with healthy
controls  On the contrary, the genera Roseburia, Ruminococcus, and Clostridium were depleted in
line with the observed reduction in AN of the total SCFAs . Furthermore, Shigella and
Escherichia are widely under-represented. At the
genus level, Hadza gut microbiota are comparatively enriched in Prevotella, Eubacterium, Oscillibacter,
Butyricicoccus, Sporobacter, Succinivibrio, and Treponema and correspondingly depleted in Biﬁdobacterium,
Bacteroides, Blautia, Dorea, unclassiﬁed Lachnospiraceae, Roseburia, Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcus, and
unclassiﬁed Erysipelotrichaceae. and lower proportions of Bacteroides spp. whereas the Bacteroidetes and
Firmicutes phyla were depleted. and an increase in various opportunistic pathogens (Clostridium spp., These ﬁndings demonstrated that
gut microbiota dysbiosis has close relationships with gastrointestinal and behavioral manifestations
of autism..

The bidirectional interactions of gut–brain mean that the brain can also alter gut microbiota
composition demonstrated that exposure
to stress results in substantial changes in gut microbiota composition: a decrease in Bacteroides spp.