Mei Wang

Sharon M. Donovan

Introduction

Over the past decade, the essential role that the gut micro-
biota plays in the developmental programming of the neo-
nate, including growth trajectories, metabolism, and immune 
and cognitive development, has been demonstrated  
Thus, fostering the development of the microbiome in the 
first 1000 days of life is critical to supporting lifelong health. Dietary pat-
tern 2, defined by intake of grains, dairy and legumes, nuts 
and seeds, was associated with higher Cyanobacteria and 
Phascolarctobacterium abundance and lower Dorea and 
Eubacterium abundance  Additionally, the intake of 

snacks and sweets and refined carbohydrates were nega-
tively correlated with both Shannon and the Chao1 Indices, 
respectively, demonstrating reduced microbial diversity with 
greater intake of sugars and refined grains. Residing in rural vs. urban environments can also affect 
food availability and choices, which has been investigated 
in a series of studies. Urban-dwelling children also con-
sumed a diet higher in meat, fat, and confectionaries, such 
as sweetened pastries and biscuits, and lower in complex 
carbohydrates compared to rural children. Vegetables comprised < 1.0% of total cal-
orie intake in urban children compared to 7.3% in rural chil-
dren. The fecal microbiome of the rural children displayed 
significantly greater alpha diversity (Chao1 index). The 
microbiota of rural children was enriched by bacteria in the 
order Clostridiales, containing families such as Peptostrep-
tococcaceae and unclassified Ruminococcaceae, compared 
to higher proportions of Actinobacteria, Bacteroidales, and 
Selenomadales in urban dwellers. Additionally, rural chil-
dren had significantly higher fecal butyrate and propionate 
concentrations, suggesting that the fiber-rich diet in the rural 
children promotes a microbiota composition with greater 
fermentative capacity 

Greater Bifidobacterium abundance in 1- to 4-year-olds 
compared to adults has been reported  and recent stud-
ies have shown that the relative abundance of Bifidobac-
terium in older children is related to dietary intake and is 

1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

associated  with  metabolic  phenotypes. Studying  Dutch 
children in the KOALA Birth Cohort Study, Zhong and col-
leagues documented higher levels of Bifidobacterium at 6 
to 9 years of age compared to adults  They also classi-
fied children into three enterotypes and observed that cor-
relations between dietary and metabolic phenotypes were 
dependent on fecal microbial enterotype. Additionally,  children  may  also  be 
more similar to each other than adults are. while children displayed enhanced Bifi-
dobacterium spp., and members of 
Lachnospiraceae  However, the current literature on 
the impact of diet in this age group has some noted limita-
tions. While dietary intake differs between rural 
and urban communities, many other environmental factors 
are also likely contributing, including socioeconomic status, 
exposure to agricultural species and routine medical care, 
which could also be influencing the gut microbiota. In the USA, 
the recommended dietary fiber intake is 14 g/1000 kcal or 
25 g for females and 38 g for males. Most prebiotics are DF, but not all DF 
are considered to be prebiotics. Infant Formula and Prebiotics

HMOs are considered prebiotics, which may partly explain 
the differences in microbiota composition between BF and 
FF infants  To narrow the gap between HM and infant 
formula, prebiotics are now routinely added to infant for-
mula. Further large-scale studies are 
needed with different fiber sources. Probiotic Interventions in Children on Gut 
Microbiota

Probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered 
in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” 
 The most commonly administered probiotic bacteria 
belong to the genera Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus, 
but can be provided either as single or mixtures of strains. Pro-
biotics shorten the duration of acute gastroenteritis, prevent 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea, reduce the risk of necrotiz-
ing enterocolitis in preterm infants and lower the incidence 
of eczema in high-risk children  The mechanisms 
of action of probiotics are not fully understood; however, 
modulation of gut microbiota has been postulated as one of 
the mechanisms 

Two general probiotic approaches have been taken to 
influence the infant or child microbiota. For example, supplementation of pregnant and 
lactating women with L. rhamnosus GG (LGG), L. acidophi-
lus La-5 and B. animalis subsp. lactis BB-12 from 36-week 
gestation until 3 months postnatal during breastfeeding did 
not affect the proportions of bacteria classes and genera of 
the infants at 3 months and 2 years  In contrast, a Finish 
study evaluated the effect of administration of L. rhamnosus 
LPR and B. longum BL999 to mothers 2 months before and 
2 months after delivery. Probiotics have been administrated directly to infants and 
children (Table 4). These studies varied in terms of 
age of the children (newborns to age 18), type of probiotic, 
dose administered, and duration of the intervention. These conflicting results may be 
related to differences in probiotic strain/strains used, the 
dose use, duration of administration, and the methods used 
for microbiota analysis. Furthermore, factors that influence 
the development of gut microbiota, such as delivery mode, 
children’s age, and diet, likely confound the effects of pro-
biotic supplementation in this population 

While some encouraging data exist on the efficacy of pro-
biotics on disease prevention, no broad consensus exists to 
recommend the use of probiotics in these conditions  
Although probiotics are safe for use in healthy population; 
several concerns have been raised related to the administra-
tion of probiotics early in life when gut microbiota is not 
fully established. For example, it is not known 
whether or not early-life acceleration toward an adult-like 
microbiome has negative downstream effects on health. 1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

year, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
interspace profiling, mo month, qPCR quantitative PCR, T-RFLP terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism, RT-qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, VD vaginally delivered, y 
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12, CFU colony-forming unit, CS cesarean section, d day, FISH fluorescent in situ hybridization, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-pro 

6 mo

Metagenomic sequencing by Illumina 
0, 3, 12 and 24 mo of age

HiSeq 2500

9 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. animalis subsp. •  The microbiome of BF infants is nurtured by human milk 
components, including HMO, and differs from that of FF 
infants. •  Findings on probiotic administration to pregnant or 
lactating women or directly to the infant or child are 
inconsistent, likely due to the variation in the bacterial 
strains, doses, duration and methods of microbiome 
analysis. Funding  This work was supported in part by NIH R01 DK107561 
[SMD].

Compliance with Ethical Standards 

Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.