Feeding mode interacts with other perinatal factors to 
influence the infant gut microbiota. Con-
tinued breastfeeding provides substrates necessary to sustain 
microbes such as Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Collinsella, 
Megasphera, and Veillonella (Table 1). Introduction 
of foods high in protein and fiber increases microbial diver-
sity, but the particular foods most correlated with microbial 
diversity differ depending on whether the infant is still being 
breastfed  For example, a greater number of predicted 
functional changes were identified in FF and MF infants dur-
ing introduction of solids compared to BF infants, suggest-
ing that breastfeeding may increase the plasticity of the infant 
microbiome . Soy, pulse, and nut positively associated with Bacteroides . Dietary pat-
tern 2, defined by intake of grains, dairy and legumes, nuts 
and seeds, was associated with higher Cyanobacteria and 
Phascolarctobacterium abundance and lower Dorea and 
Eubacterium abundance  Additionally, the intake of . These findings may 
reflect the higher consumption of complex carbohydrates in 
rural children. . Bifidobacterium and Collinsella were positively cor-
related with refined-sugar enriched foods, and Collinsella 
was also positively associated with fruit and curry intake . Additionally,  children  may  also  be 
more similar to each other than adults are. For example, administration of wheat bran extract (5 g/d 
for 3 weeks) increased fecal Bifidobacterium  while 
consumption of soluble corn fiber (SCF; 10 or 20 g/d for 
4 weeks) modulated the overall microbiota, increased the 
alpha diversity and altered the relative abundances of some 
bacterial genera, including Parabacteroides and unclassi-
fied Lachnospiraceae  This same group also showed 
that GOS increased calcium absorption 
in adolescent girls and boys, demonstrating a health benefit 
for this age population. ↔ counts of Lactobacillus/Enterococcus, C. 
↑ Bifidobacterium level
↔ fecal pH and stool consistency. perfringens, C. difficile, and Enterobacteriaceae. lactis BB-12 from 36-week 
gestation until 3 months postnatal during breastfeeding did 
not affect the proportions of bacteria classes and genera of 
the infants at 3 months and 2 years  In contrast, a Finish 
study evaluated the effect of administration of L. rhamnosus 
LPR and B. longum BL999 to mothers 2 months before and 
2 months after delivery. ↔ numbers of total bacteria Bifidobacterium and Bacte-. lus La-5 + BB-12 
LGG + L. acidophi-
Fermented milk
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d
B. breve M16V + B. longum BB536
Powder in water, milk or formula
1 × 109 CFU/strain/d. ↑ prevalence of species belonging to B. longum group at . over the first y
related to B. fragilis and Blautia . qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, V vaginal delivery, wk week, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
in situ hybridization, FOS fructooligosaccharides, LGG Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, IS-Pro interspace profiling, mo month, OTU operational taxonomic unit, qPCR quantitative PCR, RT-
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. 6 mo of intervention
and Staphylococcus after 3 and . ↑relative abundance of Lacto-
↑ Proportion of Faecalibacterium. 10 d
coccus and Garnulicatella after 
linsella, Turicibacter, Entero-
Sutterella, ↓ Allobaculum, Col-
↑ proportions of Prevotella and . 1.6 × 1010 CFU/d
L. paracasei A
Fermented milk.