Presence of haustrum and taenia coli in the colon . Another difference is the presence of transverse folds
along the length of the colonic mucosa in humans, whereas these
folds are restricted to the cecum and proximal colon in mice. M, mucosa; ME, muscularis
externa; TC, taenia coli. D is reproduced from the
website http://theses.ulaval.ca/archimede/fichiers/24866/ch07.html with the
author’s permission. Paneth cells
secrete  antimicrobial  compounds  into  the  lumen  of  the  small
intestine. For instance, Prevotella abundance
is  known  to  be  low  in  mouse  gut  microbiota  (Hildebrand  et  al., 2013), in which low species-richness individuals
were  found  to  have  more  pronounced  inflammation,  and  to  be
dominated by Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria, the same bacterial
groups that dominated the ‘inflamed’ mouse enterotype..

Obesity
The influence of diet on the gut microbiota has received increasing
research attention over recent years. Some common trends
have emerged from this research. This
shift  is  driven  by  more  complex  alterations  at  lower  taxonomic
levels  within  the  phylum  Bacteroidetes:  most  genera,  including
Prevotella and Roseburia, decreased in abundance (Neyrinck et al., Overall,  this
highlights  that  the  use  of  diet  intervention  in  murine  models,
including the use of humanized gnotobiotic mice, can mimic the
changes in gut microbiota that occur in relation to human diet..

Bacteroides enterotype, which is associated with animal protein, and
Prevotella enterotype, which links to diets with more carbohydrates
and simple sugars. On the other hand, a study on wild
mice by Wang et al. This said, some prominent changes in the gut microbiota
have been concomitantly observed in independent IBD studies using
a  variety  of  techniques  on  different  cohorts,  such  as  reduced
bacterial  diversity  in  both  Crohn’s  disease  and  ulcerative  colitis
patients (Andoh et al., 2008) or in
the abundance of Roseburia (Willing et al., Interestingly, mucosal expression
levels  of  A20  in  humans  have  been  put  forward  as  a  prognosis
marker  for  response  to  anti-TNF  treatment  in  IBD  patients
(Vereecke et al., found that Clostridiales bacteria colonize
the gut of humanized rats more efficiently than that of humanized
mice (Wos-Oxley et al., More  recently,  another  study  employed  metagenomic
approaches to compare the gut microbiota composition of humans
and guinea pigs (Hildebrand et al.,