Interventions involving probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and dietary ﬁbre also oﬀer opportunities
to “fertilize” our microbiota. who also reviewed the potential of
the microbiota as a therapeutic target in GDM and concluded that certain microbiota-accessible
carbohydrates (MACs) could beneﬁcially modulate the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism
in GDM patients. More recently, probiotic supplementation (L. rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium animalis ssp. Very preterm infants (<32 weeks) and extremely preterm infants (<28 weeks)
are at signiﬁcant risk of sepsis, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), feeding intolerance and mortality 
The preterm infant microbiota has been shown to be lacking in the health-promoting Biﬁdobacterium
species and as a consequence of antibiotic administration can be dominated by Enterobacteriaceae,
Enterococcus and Staphylococcus and has
an increased abundance of Proteobacteria  In a study investigating the distortions in intestinal
microbiota development and late onset sepsis in preterm infants, Mai et al. In a study involving 192 breast-fed infants, Hill et al. While consumption of a probiotic
cheese containing L. rhamnosus HN001 and L. acidophilus NCFM by an elderly population increased the
numbers of said probiotics in faeces, there was no eﬀect on faecal immune markers  However,
the probiotic cheese was associated with a trend towards lower C. diﬃcile counts, an eﬀect which was
statistically signiﬁcant in the subpopulation that were found to harbor C. diﬃcile at the beginning of the
study. Likewise, consumption of one probiotic-containing biscuit (Bif. Decreases in the levels of Ruminococcaceae and Parabacteroides
have been pinpointed as the main microbial shifts associated with ageing in mice  Slight
reductions were observed in Oscillospira (positively associated with leanness and health  and
the sulphate-reducing Desulfovibrio following L. rhamnosus GG with soluble corn ﬁbre consumption,
whereas only Desulfovibrio decreased following intake of L. rhamnosus GG PB12 with corn ﬁbre..

In order to better understand the impact of exercise on the gut microbiota, Estaki et al. Likewise, ﬁve-weeks of endurance exercise by elderly men was found to signiﬁcantly
decrease the relative abundance of C. diﬃcile and signiﬁcantly increase Oscillospira which correlated with
beneﬁcial changes in several cardiometabolic risk factors  Changes in food intake did not diﬀer
between control and exercise periods. In a later
study with the same probiotic strain, ﬁve months of supplementation to university athletes and game
players (n = 243) had no impact on upper respiratory tract infection symptoms which the authors state
could be attributable to the low incidence of such symptoms during the study  The probiotic
was associated with plasma cytomegalovirus and Epstein Barr virus antibody titres which could be
interpreted as an improvement in immune status. Consumption of inulin-type fructans by obese women at 16 g/day for 3 months led to gut
microbiota changes which included an increase in Biﬁdobacterium and F. prausnitzii, both of which
negatively correlated with serum lipopolysaccharides The prebiotic also decreased Bacteroides
intestinalis, Bac. In another study involving overweight and obese pregnant
women, low ﬁbre intake was found to increase the genus Collinsella in the gut microbiota, which is
positively associated with circulating insulin  The low ﬁbre diet was also associated with a
gut microbiota favouring lactate fermentation, whereas the high ﬁbre diet was associated with SCFA
producing bacteria..

Salonen et al. Placing the AMER communities into a model. Transferring day 7 stools
from NAS responders into normal germ-free mice induced signiﬁcant glucose intolerance compared to
mice transplanted with day 1 stool (before intervention) from the same NAS responders. Hence, future commercial
tests may oﬀer genetic testing as a way to help consumers, such as lactating mothers in the case of
FUT2, make better choices and optimise health outcomes..

A relatively “simple” interaction with a single strain of bacteria, measuring the outcome (e.g., glucose
response) over a number of weeks can give more conﬁdence of “cause and eﬀect.” An intermediate interaction: speciﬁc prebiotics, ﬁbre etc.