Interventions involving probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and dietary ﬁbre also oﬀer opportunities
to “fertilize” our microbiota. Synbiotics describe the
combination of probiotics and prebiotics which act synergistically. For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003)  However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes  It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism. Decreases in the levels of Ruminococcaceae and Parabacteroides
have been pinpointed as the main microbial shifts associated with ageing in mice  Slight
reductions were observed in Oscillospira (positively associated with leanness and health  and
the sulphate-reducing Desulfovibrio following L. rhamnosus GG with soluble corn ﬁbre consumption,
whereas only Desulfovibrio decreased following intake of L. rhamnosus GG PB12 with corn ﬁbre..

In order to better understand the impact of exercise on the gut microbiota, Estaki et al. Furthermore, the presence of high levels of Clostridium sphenoides,
a common gut inhabitant and Firmicutes member, in the faecal microbiota of obese individuals before
dietary invention was associated with a decrease in cholesterol following intervention while obese
individuals with abnormally low abundance of this species did not beneﬁt in terms of cholesterol
levels. Hence, future commercial
tests may oﬀer genetic testing as a way to help consumers, such as lactating mothers in the case of
FUT2, make better choices and optimise health outcomes..

A relatively “simple” interaction with a single strain of bacteria, measuring the outcome (e.g., glucose
response) over a number of weeks can give more conﬁdence of “cause and eﬀect.”