The gut microbiota serves the host by interacting directly or indirectly with host cells, the latter of
which comes about through microbially-produced bioactive molecules, thus the microbiota is capable
of regulating numerous biological pathways involved in immunity and energy homeostasis, while also
protecting the host against pathogens through colonisation resistance. In terms of the adolescent
microbiota, Agans et al. More recently, a co-culture experiment revealed that
GABA produced by Bacteroides fragilis was essential for the growth of a gut isolate termed KLE1738
which is believed to be an unreported bacterial genus  This led to the isolation of a variety
of GABA-producing bacteria and the Bacteriodes species in particular were found to produce large
quantities of GABA. The tryptophan-metabolising
strain Peptostreptococcus russellii provided a protective eﬀect against colitis in mice, which the authors
suggest is linked to its ability to produce the tryptophan metabolite and AhR ligand, indoleacrylic acid
which mitigates inﬂammatory responses and promotes intestinal barrier function  The authors
also noted a diminishment of tryptophan-metabolising capacity in stool samples of IBD patients. Furthermore, it seems that long term improvements to dietary habits may be required to improve
and stabilise gut microbial diversity which agrees with the observations of Klimenko et al. These changes were associated with receipt of broad-spectrum antibiotics. However, a recent study reported the presence. This observation was also corroborated by Turnbaugh et al. Overall, the results suggest that high fat-diet-induced
shifts in gut microbiota could disrupt vagal gut-brain communication ultimately leading to increased
accumulation of body fat..

in both milk fat- and saﬄower oil-fed mice, Tenericutes were decreased, a phylum which has been
shown to be reduced under inﬂammatory conditions and Proteobacteria was increased, of
which Bil. In a more recent study, the same group investigated
the eﬀect of extra virgin olive oil on mouse gut microbiota compared to butter using more in-depth
analysis  Highest levels of systolic blood pressure were recorded for mice fed butter which
correlated positively with Desulfovibrio sequences in faeces, which were signiﬁcantly higher in mice fed
butter compared to olive oil. There was also an increase in spermine
which has been shown to be extremely toxic in rats  The following bacteria, which are generally
regarded as being beneﬁcial, decreased in abundance on the high protein diet, including the butyrate
producer F. prausnitzii (by 3.5 fold), Ruminococcus (by 8.04 fold) which contains butyrate producers,
and the mucin degrader Akkermansia (not detected in high protein diet group). Principal component
analysis revealed distinct microbiota on days 7 and 14, whereby the soy protein group was separate
from the meat and casein groups  In another similar study, soy protein was associated with
increased faecal SCFAs in rats compared to rats fed white meat, red meat or casein  The soy group
also had a higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which are the major propionate and
other SCFA producers  Lactobacillus, a genus known for its beneﬁcial eﬀects was increased in the
gut microbiota by ingestion of meat proteins. in the soybean group with an elevated secondary: primary bile acid ratio, along with an enhancement
in the secretion of GLP-1. In three subjects, resistant starch type 4 induced
a 10-fold increase in biﬁdobacteria. H2-scavenging sulphite reducers and acetogens also increased.