The gut microbiota serves the host by interacting directly or indirectly with host cells, the latter of
which comes about through microbially-produced bioactive molecules, thus the microbiota is capable
of regulating numerous biological pathways involved in immunity and energy homeostasis, while also
protecting the host against pathogens through colonisation resistance. In terms of the adolescent
microbiota, Agans et al. Remarkably, a study investigating the semi-supercentarian
microbiota revealed not only a decrease in saccharolytic butyrate producers
(Faecalibacterium, Coprococcus, Roseburia) and an increase in potential opportunistic bacteria, as expected,
but also an enrichment and/or higher prevalence in health associated bacterial groups, including
Akkermansia, Biﬁdobacterium and Christensenellaceae. Thuricin CD is an example
of a sactibiotic bacteriocin produced by a human gut isolate, Bacillus thuringiensis  While it has a
narrow spectrum of inhibition, thuricin CD is capable of killing a wide range of C. diﬃcile isolates, its
antimicrobial activity being as potent as the antibiotics vancomycin and metronidazole, but without the
concomitant damage to other members of the microbiota  Bacteriocin production can also aid niche
occupation of the producing strain. Mouse models have shown that
a defective mucus barrier enables contact between epithelial cells and bacteria resulting in spontaneous
colitis in mice  But a direct connection
between dietary ﬁbre and the status of the colonic mucosal barrier was more recently presented in a
mouse study by Desai et al. This observation was also corroborated by Turnbaugh et al. who also noted a higher proportion
of Actinobacteria in obese subjects. Furthermore, faecal SCFA concentrations tend to be higher in obese
individuals  The obese gut microbiota has also been characterised by reduced diversity and
altered representation of bacterial genes and metabolic pathways  More recently, a systematic
review investigated the link between the gut microbiota and low-grade inﬂammation, a hallmark of
obesity which plays a major role in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in humans  Fourteen,
mostly observational studies were included with n = 10 to 471 participants. This is in agreement with Yatsunenko et al. Overall, the results suggest that high fat-diet-induced
shifts in gut microbiota could disrupt vagal gut-brain communication ultimately leading to increased
accumulation of body fat..

in both milk fat- and saﬄower oil-fed mice, Tenericutes were decreased, a phylum which has been
shown to be reduced under inﬂammatory conditions and Proteobacteria was increased, of
which Bil. consisted of 75.1% fat composed of SFAs, MUFAs and PUFAs. There was also an increase in spermine
which has been shown to be extremely toxic in rats  The following bacteria, which are generally
regarded as being beneﬁcial, decreased in abundance on the high protein diet, including the butyrate
producer F. prausnitzii (by 3.5 fold), Ruminococcus (by 8.04 fold) which contains butyrate producers,
and the mucin degrader Akkermansia (not detected in high protein diet group). Principal component
analysis revealed distinct microbiota on days 7 and 14, whereby the soy protein group was separate
from the meat and casein groups  In another similar study, soy protein was associated with
increased faecal SCFAs in rats compared to rats fed white meat, red meat or casein  The soy group
also had a higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which are the major propionate and
other SCFA producers  Lactobacillus, a genus known for its beneﬁcial eﬀects was increased in the
gut microbiota by ingestion of meat proteins. Resistant starch type 2 signiﬁcantly increased R. bromii and Eub. In this group, resistant starch-degrading microorganisms increased in abundance, suggesting the
resistant starch was degraded, but there was no concomitant increase in butyrate levels which the
authors suggest may be due to these individuals experiencing a plateau eﬀect owing to the fact that
they are performing well in terms of butyrate production. compared
the impact of diﬀerent oligo- and polysaccharides (galacto- and fructooligosaccharides, resistant starch,
levan, inulin, arabinogalactan, xylan, pectin and chitin), as well as a glycoprotein mucin, representing
an indigenous substrate, on the growth and metabolism of the faecal microbiota.