Interventions involving probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and dietary ﬁbre also oﬀer opportunities
to “fertilize” our microbiota. In T3 and just before transmission of the microbiota
to the newborn, each mother has a “purely personal” microbiota which is suggested to have been
selected at the level of each host lineage to ensure maximum development of the developing foetus
and newborn  Transferring T3 microbiota to germ-free mice resulted in increased adiposity and
reduced insulin sensitivity compared to T1 microbiota  The study indicates that the microbial
changes which occur during pregnancy inﬂuence host metabolism and are beneﬁcial for that stage
in life. For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003)  However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes  It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism. More recently, probiotic supplementation (L. rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium animalis ssp. reported a similar ﬁnding in relation to F. prausnitzii levels
following long-term probiotic consumption by an elderly cohort. While consumption of a probiotic
cheese containing L. rhamnosus HN001 and L. acidophilus NCFM by an elderly population increased the
numbers of said probiotics in faeces, there was no eﬀect on faecal immune markers  However,
the probiotic cheese was associated with a trend towards lower C. diﬃcile counts, an eﬀect which was
statistically signiﬁcant in the subpopulation that were found to harbor C. diﬃcile at the beginning of the
study. Prebiotic supplementation in the elderly has generated promising results in terms of beneﬁcial
alterations to the gut microbiota and also frailty syndrome. Decreases in the levels of Ruminococcaceae and Parabacteroides
have been pinpointed as the main microbial shifts associated with ageing in mice  Slight
reductions were observed in Oscillospira (positively associated with leanness and health  and
the sulphate-reducing Desulfovibrio following L. rhamnosus GG with soluble corn ﬁbre consumption,
whereas only Desulfovibrio decreased following intake of L. rhamnosus GG PB12 with corn ﬁbre..

In order to better understand the impact of exercise on the gut microbiota, Estaki et al. concluded that probiotics were better than placebo for reducing the incidence of such
episodes, the duration of episodes as well as cold-related school absence and antibiotic use. Chronic fatigue syndrome is characterised by persistent and relapsing tiredness and 97% of
patients report neurological disturbances resulting in a variety of emotional symptoms of which
anxiety and depression are the most common  In a pilot study involving 39 chronic fatigue
syndrome patients intake of L. casei strain Shirota for two months resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in
anxiety symptoms compared with the control group (P = 0.01)  Lactobacillus and biﬁdobacteria
counts were also signiﬁcantly increased as a result of probiotic administration. longum, followed later on by absence of the HMAGM resulting
in deﬁcient energy harvest, immune protection and vitamin biosynthesis which are associated with
malabsorption, systemic pathogen invasion and diarrhoea used a
combination of culturomics and metagenomics to analyse the stool samples of healthy children and
kwashiorkor patients to identify potential probiotics to treat SAM. In another study involving overweight and obese pregnant
women, low ﬁbre intake was found to increase the genus Collinsella in the gut microbiota, which is
positively associated with circulating insulin  The low ﬁbre diet was also associated with a
gut microbiota favouring lactate fermentation, whereas the high ﬁbre diet was associated with SCFA
producing bacteria..

Salonen et al. Furthermore, the presence of high levels of Clostridium sphenoides,
a common gut inhabitant and Firmicutes member, in the faecal microbiota of obese individuals before
dietary invention was associated with a decrease in cholesterol following intervention while obese
individuals with abnormally low abundance of this species did not beneﬁt in terms of cholesterol
levels. In a randomized controlled
trial investigating the impact of increased intake of whole grains versus fruits and vegetables on the
gut microbiota in obese and overweight individuals, Kopf et al. reported that Americans consuming
unrestricted diets had less diverse faecal microbiota (termed AMER) compared to the microbiota of
individuals consuming calorie-restricted plant-rich diets (termed CRON) and the AMER microbiota
lacked many bacterial lineages representative of CRON. Placing the AMER communities into a model.