Lactobacillus crispatus  CTV-05  (Lactin-V,  Osel) 
is  a  live  biotherapeutic  product  that  contains  a 
naturally occurring vaginal strain of L. crispatus. Lactin-V  is  designed  to  promote  a 
community  state  type  (i.e.,  microbial  composi-
tion) with a predominance of  L. crispatus11 after 
treatment with vaginal 0.75% metronidazole gel. In previous clinical trials, no serious or grade 3 
adverse events that were considered to be related 
to the use of Lactin-V were reported.13-18 On the 
basis of the results from a phase 2a clinical trial 
of Lactin-V,16 the current phase 2b trial was de-
signed to assess whether treatment with Lactin-V 
after  a  5-day  course  of  metronidazole  to  treat 
bacterial vaginosis would result in a significantly 
lower  incidence  of  recurrence  of  bacterial  vagi-
nosis than placebo..

regimen for reevaluation of their eligibility. After 
providing written informed consent to partici-
pate in the trial, eligible women were randomly 
assigned,  in  a  2:1  ratio,  to  receive  Lactin-V  at 
2×109  CFU  per  dose  or  matching  placebo  and 
subsequently  received  a  carton  containing  25 
vaginal applicators. The 
data from the questionnaire are not reported here.). The  results  were  materially  unchanged  across 
the  analysis  populations. Median Concentration and Incidence of Detectable Lactobacillus 
crispatus CTV-05 in the Lactin-V Group, According to Trial Visit. I bars indicate maximum and minimum values, the horizontal lines inside the 
blue bars indicate median values, and the diamonds indicate mean values. (The circles below the blue bar at week 4 represent outliers.) The size of each 
blue bar represents the interquartile range. CFU denotes colony-forming 
units..

There were no apparent associations between 
the detection of L. crispatus CTV-05 at week 12 or 
week  24  and  adherence  to  the  assigned  treat-. Participants with detectable
L. crispatus CTV-05 . The use of Lactin-V after treatment with vaginal 
metronidazole for bacterial vaginosis resulted in 
a significantly lower incidence of recurrence of 
bacterial  vaginosis  at  12  weeks  than  placebo, 
and  the  benefit  appeared  to  persist  through 
week  24. Overall,  adherence  to  the  assigned 
treatment  was  high. We did not find that the occurrence of menses 
since the last visit or the occurrence of sex with-
out the use of a condom affected the detection 
of L. crispatus CTV-05.