Female infants are generally born smaller than male infants; however, in response to maternal asthma, the
Caucasian male fetus is more likely to have a lower birthweight and show growth retardation when
delivered at term than the female fetus recently reported less colonisation of stool
with Lactobacillus species at birth and during the first month of life among full-term male infants in
comparison to female infants. These observations led us to study the
influence of maternal asthma status during pregnancy on infant intestinal microbiota in the Canadian
Healthy Infant Longitudinal Development (CHILD) general population birth cohort. Based on the ART test, the p-value for
the interaction term between prenatal asthma and Caucasian ethnicity was 0.002. Data are presented as n (%),unless otherwise stated. Other sex-specific differences
were uncovered. Data are presented as median (interquartile range), unless otherwise stated. Comparisons were performed
using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. The false discovery rate (FDR) was used to adjust p-values for multiple
testing and crude p-values <FDR p-values are indicated by “#”. The p-values <0.1 are reported and
p-values <0.05 are indicated in bold. ¶: Differences were
also evident at the Bacteroidaceae family level ( p=0.02, supplementary table S2) in all female breastfed
infants born vaginally without
the
Firmicutes phylum ( p<0.05)..

Lactobacilli were less abundant in male infants born to women with asthma and concomitant food or
environmental allergies, or asthma and pre-pregnancy overweight; statistical significance was not observed in
the absence of either comorbidity (table 4). With one exception (when
the crude p-value was 0.06 with reduced sample size following restriction, as presented in table 3), reductions
in Lactobacillus abundance were also statistically significant after the FDR correction..

Data are presented as median (interquartile range), unless otherwise stated. This reduced response of the placenta heightened the risk for intrauterine growth restriction
in male newborns. Further,
amniotic fluid are capable of modulating expression of toll-like receptor genes in the fetal gut  In our
study, the reduction in Lactobacillus abundance was most apparent among infants whose mothers had
asthma and overweight or a history of allergies. Maternal overweight during pregnancy has been linked to a higher risk of asthma and other atopic
diseases in offspring  In our study infants, maternal asthma comorbidity with this added risk for
offspring also yielded a reduction in the abundance of faecal Megasphaera in female infants and an
elevation in the abundance of Bacteroidaceae. Both
Megasphaera and Bacteroidaceae microbes produce propionate, but under opposing conditions. The
Megasphaera species utilise lactate as a substrate to produce propionate  whereas Bacteroides species
produce propionate when lactate levels are low  Propionate is absorbed by the host for liver
gluconeogenesis, possesses anti-inflammatory and satiety properties  and protects against the
development of allergic asthma in a murine model .