In studies on urinary microbiomes, the degree of concentration 
of  bacteria  habiting  in  urinary  systems  may  vary  according  to 
the sex, the method of urine collection, and the technique used 
to  study  UM. In  general,  Lactobacillus  and  Streptococcus  are 
the  most  frequently  observed  species  and  many  studies  have 
been performed on them. Lactobacillus, Gardnerella, 
Corynebacterium, 
Enterobacteriaceae, Anaerococcus, 
Bifidobacterium, Streptococcus, 
Staphylococcus, Sneathia, 
Peptoniphilus, Atopobium, 
Rhodanobacter, Trueperella, 
Alloscardovia, Veillonella. are dominant bacteria and form UM 
which demonstrates antimicrobial activity. These properties 
as  well  as  their  microbiomimetic  regulatory  effects  have  been 
demonstrated. It has been shown that healthy 
microbial  populations  of  Lactobacillus  species  have  a  strong 
inhibitory effect on E. coliInfections treated using antibiotics 
reduce drug abuse, leading to drug resistance and render the nat-
ural barrier of the urinary system vulnerable to infections..

Stewardson et al.compared ciprofloxacin and nitrofurantoin 
treatments in their study and found that the ciprofloxacin group 
had a significant effect on intestinal microbiome which mostly 
contain  healthy  Lactobacillus  spp. The  same  investigators  have  empha-
sized that oral Lactobacillus therapy can colonize these bacteria 
in the urinary tract following intestinal colonization. . If  pathogenic  bacteria  can 
achieve this, then why Lactobacillus, an important component 
of  vaginal  colonization,  can  not  do  it? In 
conclusion, they found evidence that Lactobacillus species (par-
ticularly L. rhamnosus GR-1 and L. reuteri) may be useful in the 
prevention and treatment of recurrent UTIs. In  a  recent 
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2 study, Stapleton et al. investigated 100 premenopausal women who had undergone cys-
titis at least once within the last 12 months . These patients were 
divided into two groups and for 10 weeks following an episode 
of cystitis placebo treatment was given to 48 patients, and other 
48  patients  received  intravaginal  probiotics  (Lactin-V)  contain-
ing  Lactobacillus  crispatus    The  results  of  this 
study showed that the incidence of recurrent UTIs in patients who 
received  intravaginal  Lactobacillus  treatment  decreased  signifi-
cantly compared to the placebo group. . Vajinal, 1x109 
CFU/L. rhamnosus 
GR-1 ve 
L.fermentum B-54. In the 3rd and 6th month controls, the response rates to treat-
ment were 72.2% and 61.1%, respectively. Researchers noted that 
the combination was well tolerated and effective.