Round and Mazmanian

Page 2

and anti-inflammatory responses, and balances in the community structure of gut bacteria
may be intimately linked to the proper function of the immune system. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14. Consistent with this notion, the Gram-
negative commensal organism Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, but not the Gram-positive
microbe, Bifidobacterium longum, induces the expression of the antimicrobial peptide,
RegIIIγ, by specialized IECs known as Paneth cells15, 16. Listeria infected germ-free mice have decreased
accumulation of CD44+L-selectin+ T cells resulting in increased bacterial burden compared
to SPF animals20. Moreover, S. typhimurium
exploits this deficiency in “colonization resistance” to establish infection and cause
disease22. The importance of Tregs in regulation of intestinal homeostasis is best demonstrated by the
ability of these cells to prevent induction of experimental colitis upon transfer into diseased
hosts 37. The ability of Tregs to secrete IL-10 and IL-35 has been reported to be important
during protection. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 5

Recent evidence has begun to reveal mechanisms of intestinal immune modulation by the
microbiota. Supporting this, another study reported lower expression of the Foxp3 transcript in
CD4+CD62L− T cells from germfree mice.43. Therefore, the equilibrium between

Nat Rev Immunol. Genetic factors play an important role in the pathogenesis of
IBD. Additionally, experimental systems have demonstrated the importance
of host genetics during induction of IBD. Much like IBD, obesity appears to have a strong
genetic component71. Many
investigations have shown a significant alteration in the microbiota of patients with
IBD 72,73,74. Here we
review the mechanisms by which symbiotic bacteria affect the mammalian immune system
that result in the prevention or treatment of experimental and human IBD. The common feature
of almost all bacterial species used as probiotics is the ability of these organisms to control
inflammation. More recently, in a model of
pathogen-induced inflammation, treatment of mice with Bifidobacteria infantis led to a
downregulation of intestinal inflammation and increases in the number of CD4+CD25+ TReg
cells78. The specific molecules made by these
particular bacterial species that guide immune responses remain unknown; however current
data support the idea that symbiotic organisms actively communicate with the host immune
system to modulate anti-inflammatory processes. These data have identified a single molecule made by a
symbiotic microorganism that stimulates CD4+ T cells to make IL-10, required for the
suppression of the inflammatory process during colitis, and suggest that other beneficial
bacteria may produce factors that can positively shape the host immune response during
IBD. As symbiotic bacteria seem to have
evolved mechanisms to promote protection from pathobionts found in the same microbiota,
does disease result from the absence of specific organisms and their beneficial molecules? Astonishingly, the immune disorders for which incidences have increased in
‘Western’ countries all seem to involve reduced TReg-cell activity. Work in the laboratory of the authors is supported by funding from the National Institutes of Health,
Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation and the Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America to S.K.M.

Sarkis K. Mazmanian: Sarkis K. Mazmanian is an assistant professor in the Division of
Biology at the California Institute of Technology. An organism that lives in association with a host (usually for a
lifetime) without obvious benefit or harm to either member. From the Latin, com mensa, meaning to ‘share a table’. They occur massed together on the intestinal wall,
opposite the line of attachment of the mesentery. Small lymphoid aggregates located in the anti-mesenteric wall of the
small intestine and containing B cells, dendritic cells, stromal cells
and some T cells.