Round and Mazmanian

Page 2

and anti-inflammatory responses, and balances in the community structure of gut bacteria
may be intimately linked to the proper function of the immune system. While the
classical view of the immune system is that it evolved to protect organisms from infection
by microbial pathogens, we peacefully co-exist with our vast and complex microbiota. Germ-free animals show extensive deficits in the development of the gut-associated
lymphoid tissues (GALT)9,11. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14. Gut bacteria
have been shown to direct the glycosylation of lumenally-exposed surface proteins of the
epithelium14. Listeria infected germ-free mice have decreased
accumulation of CD44+L-selectin+ T cells resulting in increased bacterial burden compared
to SPF animals20. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 4

Although significant work is still required to determine the beneficial immune responses
induced by the microbiota, it is exciting to consider the teleological notion that indigenous
bacteria actively prevent enteric disease by infectious microorganisms to fortify their niche. In other words, is our
wellbeing dependent on the microbes we harbour? The causes for these diseases are complex, and
include the contributions of genetic, geographic and habitual factors27. These include the expression of inhibitory cytokines such as IL-10, TGF-β, and
IL-35; disruption of cellular metabolism by expression of the IL-2 receptor, CD25;
cytolysis, and targeting the maturation of DCs through surface expression of molecules such
as CTLA-4 and LAG-335. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Round and Mazmanian

Page 5

Recent evidence has begun to reveal mechanisms of intestinal immune modulation by the
microbiota. The contribution of the microbiota to the development of TRegcells remains unclear as
multiple studies have revealed conflicting results. Therefore, the equilibrium between

Nat Rev Immunol. As shown in Table 2,
many individual or combinations of bacterial species have been shown to ameliorate the
symptoms of IBD in humans and mouse models. More importantly, transfer of lamina propria mononuclear cells from
VSL#3-treated mice was able to prevent colitis in recipient mice, indicating the ability of the
VSL#3 cocktail to initiate the generation of a protective population of cells. Moreover, depletion of the CD4+CD25+ T-cell subset
abolished the ability of the probiotic-treated DCs to protect from disease, suggesting that L.
rhamnosus-treated DCs can initiate TReg-cell activity79. The specific molecules made by these
particular bacterial species that guide immune responses remain unknown; however current
data support the idea that symbiotic organisms actively communicate with the host immune
system to modulate anti-inflammatory processes. The importance of B. fragilis in
maintenance of a healthy immune response was recently illustrated by the finding that
colonization by B. fragilis or treatment with purified PSA can protect from the induction of
experimental IBD66. These data have identified a single molecule made by a
symbiotic microorganism that stimulates CD4+ T cells to make IL-10, required for the
suppression of the inflammatory process during colitis, and suggest that other beneficial
bacteria may produce factors that can positively shape the host immune response during
IBD. B. fragilis has been shown to protect its host from inflammatory disease caused by H.
hepaticus in an animal model of experimental colitis66. As symbiotic bacteria seem to have
evolved mechanisms to promote protection from pathobionts found in the same microbiota,
does disease result from the absence of specific organisms and their beneficial molecules? Reflecting a growing
medical crisis in Western societies, recent epidemiological and clinical reports have revealed
dramatic increases in the incidences of several immune disorders. The intestinal bacterial composition of IBD patients differs
greatly from that of healthy controls74. It has been shown in
animal models and some human studies that deficiencies in TReg-cell populations or
function underlie asthma, IBD, rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes and multiple sclerosis89. Recent studies have shown that at least for experimental IBD, spontaneous disease results
when immune suppression is deficient; thus inflammation appears to be a default
immunological state in the absence of regulation94. Work in the laboratory of the authors is supported by funding from the National Institutes of Health,
Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation and the Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America to S.K.M.

Sarkis K. Mazmanian: Sarkis K. Mazmanian is an assistant professor in the Division of
Biology at the California Institute of Technology. Although often used to describe a beneficial relationship,
symbiosis literally does not imply that either partner gains an
advantage. An organism that lives in association with a host (usually for a
lifetime) without obvious benefit or harm to either member. From the Latin, com mensa, meaning to ‘share a table’. Lymphoid structures and aggregates associated with the intestinal
mucosa, specifically the tonsils, Peyer's patches, lymphoid follicles,
appendix or cecal patch and mesenteric lymph nodes. Lymph nodes located at the base of the mesentery.