Several studies have demonstrated modulation of colonic 
microbiota by prebiotic inulin or inulin-type fructans. and 
F. prausnitzii in obese women  In healthy adults with 
mild constipation, inulin-type fructans increased the relative 
abundance of Anaerostipes, Bilophila and Bifidobacterium 
in feces, and reduced the abundance of Bilophila  Dif-
ferences in selectivity for the fermentation of several car-
bohydrate substrates (lactulose, galacto-oligosaccharides, 
sugar beet pectin and apple fiber) were found between the . Clostridium XIVa
E. halli R. hominis
Anaerostipes . These included 
modulation  of  goblet  cells  to  enhance  mucosal  barrier 
function  a direct protective effect on intestinal barrier 
function  and inhibiting adherence of enteropathogenic 
Escherichia coli to Caco-2 enterocyte and Hep-2 epithelial 
cells . The effects of butyrate on the human colonic mucosa 
were examined following administration of butyrate enemas 
at physiologically relevant concentrations in healthy volun-
teers. Transcription analysis of microbiome revealed that 
butyrate induced differential expression of multiple genes 
involved in fatty acid oxidation, electron transport chain and 
oxidative stress pathways  In addition, butyrate led to 
dose-dependent decreases in visceral sensitivity  How-
ever, butyrate enemas administered to patients with UC in 
clinical remission had relatively minor effects on inflamma-
tory and oxidative stress parameters, although the selection 
of patients with chronically mild levels of inflammation and 
oxidative stress may have limited the scope of this study . This study highlighted a 
relationship between the microbiome and multiple extrinsic 
and host factors, comprising 60 dietary factors, 31 intrinsic 
factors, 19 drug categories, 12 diseases, and 4 smoking cat-
egories. Results suggested that PPIs 
diminished the gastric acid barrier, as species found in the 
oral microbiome of PPI users were more abundant in the gut 
than in non-users  It is increasingly observed that the 
use of PPIs is associated with an increase in the incidence of 
enteric infections like Clostridium difficile and Campylobac-
ter. Fiber-degrading bacteria include Ruminococcus 
callidus, Ruminococcus albus, Blautia obeum and Prevo-
tella spp. The bar represents 10 µm (Photo, M. Sadaghian Sadabad). Preterm infants show delayed colonization of the gut 
microbiota with Bifidobacterium, and have a high preva-
lence of Enterobacteriaceae, Staphylococcus, and Enterococ-
caceae  Vaginally delivered neonates have an increased 
prevalence of maternal microbiota derived from the vagina 
and intestine (e.g. Lactobacillus, Prevotella and Sneathia) 
compared with neonates delivered by Caesarean section. Therefore, the maternal microbiome 
also seems to be important for the development of the neo-
natal microbiome. Further studies on the role of the maternal 
microbiome in development of the neonatal microbiome are 
necessary..

Preclinical studies have shown effects of the gut micro-
biota on nociceptive reflexes  feeding, emotional and 
social behavior  and brain neu-
rochemistry  The gut microbiota is essential for 
normal social development in the mouse and is implicated 
in neurodevelopmental disorders including autism spectrum 
disorder  Germfree mice have an exaggerated 
stress response compared with control animals. lactis, 
Streptococcus thermophiles, and two Lactobacillus spp. produced significant changes in brain activity assessed by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), in response 
to an emotional faces attention task. plus Bifidobacterium bifidum produced a significant 
decrease in Beck Depression Inventory total scores, sig-
nificant decreases in serum insulin levels and serum high-
sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) concentrations in 
addition to a significant increase in plasma total glutathione 
concentrations  A RCT of patients with Alzheimer’s 
disease found that ingestion of a probiotic containing three 
Lactobacillus spp.