S2 

European Journal of Nutrition S1–S14

Crohn’s disease (CD) or ulcerative colitis (UC); and irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS). Moreover, the various benefits of 
prebiotics on human health, the microbiome–nutrient inter-
action and the role of vitamins in promoting the selective 
growth of microbes in the gut as well as determinants of 
the development of a healthy microbiome were presented 
and discussed intensively. Last but not least, the panel dis-
cussed how the brain and the microbiome may affect and 
control each other’s functions and the implications of such 
communication for treating or preventing the brain-related 
functional decline during aging. Fermentation of dietary prebiotics in the gut involves 
metabolic cross-feeding where the products of fermentation 
by one or more bacterial species provide the substrate(s) 
for other bacterial species   This complex coop-
erative activity of the gut microbiota is essential for good 
health  Bacterial fermentation of amino acids and 
proteins, which occurs mainly in the distal colon, generates 
a range of metabolites, many of which have a toxic poten-
tial. and 
F. prausnitzii in obese women  In healthy adults with 
mild constipation, inulin-type fructans increased the relative 
abundance of Anaerostipes, Bilophila and Bifidobacterium 
in feces, and reduced the abundance of Bilophila  Dif-
ferences in selectivity for the fermentation of several car-
bohydrate substrates (lactulose, galacto-oligosaccharides, 
sugar beet pectin and apple fiber) were found between the 

Fig. Metabolites in green 
boxes are believed to be health-
positive while those in red 
boxes are potentially harmful. Similarly, allergic 
reactions to food and milk were significantly higher in the 
standard formula milk group 

A  meta-analysis  of  26  randomized  controlled  trials 
(RCTs) involving 831 healthy adults showed that dietary 
prebiotic  supplementation  significantly  increased  self-
reported feelings of satiety compared with placebo  
Healthy adults fed an oligofructose-enriched inulin diet 
experienced lowered hunger and increased satiety rates com-
pared with the placebo, maltodextrin. Prebiotics  have  been  used  in  several  studies  to  treat 
constipation. In many cases the 
suggested mechanisms are 
speculative at the present time. For some products there is already 
good evidence on gut health and these findings should be 
communicated to health care professionals and consumers. The study collects extensive data on participants 
including demographic, biological and phenotypic infor-
mation  including  genetic,  epigenetic  and  ‘omics’  data 
(metabolomics, transcriptomics, proteomics), with a wide 
range of biomaterials stored in a biobank. In addition, we could 

1 3S6 

European Journal of Nutrition S1–S14

show that 4.5% of the variance in BMI is attributable to the 
gut microbiome 

Analysis of the gut microbiome revealed that the use of 
proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) was associated with a signifi-
cant decrease in gut microbiota diversity and with signifi-
cant changes of around 20% of bacterial taxa. PPIs depleted ben-
eficial bacteria such as the Ruminococcaceae family and 
Bifidobacterium, and increased potentially harmful bacte-
ria including Enterococcus, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus 
genera and Escherichia coli. The Microbiome working group within the UMCG has 
embarked recently on a large project within the LifeLines 
cohort: the 10K metagenome project. It is planned that the subjects will prospectively 
followed up every 5 years. In contrast, a 
Caesarean section, premature delivery, formula milk, and 
exposure to antibiotics have a negative impact on the diver-
sity and composition of microbiota in infants 

Preterm infants show delayed colonization of the gut 
microbiota with Bifidobacterium, and have a high preva-
lence of Enterobacteriaceae, Staphylococcus, and Enterococ-
caceae  Vaginally delivered neonates have an increased 
prevalence of maternal microbiota derived from the vagina 
and intestine (e.g. Lactobacillus, Prevotella and Sneathia) 
compared with neonates delivered by Caesarean section. The 
development  of  the  infant  microbiome  is  dependent  on  various  fac-
tors,  such  as  infant  feeding  method,  diet  and  the  environment. It is known since long that birth 
mode, feeding mode and antibiotic exposure, all affect the 
development of the neonatal microbiome. Central control of the gut is mediated through the HPA 
axis and the autonomic nervous system. lactis, 
Streptococcus thermophiles, and two Lactobacillus spp. produced significant changes in brain activity assessed by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), in response 
to an emotional faces attention task. There-
fore, the introduction of probiotic or symbiotic nutritional 
approaches are put forward by researches to prevent, delay, 
or ease neurological disorders in the future (see: . FMT is highly effective for treating recurrent Clostridium 
difficile infections and may be used more widely in the future 
for conditions such as metabolic syndrome. Acknowledgements  RKW is supported by a VIDI grant 
from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO). Author contributions  MHM wrote this manuscript. RJMB, RAR, 
RKW, MF declare no conflict of interest.