The possibility of early modulation of the offspring gut microbiota by acting on specific
maternal factors and/or characteristics is of potential great interest. Nevertheless, only few
data are available about the associations between maternal characteristics and newborn micro-
biota pattern. In order to reduce the noise, each oligotype should appear in at least 10 samples,
occur in more than 1.0% of the reads for at least ten samples, represent a minimum of 750
reads in all samples combined, and have a most abundant unique sequence with a minimum
abundance of 50. A cladogram of representative sequences was generated using the ANVIOs
software . Two out of 29 women were treated with insulin;
none received metformin. In multiple regression analyses, a significant association
between breastfeeding and the relative abundance of Bifidobacterium in the infant gut micro-
biota was found (β = 22.9; 95%CI = 10.1–35.7; P = 0.0017)..

In order to explore the possible mother-to-infant gut microbiota transmission at sub-OTUs
level, we carried out oligotyping on sequences of Blautia, Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium
since these were the only genera showing a Shannon entropy index sufficient to identify all. A high degree of mother-offspring concordance was found for B11
(P = 0.008) and B42 (P<0.001); both were identified as Blautia wexlerae by best BLASTn
match. A reduction in the relative abundance of Bacteroides oligotypes was observed across
pregnancy while few oligotypes were observed to be dominant in the offspring samples
(S4B Fig)..

The gut microbiota of our offspring was compared with those of 19 breastfed infants from
healthy normoglycemic women. Accord-
ingly, these bacteria have been detected in the feces or meconium of full-term newborns in
several studies . The Clostridiales order includes several genera and in particular Roseburia and. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, both butyrate-producing bacteria with beneficial functions,
which have been found to be reduced in GDM women . Distribution of representative Bifidobacterium oligotypes in the offspring samples. Distribution in representative Blautia (plot A) and Bacteroides (plot B) oligotypes. Inner bars indicate the presence of an oligotype
in a given sample. Outer circle, if colored, denotes oligotype abundance with high degree of
mother-offspring concordance. Amenta, Clara Monzeglio, Roberto Gambino, Simona Bo..

Investigation: Valentina Ponzo, Ilario Ferrocino, Adriana Zarovska, Maria Bernadette
Amenta, Filomena Leone, Clara Monzeglio, Marianna Pellegrini, Roberto Gambino,
Simona Bo.