Several studies have demonstrated modulation of colonic 
microbiota by prebiotic inulin or inulin-type fructans. and 
F. prausnitzii in obese women  In healthy adults with 
mild constipation, inulin-type fructans increased the relative 
abundance of Anaerostipes, Bilophila and Bifidobacterium 
in feces, and reduced the abundance of Bilophila  Dif-
ferences in selectivity for the fermentation of several car-
bohydrate substrates (lactulose, galacto-oligosaccharides, 
sugar beet pectin and apple fiber) were found between the . Clostridium XIVa
E. halli R. hominis
Anaerostipes . Transcription analysis of microbiome revealed that 
butyrate induced differential expression of multiple genes 
involved in fatty acid oxidation, electron transport chain and 
oxidative stress pathways  In addition, butyrate led to 
dose-dependent decreases in visceral sensitivity  How-
ever, butyrate enemas administered to patients with UC in 
clinical remission had relatively minor effects on inflamma-
tory and oxidative stress parameters, although the selection 
of patients with chronically mild levels of inflammation and 
oxidative stress may have limited the scope of this study . This adverse 
effect of PPIs on bacterial diversity was greater than for any 
other drug class, including antibiotics. The bar represents 10ʵm (Photo, M. Sadaghian Sadabad). Preterm infants show delayed colonization of the gut 
microbiota with Bifidobacterium, and have a high preva-
lence of Enterobacteriaceae, Staphylococcus, and Enterococ-
caceae  Vaginally delivered neonates have an increased 
prevalence of maternal microbiota derived from the vagina 
and intestine (e.g. Lactobacillus, Prevotella and Sneathia) 
compared with neonates delivered by Caesarean section. Further studies on the role of the maternal 
microbiome in development of the neonatal microbiome are 
necessary..

Preclinical studies have shown effects of the gut micro-
biota on nociceptive reflexes  feeding, emotional and 
social behavior  and brain neu-
rochemistry  The gut microbiota is essential for 
normal social development in the mouse and is implicated 
in neurodevelopmental disorders including autism spectrum 
disorder  Germfree mice have an exaggerated 
stress response compared with control animals. produced significant changes in brain activity assessed by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), in response 
to an emotional faces attention task.