Abstract: Pregnancy induces a number of immunological, hormonal, and metabolic changes that are
necessary for the mother to adapt her body to this new physiological situation. The present review summarizes the actual
knowledge related to physiological changes in the microbiota occurring in the mother, the fetus,
and the child, both during neonatal period and beyond. argued the weakness of evidence supporting the. The composition of the vaginal microbiota is dynamic, corresponding with hormonal ﬂuctuations
throughout the woman’s reproductive life, and also during pregnancy. Therefore, early pregnancy may be an important environment,
modulating preterm delivery. It has
been hypothesized that pregnancy creates a nutrient environment that is more favorable to some
sensitive strains  The presence of pathogenic bacteria Porphyromonas gingivalis and Aggregatibacter
actinomycotemcomitans in gingival sulcus were signiﬁcantly higher during early and middle stages
of pregnancy compared to non-pregnant women  The oral alpha-diversity index was higher
in the third trimester compared to non-pregnant women, and this may be related to the increase of
progesterone and estradiol. One underlying mechanism refers to estrogens being substituted
for vitamin K in bacterial anaerobic respiration, especially for black-pigmented Bacteroides such as
Bacteroides melaninogenicus and Prevotella intermedia . Microorganism may pass through the
placenta and colonize the fetus ascending from the vagina, from the oral cavity, from the urinary track,
or from the intestinal lumen of the mother. Diﬀerent studies have also detected microbiome in the ﬁrst baby fecal sample, the meconium,
supporting the in utero exposure to bacteria  Staphylococcus has been reported as the most
prevalent bacteria in meconium samples, followed by Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus,
and Biﬁdobacterium even in infants born by C-section  Modiﬁcation in placental microbiota may
be related with adverse pregnancy outcomes of pregnancy or symptoms of clinical infection . It has been proposed that infants born
by C-section lacked the early provision of breast milk essential to attain a proper gut microbiota that
contains microbes such as Lactobacilli and Biﬁdobacteria. In contrast, Paenibacillus predominated in term placental specimens 
Other authors have proposed that the fetal intestinal microbiota derives from swallowed amniotic ﬂuid,
and that they may trigger an inﬂammatory response which leads to premature birth  Considering
that some Lactobacillus strains may possess potential anti-inﬂammatory activities, and could regulate
blood glucose levels in diabetic humans  the low abundance of Lactobacillus in placentas of low
birth weight neonates reported by Zheng et al. might be related to a pro-inﬂammatory status in
these pregnancies. On one hand, sedation and endotracheal intubation
decrease mucociliary clearance and cough, reducing the elimination of microorganisms. In addition to the critical patients, associated dysbiosis, hypoperfusion, and reperfusion of the
intestinal wall produce an intense inﬂammation of the digestive mucosa which alters the gradient of
oxygen concentration and increases the concentration of nitrates favoring the growth of pathogenic ﬂora. may also inﬂuence the alteration of the digestive
functions  Freedberg et al. The presence of these bacteria is lower in Crohn’s disease patients, as well as
anti-inﬂammatory fecal bacteria metabolites  Besides, it has been shown that infants with AD
improved their symptomatology when the abundance of fecal Coprococcus eutactus, a butyrate-producing
bacterium, is increased  Consequently, it has been proposed that dysbiotic gut microbiota and
subsequent dysregulation of the gut inﬂammation may promote an aberrant Th2-type immune response
to allergens altering the epithelial barrier in AD skin