Supported by the University of California Innovation Institute for Food and Health, Agricultural
Research Service CRIS Projects 2032-51530-022-00D and 2032-53000-001-00D, Arcadia
Biosciences and Ardent Mills. The funding agencies did not participate in data collection, or
interpretation of the data. Mention of trade names or commercial products in this publication
is solely for the purpose of providing specific information and does not imply recommendation
or endorsement by the USDA. The USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. Figures were created using BioRender (https://biorender.com). Author disclosures: RLH, MLM, JPH, NLK, and MEK, no conflicts of interest. Address correspondence to MEK (e-mail: mary.kable@ars.usda.edu). first introduced the concept of
“enterotypes”, clustering individuals into 3 groups according
to their dominant genera: Bacteroides, Prevotella, and Ru-
minococcus. Although enterotypes have since been shown
to exist more on a continuous scale  the Bacteroides
and Prevotella enterotypes have been consistently replicated
across cohorts  The identification of the Ruminococcus
enterotype is more dependent on clustering and modeling
approaches  Roager
et al. highlight measures such as enterotype or
the Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio. Both animal and in vitro models have limitations when
it comes to drawing conclusions about human health and
nutrition as they lack the specific interactions present in
the human supraorganism. However, these techniques used in combination with human
clinical trials will be crucial in the development of precision
nutrition research and our understanding of the interaction
between the host and the gut microbiota..

10. Sonnenburg ED, Zheng H, Joglekar P, Higginbottom SK, Firbank
SJ, Bolam DN, Sonnenburg JL. Specificity of polysaccharide use
in intestinal Bacteroides species determines diet-induced microbiota
alterations. Possemiers S, Rabot S, Espín JC, Bruneau A, Philippe C,
González-Sarrías A, Heyerick A, Tomás-Barberán FA, De
Keukeleire D, Verstraete W. Eubacterium limosum activates
isoxanthohumol from hops (Humulus lupulus L.) into the potent
phytoestrogen 8-prenylnaringenin in vitro and in rat intestine.