rates of cell turnover in germ-free animals compared with wild-type animals13. When challenged with the Gram-negative enteric pathogen Shigella flexneri,
germ-free animals showed decreased immune resistance to infection and increased mortality
compared with conventionally colonized animals17. L-selectin and CD44 are known to be involved in homing of
lymphocytes to sites of inflammation. These studies support the idea that enteric pathogens
such as S. typhimurium may have developed strategies to counter both the immune system
and the microbiota during the infectious process..

IBD involves a shift from a regulated intestinal immune responses to one that is driven by
unrestrained immune-cell activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine production474849. The data in animal models provide further evidence for the
involvement of gut bacteria in IBD. However, it appears that inflammatory responses during human and experimental
IBD are directed towards certain subsets of commensal organisms with pathogenic potential
such as Helicobacter, Clostridium and Enterococcus species. Curiously, these organisms are
abundant commensals, and not typically infectious pathogenic agents. Genetic factors play an important role in the pathogenesis of
IBD. This is demonstrated by familial aggregation of IBD and increased concordance for
IBD in monozygotic twins. As shown in Table 2,
many individual or combinations of bacterial species have been shown to ameliorate the
symptoms of IBD in humans and mouse models. Treatment of colitic mice with the
probiotic cocktail, VSL#3, increased the production of IL-10 and the percentage of TGFβ-
expressing T cells77. physical development of the immune system, including expansion and differentiation of
splenic CD4+ T cells81. These data have identified a single molecule made by a
symbiotic microorganism that stimulates CD4+ T cells to make IL-10, required for the
suppression of the inflammatory process during colitis, and suggest that other beneficial
bacteria may produce factors that can positively shape the host immune response during
IBD..

Does harboring certain strains of bacteria predispose an individual to disease or protect from
it? No infectious organisms have ever
been conclusively demonstrated to be involved in IBD, though various studies are still
ongoing. An opportunistic
organism that rarely comes in contact with the host, but causes acute
or chronic disease upon infection.