S2 

European Journal of Nutrition S1–S14

Crohn’s disease (CD) or ulcerative colitis (UC); and irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS). Moreover, the various benefits of 
prebiotics on human health, the microbiome–nutrient inter-
action and the role of vitamins in promoting the selective 
growth of microbes in the gut as well as determinants of 
the development of a healthy microbiome were presented 
and discussed intensively. Fermentation of dietary prebiotics in the gut involves 
metabolic cross-feeding where the products of fermentation 
by one or more bacterial species provide the substrate(s) 
for other bacterial species   This complex coop-
erative activity of the gut microbiota is essential for good 
health  Bacterial fermentation of amino acids and 
proteins, which occurs mainly in the distal colon, generates 
a range of metabolites, many of which have a toxic poten-
tial. Arrows indicate known cross-
feeding relationships between 
the principle microbial groups 
present. Metabolites in green 
boxes are believed to be health-
positive while those in red 
boxes are potentially harmful. Several studies have examined the effect of prebiot-
ics on allergic reactions and infections in infancy. Similarly, allergic 
reactions to food and milk were significantly higher in the 
standard formula milk group 

A  meta-analysis  of  26  randomized  controlled  trials 
(RCTs) involving 831 healthy adults showed that dietary 
prebiotic  supplementation  significantly  increased  self-
reported feelings of satiety compared with placebo  
Healthy adults fed an oligofructose-enriched inulin diet 
experienced lowered hunger and increased satiety rates com-
pared with the placebo, maltodextrin. Prebiotics  have  been  used  in  several  studies  to  treat 
constipation. 2   Effect of prebiotics 
on gut function and health. In many cases the 
suggested mechanisms are 
speculative at the present time. Physiological functions are in 
purple and health outcomes 
are in green. reduced infection

NK 
activity

phagocytic 
activity

reduced 
renal toxicity

increased
absorption

immune 
stimulation

M Cell

regulation of peristalsis

p-cresyl sulphate
indoxyl sulphate

Ca++

reduced 
pH

defence against 
pathogens

reduced
infection

Butyrate

Acetate 

Propionate
reduced tumour 
promoters

FFAR2

FFAR3

improved 
bowel habit

faecal 
bulking

Prebiotics 

selective
fermentation

adhesion
inhibition

reduced
intestinal 
infection

maintenance of barrier function

Zonulin

Occludin

GLP-2 

ZO1

GLP-1

PYY

Ghrelin

Reduced 
cancer 
risk? Appli-
cation of the multi-sugar test showed that small intestinal 
permeability was increased in patients with diarrheal IBS 
compared to healthy controls 

Patients with post-infectious IBS have reduced mucosal 
and fecal microbial diversity compared with healthy con-
trols. For addressing 
this question and defining the intrinsic and extrinsic factors 
that influence the gut microbiome, Zhernakova et al analyzed 
the LifeLines Deep cohort utilizing metagenomic shotgun 
sequencing of the gut microbiome of 1135 participants and 
more than 200 phenotypic features. Age and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) 
concentration were positively correlated with gut microbi-
ome inter-individual variation  In another study, our 
group showed by performing a Mendelian Randomization 
study that the human gut microbiota is an independent fac-
tor for variation of blood lipid levels, accounting for 6% of 
triglyceride, and 4% of HDL variance. PPIs depleted ben-
eficial bacteria such as the Ruminococcaceae family and 
Bifidobacterium, and increased potentially harmful bacte-
ria including Enterococcus, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus 
genera and Escherichia coli. It is planned that the subjects will prospectively 
followed up every 5 years. Microbial  diversity  increases  dramatically  during 

first months of infancy . In contrast, a 
Caesarean section, premature delivery, formula milk, and 
exposure to antibiotics have a negative impact on the diver-
sity and composition of microbiota in infants 

Preterm infants show delayed colonization of the gut 
microbiota with Bifidobacterium, and have a high preva-
lence of Enterobacteriaceae, Staphylococcus, and Enterococ-
caceae  Vaginally delivered neonates have an increased 
prevalence of maternal microbiota derived from the vagina 
and intestine (e.g. Lactobacillus, Prevotella and Sneathia) 
compared with neonates delivered by Caesarean section. Changes in the microbiota began at the onset of pregnancy 
 Pregnant Balb/c mice showed significant increases 
in the relative abundance of Actinobacteria and Proteo-
bacteria  compared  with  non-pregnant  littermates. It is known since long that birth 
mode, feeding mode and antibiotic exposure, all affect the 
development of the neonatal microbiome. lactis, 
Streptococcus thermophiles, and two Lactobacillus spp. produced significant changes in brain activity assessed by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), in response 
to an emotional faces attention task. How-
ever, the underlying mechanisms of these interactions are 
largely unclear and, at the present time, it is not possible to 
differentiate between the microbes involved. The gut microbiota has a 
regulatory role on anxiety, mood, cognition and pain which 
is exerted via the gut-brain axis. FMT is highly effective for treating recurrent Clostridium 
difficile infections and may be used more widely in the future 
for conditions such as metabolic syndrome. It is, therefore, expected that pre/probiotics will 
be combined with other nutritional compounds to achieve a 
more robust health effect. Acknowledgements  RKW is supported by a VIDI grant 
from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO). Author contributions  MHM wrote this manuscript. All co-authors reviewed and approved the manuscript before 
submission. Conflict of interest  MHM and ME are employees of DSM Nutritional 
Products,  Kaiseraugst,  Switzerland  and  as  such  no  external  funding 
was provided.