proﬁle identiﬁed based on sequencing different
variable regions. A) The 16S rDNA gene of bacteria
contains nine hypervariable regions (V1–V9) that are ﬂanked by conserved regions, which makes this gene an
ideal target for PCR ampliﬁcation and bacterial classiﬁcation. An additional method that may be use-
ful to examine microbiome communities across
ethnicities is to use single nucleotide poly-
morphisms (SNPs) in mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), which provides more precision in
analysis (Ruiz-Pesini et al. Vaginal samples collected
from a cross-sectional survey of gravid subjects
from 18 wk gestation to term or delivery, and
all samples were collected by a single physician
who also conducted the HMP sampling for
50% of subjects. All samples were extracted in
a manner identical to that used by the HMP, and
sequenced on the same pipelines. And on
probing at the species level using supervised
machine learning approaches, such as linear
discriminate analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe)
and Boruta feature selection, we discovered that
the vaginal microbiome during pregnancy was
enriched in L. iners, L. crispatus, Lactobacillus
jensenii, and Lactobacillus johnsonii (Aagaard
et al. Al-
though this insight should be kept in mind for
future studies, this study had only two subjects
with advanced maternal age (Walther-
Anto´ nio et al. Intriguingly, the investigators found
that the presence of lactobacilli did not distin-
guish term (.37 wk) from preterm (,37 wk)
subjects using Sanger sequencing methods. Despite the
lack of association of lactobacilli with preterm
birth, measured alpha diversity was reported as
diminished when comparing Caucasian term
and preterm subjects (Hyman et al. 2014), which is in contrast to a previous
study demonstrating that L. crispatus is domi-
nant in healthy term pregnancies (Verstraelen
et al. Moreover,
although two subjects in the Hyman et al. However, this study included a small sub-
ject number and did not examine the maternal
stool postpartum, which would be relevant to
determine the persistence of the probiotic in
the maternal microbiome that would provide
an opportunity for horizontal transmission. This study
shows that the maternal microbiome at birth
and postpartum may be critical in the establish-
ment and development of the neonatal micro-
biome via horizontal transmission..

When directly examining the intestinal mi-
crobiome of infants born via cesarean or vaginal
delivery, culture-based microbiological tech-
niques have shown differences in the coloniza-
tion of the neonatal
intestinal microbiome,
particularly of Biﬁdobacterium-like bacteria,
Lactobacillus-like bacteria, and Bacteriodes fra-
gilis (Gro¨nlund et al. Our ﬁnding of Fuso-
bacteria to be a relatively abundant taxon in the
placenta supports the hypothesis of hematoge-
nous spread from the oral cavity to the placenta
(Aagaard et al. 2014), and this theory is further
buttressed by the ﬁnding of bacteria in cord
blood of normal pregnancies (Jime´nez et al.