The microbiological diagnosis of a ‘normal’ or dis-
turbed vaginal microbiota has historically been based on
the Nugent score, the current gold standard diagnostic
method that relies on Gram stain of vaginal smears 
The ‘normal’ vaginal microbiota in non-pregnant repro-
ductive aged women is understood to be dominated by
Lactobacillus species, while an abnormal microbiota
(defined as bacterial vaginosis) is characterized by low
abundance of lactobacilli and an overgrowth of anaer-
obic bacteria, such as Gardnerella vaginalis, Prevotella
spp., and Mycoplasma
hominis  In low-risk pregnant women, it has been
shown that the vaginal microbiota has reduced richness
lactobacilli
and diversity and increased abundance of
compared to those of non-pregnant women  An
abnormal microbiota has been previously associated
with preterm birth  but only a few in depth
culture-independent studies of the vaginal microbiota of
women who had preterm birth have been published,
with inconsistent conclusions . Hierarchical clustering of vaginal microbiota profiles
resulted in seven community state types
I
(CST):
(Lactobacillus crispatus dominated),
(Lactobacillus
gasseri dominated), III (Lactobacillus iners dominated),
IVA (Gardnerella vaginalis subgroup B or mix of differ-
ent species), IVC (G. vaginalis subgroup A dominated),
IVD (G. vaginalis
subgroup C dominated) and V
(Lactobacillus jensenii dominated) . A total of 60 taxa had significant differences
in prevalence between term and preterm groups; 11 spe-
cies had greater prevalence in the term cohort and 49
in the preterm cohort
species were more prevalent
(Table 3). Ureaplasma species were detected by
genus-specific PCR in samples of 14/46 women
who had PTB, with all women testing positive for U.
parvum and none for U. urealyticum. Identifying dif-
ferences in the causes of early and late sPTB and the
role of the vaginal microbiota in those processes will re-
quire further study..

Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. Differences in the
prevalence of several other taxa between groups were
also observed.