The microbiological diagnosis of a ‘normal’ or dis-
turbed vaginal microbiota has historically been based on
the Nugent score, the current gold standard diagnostic
method that relies on Gram stain of vaginal smears 
The ‘normal’ vaginal microbiota in non-pregnant repro-
ductive aged women is understood to be dominated by
Lactobacillus species, while an abnormal microbiota
(defined as bacterial vaginosis) is characterized by low
abundance of lactobacilli and an overgrowth of anaer-
obic bacteria, such as Gardnerella vaginalis, Prevotella
spp., Conventional PCR
Some Mollicutes (Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma) species
lack a cpn60 gene  Thus, we performed a family-
specific semi-nested PCR targeting the 16S rRNA gene
to detect Mollicutes  and a PCR targeting the
multiple-banded antigen gene to detect Ureaplasma spp. PCR products from U. parvum and U. urealyticum can
be differentiated by size . Hierarchical clustering of vaginal microbiota profiles
resulted in seven community state types
I
(CST):
(Lactobacillus crispatus dominated),
(Lactobacillus
gasseri dominated), III (Lactobacillus iners dominated),
IVA (Gardnerella vaginalis subgroup B or mix of differ-
ent species), IVC (G. vaginalis subgroup A dominated),
IVD (G. vaginalis
subgroup C dominated) and V
(Lactobacillus jensenii dominated) . Overall microbiota profiles did not cluster together
based on gestational age at delivery (Figs. A total of 60 taxa had significant differences
in prevalence between term and preterm groups; 11 spe-
cies had greater prevalence in the term cohort and 49
in the preterm cohort
species were more prevalent
(Table 3). were associated with both term and pre-
term. Ureaplasma species were detected by
genus-specific PCR in samples of 14/46 women
who had PTB, with all women testing positive for U.
parvum and none for U. urealyticum. An associ-
ation between Mollicutes/Ureaplasma detection and the
composition of the vaginal microbiota, represented as
CST, was also investigated. abundance of other Lactobacillus species as well as
Gardnerella . Differences in the
prevalence of several other taxa between groups were
also observed. For example, more women in the term
group had Prevotella amnii and P. tannerae detected in
their vaginal samples, whereas P. timonensis, P. bivia, P.
corporis and P. bucalis were more frequently detected in
samples from women in the preterm group (Table 3). have been previously associated with bac-
terial vaginosis and preterm labour  and our
results indicate that different Prevotella species might
have different roles in sPTB. Further investigation would be re-
quired to determine if these rare members of the micro-
bial community play a yet unknown role in sPTB..

Our results also confirmed previous reports of an as-
sociation between Mycoplasma and preterm birth 
Mollicutes were detected significantly more often in
women in the preterm group compared to women in the
term group, but no differences were observed in
Ureaplasma prevalence between groups indicating that
the difference in Mollicutes prevalence is primarily
driven by the presence of Mycoplasma spp. Samples were collected at each
trimester and preterm was defined as delivery before
37 weeks of gestation. In other words, the increased richness and diversity
we observed might be a remnant characteristic of the pre-
vious disturbed microbiota.