bioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. 1A

1B

1D

1C

1E

2

Figure 1: Study Design and Population 
Characteristics

1A. The study cohort had 550 adult participants 
 Each study participant provided 
a stool sample, filled out questionnaires, and 
made an office visit. 1D. 4% of the study population were pre-diabet-
ic with HbA1c% > 5.7. We collected blood glucose measurements every 
15  minutes  using  a  Continuous  Glucose  Monitor  (CGM)  sensor  that 
measures glucose levels within the range of 40 to 500 mg/dL [Abbott 
2016]. 

Study Meals
As  described  in  Figure  2,  participants  were  provided  pre-designed 
breakfasts,  snacks,  and  lunches  (“provided  meals”)  over  14  days 
(“day  0”  to  “day  13”). Provided meals 

accounted for 66% of all meals and free meals 34%. Free  meals  were  loaded  by  users  through 
selection of custom dishes, ingredients, and quantities. A total of 9 distinct meals shown in Figure 2D were repeated 
over the course of the 14 day diet schedules (omnivore and vegetar-
ian/gluten-free)  to  collect  information  regarding  intra-person  vari-
ability; each repeat meal was consumed twice by study participants. Microbiome Features
Stool  samples  from  participants  were  processed  using  our  meta-
transcriptomic  method  [Hatch  2019]  to  yield  raw  microbiome  data 
features  including  KEGG  gene  orthologs  (or  “KOs”)  [KEGG]  and 
microbial taxonomy. For the samples provided by the 550 
participants in this study, 6587 unique microbial KOs were detected, a 
mean of 2941.9 per sample (s.d. Metabolic  and  signaling  pathway  activities  are  scored  using  ex-
pression levels of genes encoding specific protein functions (KEGG 
mappings  are  used  primarily),  compared  with  a  reference  cohort  of 
samples supplied by Viome customers. 2B. In this omnivore diet example, 
meals are shown for several of the 
provided macronutrient groups 
(carbs - fiber - protein - fat). The blue curve is 
the CGM reading collected every 15 
mins. Grey bars 
represent light and deep sleep. All predictors were significant by likelihood-ratio test at p<.05, except 
for  glutamine  production  pathways  (p=.08)  and  the  interaction  be-
tween tyrosine metabolizers and carbs (p=.06) which are kept in this 
model as suggestive, and do not substantially affect the estimation of 
other coefficients. Tyrosine  metabolizers,  when  “Low,”  are 
directly related to elevated PPGR. Including the microbiome features yields a small 
but significant improvement in fit (R=.42, not pictured), and adding 
the other fixed effect predictors (age, BMI, sleep, activity, microbiome) 
improves the fit further (R=.45, Fig. Two hypothetical meals A and 
B (similar to repeat meals from Figure 2D with carbs approximately 
25g and 50g respectively) are shown to illustrate that two users (blue 
and red lines) have the opposite glycemic responses (iAUC of 14 & 20 
vs iAUC of 37 & 27 respectively) due to the crossover of their iAUC 
response  lines  between  the  two  meals  —  this  effect  was  shown  in 
Figure 3D using the raw data. This is a 
gradient boosting machine [Chen 2016] built on the same predictors 
already discussed as well as a number of additional features. Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Boxplots show the interquartile range; whiskers cover the middle 95th percentile. X axis is the mean absolute difference in iAUC. 3E. Relationships between anthropometric characteristics and per-participant average iAUC across all meals (provided and free). Performance on training and test 
data is shown in Figure 5. The relationship between iAUC and BMI / waist-to-hip ratio 
(Figure 3E second and third panels) is the opposite of that previously 
reported  in  studies  such  as  [Zeevi  2015].  We  hypothesize  that  this 
may  reflect  the  self-reported  good  health  and  high  exercise  rate 
within this study population. 4B. Fixed effect estimates for all predictors included in the 
final model. Error bars show standard error of 
the estimate. In the case of indole acetate production, the result 
shows that when such pathways score “High” in activity, the glycemic 
response  to  the  given  food  is  lower. If  a  given  person’s  microbiota  mainly  shows 
ability to convert tryptophan to beneficial indoles and indole-actetate 
molecules capable of reducing inflammation and glycemic effects of 
foods,  then  it  may  be  of  benefit  to  recommend  tryptophan  sources 
(in  the  form  of  food  or  supplement)  to  such  people. Glutamine  production  pathways  score,  when  “Low,”  showed  a 
direct relationship with higher PPGR. Modeling methods and model evolution
The  multilevel  mixed  effects  model  presented  first  in  the  previous 
section was deliberately chosen to better understand the incremental 
effects  of  the  significant  features,  especially  the  functional  gut  mi-
crobiome  activity  features.