the commonality that relates both BV and vaginal pH to HPV
infection (independent of HIV) is the RA of certain Lactobacil-
lus species, most notably L. crispatus. Distribution of relative abundance (RA) of Lactobacillus species..

concurrent multitype infection by HPV, while accounting for
the intraindividual correlation of the repeated observations. All covariates except study group were time
dependent. Women with rapidly progression of
HIV-associated immunosuppression had a lower CD4+ T-cell
count than HIV-infected women with stable immune status
and HIV-uninfected women (P < .001). Self-report of Trichomo-
nas vaginalis infection, BV, candidiasis, or STIs within the past. The number of clusters was determined by the Milligan
point-biserial criterion  The Shannon diversity index
(SDI) was calculated for the microbiome at each patient visit
in the data set . L. crispatus dominated CST I, CST II was dominated by
Lactobacillus gasseri, both CST III and IV-A were dominated
by Lactobacillus iners, and CST V was dominated by Lactobacil-
lus jensenii. When we assessed SDI tertile instead of
CST or Lactobacillus species in multivariate GEE logistic regres-
sion models, we found signiﬁcantly higher oncogenic HPV de-
tection in women in the highest SDI tertile (OR, 2.04; 95% CI,
1.18–3.52; Ptrend = .01), relative to those in the lowest SDI tertile. Abbreviations: BV, bacterial vaginosis; CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio. a“Low” and “medium” denote the relative abundance of Lactobacillus species and L. iners, respectively. Thus, high D-lactic acid levels but not acidity per se could be
associated with reduced infection and/or transmission of
certain viruses, including HPV..

While production of H2O2 has been observed in the major-
ity of L. crispatus isolates, prior data from our group suggest
that the levels of H2O2 produced are likely too limited to great-
ly affect the risk of STIs  especially HPV infection, since
HPV is a nonenveloped virus and, therefore, likely to be resis-
tant to H2O2. On the other hand, bacteriocins produced by
L. crispatus may have antiviral effects. These include the relatively small number of HIV-infected
and HIV-uninfected subjects, even though longitudinal testing
of nearly 400 CVLs was performed. These clinical/pathologic end points were too
infrequent in the current data set to adequately study. Nor
did we have sufﬁcient data to assess statistical interaction (eg,
by immune strata), and it may require subanalyses among sex-
ually inactive women to help differentiate reactivation of previ-
ously acquired from newly acquired (incident) HPV. The study
also focused on only premenopausal African American women,
which was done to reduce the number of factors being studied..

In summary, our results suggest a beneﬁcial effect of L. crisp-
atus on the burden of HPV in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected
women that is unrelated to pH. Further research to better un-
derstand these relationships is strongly warranted, including
large prospective cohort studies and laboratory research to un-
derstand the mechanisms that underlie the relation of the cer-
vicovaginal microbiota with HPV infection.