the commonality that relates both BV and vaginal pH to HPV
infection (independent of HIV) is the RA of certain Lactobacil-
lus species, most notably L. crispatus. All covariates except study group were time
dependent. Self-report of Trichomo-
nas vaginalis infection, BV, candidiasis, or STIs within the past. L. crispatus dominated CST I, CST II was dominated by
Lactobacillus gasseri, both CST III and IV-A were dominated
by Lactobacillus iners, and CST V was dominated by Lactobacil-
lus jensenii. Figure 2 additionally shows the SDI for each study
visit, and as expected CSTs I through IV-A and V (each dom-
inated by a single Lactobacillus species) had a low SDI, com-
pared with CST IV-B. The ﬁgure also presents the proportion
of oncogenic HPV–positive women-visits for each CST..

Table 3 shows multivariate GEE logistic regression models of
the associations between CSTs and the prevalent detection of
HPV. While CST I (L. crispatus dominated)
had an inverse association with detection of any HPV and espe-
cially with any oncogenic HPV, the relationship was of border-
line statistical signiﬁcance (eg, odds ratio [OR] for oncogenic
HPV was 0.30 [95% conﬁdence interval {CI},
.08–1.11];
P = .07). Abbreviations: BV, bacterial vaginosis; CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio. Thus, high D-lactic acid levels but not acidity per se could be
associated with reduced infection and/or transmission of
certain viruses, including HPV..

While production of H2O2 has been observed in the major-
ity of L. crispatus isolates, prior data from our group suggest
that the levels of H2O2 produced are likely too limited to great-
ly affect the risk of STIs  especially HPV infection, since
HPV is a nonenveloped virus and, therefore, likely to be resis-
tant to H2O2. Nor
did we have sufﬁcient data to assess statistical interaction (eg,
by immune strata), and it may require subanalyses among sex-
ually inactive women to help differentiate reactivation of previ-
ously acquired from newly acquired (incident) HPV.