relationships
between internal microorganisms and I. scapularis have
focused on commonly studied human pathogens. For
example, infection of blacklegged ticks by A. phagocy-
tophilum (the causative agent of granulocytic anaplas-
mosis in humans) has been shown to induce protein
expression that increases cold tolerance and, depend-
ing on weather patterns, may aid in tick survival
(Neelakanta et al. Furthermore,
infection with
B. burgdorferi has been shown to affect questing beha-
viour and movement of
this tick, possibly affecting
survival and/or pathogen transmission (Lefcort &
Durden 1996). This tick
experiences a 2-year life cycle, feeding once per life
stage (larva, nymph, and adult) on vertebrate blood. A total of 6 908 532 sequences passed ﬁlter
and were assigned taxonomy. This resulted in 116 941–
452 654 (mean = 328 977, SD = 96 960) high-quality,
merged sequences per sample (Table S1, Supporting
information). The conditional uncovered probability of
the samples, on average,
indicated a high likelihood
that over 99.9% of the bacterial taxa in the samples was
covered. The relative abundance
of non-Rickettsia taxa increased along developmental
stages (i.e. larvae to nymphs to adults) with the excep-
tion of adult females, which displayed the highest rela-
tive abundance of Rickettsia of all ﬁeld-collected life
stages . Freshly hatched larvae also had a high
relative abundance of Rickettsia . Seven taxa were
found in all female and all freshly hatched larvae sam-
ples (matching to the genera Rickettsia, Phyllobacterium,
Burkholderia, Sphingomonas, Pseudomonas and the families
Comamonadaceae
and Oxalobacteraceae); however,
females harboured more observed OTUs than freshly
hatched larvae . Wolbachia was the genus with the second highest. Both Borrelia and Anaplasma were only found in
nymphs and adults..

Dermacentor and Haemaphysalis ticks (Piesman & Gage
2004), Rickettsia amblyommii isolated from the American
lone star tick Amblyomma americanum (Stromdahl et al. Global placement
uncertainty was elevated, as captured by the EPA’s
entropy measure (mean = 0.7767, SD = 0.0699). The
placement of our sequences on the reference tree can be
explored interactively on the iToL webserver (http://
itol.embl.de/tree/286234201192691468834200)..

blacklegged ticks (Moreno et al. Rickettsia are obligate, intracellular bacteria associ-
ated with eukaryotes,
including arthropods (Perlman
et al. We interpret this as an indication of sufﬁcient evolution-
ary informativeness
identiﬁcation of our
sequences at the clade level grosso modo, combined with
the observation of greater divergence patterns of this
locus in Rickettsia.