Even though they have limitations
like all other models, they present some important
immunological and histopathological aspects of IBD in
humans  The most widely used and characterized
experimental model of erosion and inﬂammation related
to UC in mice is the dextran sulphate sodium (DSS)-
induced colitis, which is developed by DSS administration
either in the drinking water or via intragastric
catheter  The DSS induces a reproducible
acute colitis  however, there is some controversy
regarding the type of inﬂammation that is induced. The new OTU table
was then used to generate metagenomic data after
normalizing the data by copy numbers, and to derive
relative Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG) Pathway abundance  The KEGG data were
analyzed using STAMP (STatistical Analysis of Metage-
nomic Proﬁles) 

Statistical analysis
The UNIVARIATE procedure of SAS (SAS 9.3, 2012) was
used to test the normality of residuals for a-diversity
data. (cid:1) 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim

www.jbm-journal.com

J. Basic Microbiol. From the macroscopic assessment of disease
severity in the colon, it was apparent that mice in the
DSS-induced colitis treatment exhibited overt features of
colitis compared to the healthy control group, which is
in agreement with previous results where a DSS model
was used  Also, analysis of the inﬂammatory
markers including serum CRP level, a marker of systemic
inﬂammation, showed signiﬁcant differences between
the two groups as DSS up-regulated this marker. In this regard, it
was worth noting that more taxa were signiﬁcantly
associated with the DSS treatment in fecal samples
compared to the colonic samples; however, several
taxa including: Bacteroides ovatus, g. Clostridium, rc4-4;
f. Clostridiaceae, Bacteroidaceae; and o. Bacteroidales,
RF39, and RF32 were positively associated with the DSS
treatment in both fecal and colonic mucosa samples. Given that the microbial analysis of diversity, commu-
nity composition and also changes at phylum level for
colonic samples did not show any signiﬁcant difference
between the DSS and control mice, the results suggest
that analysis at microbial functional level might reveal
important colitis-related changes in gut microbiome
that are otherwise not noticeable at higher phylogenetic
or community levels.