The aim of the present study was to utilize Illumina
sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene and inferred meta-
genomics by open source software PICRUSt (Phyloge-
netic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of
Unobserved States  to investigate differences in
microbiome composition and function in the fecal and
colonic mucosa of mice treated with 5% DSS for 5 days. For colonic
samples, the tissue was cut open and approximately
50 mg of mucosa scrapings were taken. DNA extraction
from colonic mucosa samples was done using ZR Tissue
and Insect DNA kit (Zymo Research Corp.). Both DNA
extraction kits included a bead-beating step for the
mechanical lysis of microbial cells. DNA samples were
normalized to 20 ng/ml, and quality checked by PCR
ampliﬁcation of the 16S rRNA gene using universal. Principle coordinate analysis (PCoA) of weighted UniFrac distances, a measure of b-diversity of bacterial community. ( The p values were determined using
PERMANOVA. The low-abundance phyla (<1% of
included Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria,
community),
Cyanobacteria, Fibrobacteres, Lentisphaerae, Planctomy-
cetes, Spirochaetes, TM7, and Tenericutes. Results of the
relative abundances of various phyla are summarized
in Fig. 4b..

Of the 151 taxa, 68 had abundances greater than
or equal to 0.01% of community, whereas 83 were
below 0.01% of community. Bacterial taxa with relative
abundance of (cid:5)0.01% of community were analysed
using PLS-DA to identify bacteria that were most
characteristic of DSS or control treatments. Percentage of relative abundances of bacterial phyla for: (a) fecal samples and (b) colon mucosa samples. DSS, dextran sulphate sodium..

The indigenous gut microbiota are thought to play a key
role in the pathogenesis of IBD. Some of these taxa have been reported to increase
as a result of DSS  and although they may have
different roles, their association with DSS in both colonic
mucosa and in feces may indicate that they may play
signiﬁcant roles in the potentiation of the abnormal
inﬂammatory response seen in DSS-treated animals, and
could therefore be important as intervention targets
against the disease. Lending support to these results,
Berry et al. Given that the microbial analysis of diversity, commu-
nity composition and also changes at phylum level for
colonic samples did not show any signiﬁcant difference
between the DSS and control mice, the results suggest
that analysis at microbial functional level might reveal
important colitis-related changes in gut microbiome
that are otherwise not noticeable at higher phylogenetic
or community levels.