the dysbiosis of host gut microbiota and modulating of gut microbiota may be beneficial for
PCOS treatment. Administration of probiotics such as Lactobacillus is an attractive
concept in combating various diseases. Tokyo, Japan) by two persons blinded to the origin of sections. Cystic follicles were defined
according to criteria proposed previously as those follicles devoid of oocytes, displaying a
large antral cavity, an enlarged thecal cell layer, and a thin granulosa cell compartment contain-
ing apparently healthy cells..

lanes (C2-2 and P2-3) were cut and sequenced. Band 2 and 3 were identified as Prevotella mela-
ninogenica ATCC 25845 with 93% similarity, indicating that the DGGE gel separated V3 16S
rRNA genes from different bacteria effectively. On day 21, the copy number of Lactobacillus, Rumi-
nococcus and Clostridium were lower and Prevotella was higher in PCOS group when com-
pared with the control group. These data indicated that PCOS resulted in a significant variation
of gut microbiota composition. The granulosa
within the follicles showed multiple layers. Morphological changes of ovarian tissues. ( A) Sections of ovary from the control group had normal appearance. ( D) PCOS FMT group
showed increased granulosa layers and formation of corpora lutea. GLC: granular cell layer, TCL: theca cell layer, O: oocyte, L: luteum, AF: atretic follicle. Prevotella intermedia
were capable of stimulating 5α-reductase activity in human gingival fibroblasts, leading to the
synthesis of dihydrotestosterone form testosterone and androstenedione  In this study,
with the testosterone and androstenedione levels increased in PCOS group, the copy number
of Prevotella also increased, which is consistent with previous study. To further understand
effects of microbiota interventions on PCOS, PCOS rats were treated with FMT and Lactobacil-
lus transplantation. The relationship between Prevotella
and androgen level needs further study in letrozole-induced PCOS rat model..

ria” as they exert health-promoting properties. The results showed that after treating PCOS rats
with Lactobacillus transplantation and FMT, the serum androgens reduced, estrous cycles
improved and the ovarian functions normalized.