Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist. Thus, the commensal gut
microbiota also had effects on the production of male sex hormone  It is interesting to
explore the role of gut microbiota in PCOS, as the androgen level in PCOS women always ele-
vated. Control rat
fecal samples and PCOS rat fecal samples were used for DGGE analysis to evaluate the gut
microbiota shift in PCOS rats. Twenty four hours after the last dose of letrozole
(on day 22), PCOS FMT rats were administered a gavage of fecal supernatant with 2×109 fecal
microbiota, PCOS Lactobacillus transplantation rats were administered a gavage of 2×109 Lac-
tobacillus, the control rats and PCOS rats were administered a gavage of normal saline for 14
consecutive days. Then all rats were sacrificed by decapitation. On day
21, all rat fecal samples were collected. The abundance and relative intensity in the DGGE were analyzed using Phoretix 1D (Phor-
etix International, UK). To identify some separated and strong bands, bands were excised from
the gel and sequenced (Takara, Japan). Real-time PCR analysis

On day 21 and 36, all rat fecal samples were collected for real-time PCR analysis. The specific primers were
showed in S1 Table. This bacterial solution was centrifuged at 5000 g for 3 min then the bacteria were col-
lected and resuspended in saline. Statistical analyses

Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 15.0 software. The similarity matrix indicated a 60.1% and
66.9% similarity within the control group and PCOS group, respectively, but only a 58.3% simi-
larity between the two groups (data not shown). The bands were assigned to bacterial species based on the
highest sequence similarity match to GeneBank sequences obtained by BLAST analysis. In
order to verify the resolution capability of DGGE, bands in the same position but in different

PLOS ONE |  April 19, 2016

5 / 15

Gut Microbiota for Polycystic Ovary Syndrome

Fig 2. Arrows 1–7 were the bands selected for sequence. ( * p<0.05 results which are signiﬁcantly different versus control group
# p<0.05 data are signiﬁcantly different versus PCOS group. All control rats had regular
estrous cycles of 4–5 days, comprising proestrus, estrus, metestrus and diestrus. Steroid concentrations

The serum estradiol and estrone concentrations were significantly lower in PCOS rats than
those in the control rats. et al
found that male germ free mice, unlike females, exhibited a significant high level of 5-hydroxy-
tryptamine and its metabolite in hippocampal compared with conventionally housed control
animals  Collectively, these studies indicated the bi-direction regulation of gut microbiota
and endocrine systems. D) PCOS FMT group
showed increased granulosa layers and formation of corpora lutea. Recently, letrozole-induced PCOS rat model was used in several papers to evaluate
effects of new therapeutic methods for PCOS  which illustrated the recognition of this

Table 3. In addition,
compared with Lactobacillus transplantation group, FMT group had better recovery effects on
sex hormone levels and estrus cycles. (DOCX)

Author Contributions

Conceived and designed the experiments: YJG LT. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: YJG.