Genomic analysis of gut bacteria offers vivid examples of the role of microbes in nutrient
utilization. published the complete genome sequence of the
gram-negative anaerobe Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, a prominent member of the normal
intestinal microbiota  Annotation and analysis of the genome revealed a sophisticated
apparatus for acquiring and digesting otherwise unusable dietary polysaccharides. This
apparatus, including a complex, multi-component, multi-enzyme complex starch utilization
system (SUS), consists of over 230 glycoside hydrolase and 15 polysaccharide lyase genes
 The genomic analysis demonstrated that B. thetaiotaomicron has evolved the
remarkable capacity to sense the availability of carbohydrates in its microenvironment, and
that it also has the ability to forage and utilize host-derived glycans (e.g., mucin and
heparin). In theory, manipulation of the gut microbiota could be used to improve energy
balance and decrease the incidence of infectious complications. A fundamental problem
with clinical application of this theory has been that we lack a detailed understanding of if
and how the microbiome is altered during critical illness. As a result, interventions in this
field have been introduced with a limited scientific foundation. Nonetheless, several
strategies to optimize the microbiome have now been evaluated clinically. Some, such as the
recent description of fecal transplantation for Clostridium difficile colitis  will not be
discussed here. Others with obvious relevance to nutrition are discussed..

Another possible approach to improve outcomes for critically ill patients is to manipulate the
intestinal microenvironment to maintain the local microbial ecology of the GI tract
indirectly. It is well established that the use of vasoactive pressors, antibiotics, and highly
processed nutrients will change not only the local microbiota, but also pH, oxygen tension,
SCFA production, and various critical micronutrients that maintain the health of normal
intestinal microbes. Our group and others have shown that maintenance of a more acidic
intestinal pH through the course of surgical injury and administration of oral pH solutions
enhance local intestinal immunity and prevent lethal gut-derived sepsis . Most recently
we have shown that surgical injury causes a rapid depletion of mucus phosphate, thereby
inducing certain strains of pathogenic bacteria to upregulate their virulence against the
intestinal epithelial barrier  Most bacteria that cause serious infections in ICU patients
are equipped with exquisite sensory mechanisms to detect the level of local phosphate
concentration. Phosphate concentration is a key trigger by which bacteria activate their
virulence machinery to, in some cases, cause lethal sepsis. When phosphate levels are high
at sites of local microbial colonization, such as the intestinal mucus, microbes use the PhoB
phosphosensory/phosphoregulatory system to repress virulence activation. Therefore, providing therapies at the microenvironmental level
could be a novel approach to create molecular diplomacy between pathogen and host
through the course of severe physiologic stress such as that which occurs during human
critical illness.