Page 2

MICROBES AND NUTRITION DURING CRITICAL ILLNESS

It has been known for decades that intestinal bacteria make important contributions to
human metabolism and physiology. Perhaps the example best known to clinicians is the
microbial synthesis of the essential nutrient vitamin B12 — the enzymes required for B12
synthesis are possessed by bacteria but not by plants or animals  However, research from
the past decade has conclusively established that the host-microbe relationship in humans is
far more complex than previously appreciated. However, until very recently, the ability of microbiologists and clinicians
to characterize and dissect this relationship was hampered by the reality that only a minority
of microbes on the planet (and in the human body) can be cultured, isolated, and
systematically studied in the laboratory  As a result, most clinical focus on bacteria and
viruses has been directed toward the statistical minority of organisms that cause clinical
disease and can be easily isolated in culture. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 August 1. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Morowitz et al. In this section, we summarize what is known about how
microbes directly impact human nutrition. They are absorbed by passive
diffusion across the colonic epithelium, and are subsequently utilized by different organs. Acetate, the SCFA produced in highest concentration, is used by skeletal and cardiac muscle
and can be used by adipocytes for lipogenesis. Some of the ammonia
can be utilized for microbial synthesis of amino acids. Until recently, few studies of the association between lipid metabolism and the microbiome
existed. By use of x-ray absorptiometry and epididymal fat pad weight analysis, it
was demonstrated that wild-type (WT) animals contained 42% more total body fat than GF
animals, despite a higher metabolic rate and a reduced daily consumption of standard chow
 To mechanistically evaluate this finding, the authors transferred the microbiota of WT
animals to GF animals. Intriguingly, colonization of GF mice with just a single gut microbe (B. thetaiotaocmicron,
discussed above) also yielded a significant increase in total body fat content, although the
increase in fat content was less than that seen with transfer of the complete mouse
microbiota. Vitamins

Page 6

Most human diets provide a robust supply of vitamins, the essential human nutrients that
must be obtained from exogenous sources. It has been known for nearly a century that ruminants have no dietary requirement for water-
soluble vitamins as a consequence of the dense microbial populations in the rumen, and that
GF laboratory animals require dietary supplements of vitamins that are not needed by their
WT counterparts  Several bacterial genera that are common in the distal intestine (e.g.,
Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, and Enterococcus) are known to synthesize vitamins. In fact, several specialized epithelial
transporters have been recognized to participate specifically in the absorption of vitamins
derived from gut bacteria  Perhaps the relative ease in replenishing vitamin stores in
ICU patients has minimized enthusiasm for aggressive investigation of how bacterial
vitamin biosynthesis is altered in hospitalized patients. LESSONS LEARNED FROM STUDIES OF NUTRIENT EXCESS AND

DEPRIVATION

Obesity

Studying the relationship between the gut microbiota and energy balance in the extreme
states of obesity and starvation may improve our ability to assess and satisfy nutritional
needs in the ICU. receiving either enteral or parenteral nutrition. To date, evaluations of the microbial ecology of the ICU have largely been restricted to
culture-based studies. Although we lack a comprehensive molecular readout of gut microbes in the ICU, several
human and animal studies provide clues about how the microbiota is altered by common
ICU exposures. As a result, interventions in this
field have been introduced with a limited scientific foundation. Others with obvious relevance to nutrition are discussed. These protocols drastically alter the ICU microbiota  and
by extension decrease both mortality and the incidence of infectious complications such as
ventilator-associated pneumonia  Importantly, although these landmark studies
serve as proof of principle that the intestinal microbiota can be manipulated in the ICU to
achieve desirable outcomes, no studies utilized molecular techniques to profile the ICU
microbiome before, during, or after decontamination. Most mechanistic studies in this area have centered upon production of
antimicrobial substances to inhibit colonization by pathogens, enhance the mucosal barrier
function, and downregulate mucosal inflammation  It is particularly interesting that,
despite the growing awareness of how gut microbes contribute to energy balance and despite
the administration of probiotics/prebiotics as nutritional supplements, little research on this
topic has focused on how these agents specifically impact nutrition, metabolism, or energy
balance. Nonetheless, several other studies conducted in

Surg Clin North Am. At present, a few concluding points can be safely made. First, it is apparent that future
evaluations of human nutritional status during critical illness should include consideration of
the gut microbiota.