In unadjusted analyses of 4 genera selected a priori based
on prior literature suggesting associations with early diet and
health outcomes,7-10,22-25 we found that high maternal intake
of vegetables and low intake of processed meats and deep fried
foods was inversely associated with Bacteroides spp (decrease. 30.5 ± 7.40, P = .001, respectively; Table IV). However, these
differences were attenuated and no longer statistically signiﬁcant
after adjustment for demographic factors alone, and after ad-
justment for demographic and other dietary factors. We did
not detect an association between solid foods and relative abun-
dance of Bacteroides spp, Biﬁdobacterium spp, Lactobacillus spp,
or Clostridia spp in unadjusted analyses. There was no sig-
niﬁcant interaction with regard to Shannon Index (P = .17),
richness (P = .66), Bacteroides spp counts (P = .55), or
Clostridium spp counts (P = .65). There was a trend toward race/
ethnicity × breastfeeding status interactions with regard to
Biﬁdobacterium spp counts (P = .10) and Lactobacillus spp
counts (P = .09). Consequently, we analyzed the association
between breastfeeding status and those taxa (Biﬁdobacterium
and Lactobacillus), stratiﬁed by race/ethnicity. We found that
Biﬁdobacterium spp counts were similar among breastfed and
formula-fed African American infants, and Hispanic and white
breastfed infants had higher levels of Biﬁdobacterium spp com-
pared with formula-fed Hispanic and White infants (African. Comparison of our ﬁndings with those of other studies is
not straightforward due to different ages studied, variable mi-
crobial proﬁling methods, and heterogenous analytic tech-
niques. In an ethnically homogeneous population using targeted
quantitative polymerase chain reaction on stool samples col-
lected at age 1 month, Penders et al showed breastfed infants
had less Clostridia difﬁcile compared with formula-fed infants.7,30
This contrasts with our ﬁnding of a positive association between
breastfeeding and overall Clostridia spp, though we expect that
the inﬂuence of breastfeeding differs among individual species
within this genus. Consistent with our results, breastfeeding
is thought to increase Biﬁdobacterium spp. However, we did
not observe the decrease in Bacteroides spp with breastfeeding
that has been seen in other studies,7,8 possibly because of the
relatively old age of our participants.