in  phylum-  or  genus-level  relative  abundance  between  diet  arms, 
with the exception of the Verrucomicrobia phylum which was sig-
nificantly  increased  during  UF  (Extended  Data  Fig. At  a  finer 
taxonomic level, we were able to identify four 16S ribosomal RNA 
sequence  variants  that  were  significantly  associated  with  the  diet 
arm (independent of order): A. muciniphila, Bacteroides coprocola, 
a  Lachnospiraceae  sp. Samples 
were  selected  from  18  individuals  at  four  key  time  points  includ-
ing a baseline  sample,  midpoint samples  during  each 3-d UF and 
OF period, a sample during the washout period in between and a 
sample during the vancomycin or placebo arm. Differentially  abundant 
bacteria  on  each  diet  arm  (independent  of  order)  were  identified 
using  a  paired  Wilcoxon  test. This  analysis  revealed  nine  bacte-
rial  species  that  were  significantly  different  between  the  two  diet 
arms , including an enrichment 
for A. muciniphila during UF, consistent with our 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing-based  analysis  . Veillonella dispar
Veillonella parvula
Veillonella sp. Lactobacillus phage Lc_Nu
Lactobacillus salivarius
Klebsiella oxytoca
Megasphaera micronuciformis
Odoribacter splanchnicus
Parabacteroides merdae
Alistipes putredinis
Erysipelotrichaceae bacterium 21_3
Lachnospiraceae bacterium 7_1_58FAA
Ruminococcus sp 5_1_39BFAA
Clostridium leptum
Oscillibacter sp. 5 | changes in the gut microbiome in response to oral vancomycin. Each data point represents the mean value 
of samples from each subject (n = 63 samples from 23 subjects). c, Principal coordinate analysis of Bray–Curtis dissimilarity for 
ordination of microbial communities of subjects on vancomycin or placebo. Each data point shows the mean and standard deviation of samples from each 
subject (n = 70 samples from 24 subjects; P < 0.0001, determined using Adonis comparing effect of treatment and accounting for repeated measures 
per subject). e, Venn diagram of 16S rRNA sequence variants 
significantly different between vancomycin and placebo, or UF and OF, respectively (FDR < 0.1, two-sided unpaired or paired Wilcoxon test). In mice, A. muciniphila counteracts the 
effect of the decrease in mucous layer thickness produced by a high-
fat diet26, producing weight loss without changes in food intake. In  humans,  a  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  pilot 
study revealed a trend towards decreased body weight and fat mass . in  response  to  A.  muciniphila  supplementation45. Additional studies are 
warranted to elucidate the role and mechanisms of A. muciniphila 
in nutrient absorption.