of intravaginal nonoxyl-9 (an ingredient in spermicide and a commonly used cytotoxic control) and univer-
sal placebo gel (isotonic) found that both have inflammatory effects on cells of the cervix and endometrium12. After six hours of co-culture, both the laboratory strain and a representative clinical strain of E. coli (from a 
postmenopausal woman with cystitis) were similarly impacted by the tested products ..

To test the observed interactions in a more high-fidelity model, the vaginal products with the most significant 
inhibitory effects in simple co-culture were then co-cultured with bacteria in the presence of an immortalized 
vaginal epithelial cell line (VK2, ATCC, VA) grown in keratinocyte serum-free (KSF) media. Over 12 hours of co-culture, L. crispatus growth in MRS (deMan, Rogosa and 
Sharpe) broth was inhibited by Replens Long-Lasting moisturizer and Trimo-San (p < 0.01), but not by KY Jelly or 
coconut oil (p > 0.05, Fig. L. crispatus growth was stimulated by Replens Silky Smooth (p < 0.01). Change in bacterial growth with exposure to vaginal products in the presence of vaginal cells. ( Inhibitory effects of vaginal lubricants could be due to several of the ingredients, including glyc-
erin, parabens, sorbic acid, chlorhexidine gluconate, all of which have been shown to have antimicrobial prop-
erties. Both formulations of 
Replens, and all products except coconut oil inhibited E. coli, suggesting that L. crispatus may be less susceptible 
than E. coli to antimicrobial effects of these products..

When we added cultured, immortalized vaginal epithelial cells to the model, we demonstrated less inhibition 
of E. coli by the products that had been most inhibitory in the co-culture without vaginal cells. At the 1:100 dilution no products 
inhibited the growth of Lactobacillus spp., thus we were unable to assess how the presence of human vaginal epi-
thelial cells modified lubricant inhibition of Lactobacillus spp..

We are unaware of any studies specifically examining the effect of vaginal products on factors that affect an 
individual’s risk of UTI. The bacterial species used in these experiments include a laboratory strain 
of E. coli (ATCC 8739) and 6 clinical strains of E. coli provided by the Massachusetts General Hospital microbi-
ology lab, which had been isolated from women with cystitis. For the L. crispatus suspensions, deMan, Rogosa Sharpe broth (MRS, BD Difco, Fisher Scientific, MA) was inoc-
ulated and incubated for 12 hours at 37 °C in an anaerobic chamber without agitation..

E. coli co-culture. In a 96-well microplate, the following were added to each well: 75 µL fresh nutrient broth, 
50 µL test product, 25 µL E. coli broth culture at 0.5 OD, adapted from Kalyoussef et al.21. The plates were incubated anaerobically at 37 °C without agitation 
for 12 hours. At the 
conclusion of the experiment, co-culture broth and negative controls were plated to confirm no contamination 
during experiments..

Vaginal epithelial cell co-culture with vaginal product and bacteria. Bacterial broths 
were prepared as described previously, and then centrifuged at 1000 RPM for 5 minutes. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.