The EUB338 probe
used to determine total counts was labeled with uorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC), while the group- or genus-specic probes
were labeled at the 50-end with indocyanine (Cy3; Sangon
Biotech, Shanghai, China)..

FISH analysis, as a quantitative molecular-based technique, was
applied to assess the microbiota composition. The relative
abundance of the major bacterial groups indicated that, even
when considering a degree of interindividual variation, the HF
diet induced the gut microbiota dysbiosis . The results
of principal coordinate analysis showed that HF microbiomes
were clearly diﬀerent from those in CT and HF-RES mice
. Moreover, the principal coordinate analysis scores plot
in Fig. 2B supports the presence of overlapping clusters between
HF-RES and CT groups, which illustrated the relative similarity
of CT and RES treated mice in microbiotal proles. Lactobacillus
was reduced by 1.8-fold in HF mice and Bidobacterium was
decreased by 1.9-fold, whereas Enterococcus
faecalis was
increased by 1.8-fold in the HF group compared with CT mice
. Aer RES treatment, Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium
were signicantly increased, whereas Enterococcus faecalis was
signicantly decreased to that of control levels . The correlations between body weight and the colonic bacterial
content were calculated . Body weight was positively and
signicantly correlated with Enterococcus faecalis (P < 0.05)
, and body weight was negatively correlated with
Lactobacillus and Bidobacterium . In addition, a
negative correlation was found between the body weight and the
ratios of Bacteroidetes-to-Firmicutes (r ¼ (cid:4)0.805, P ¼ 0.002)
..

and the Bacteroides phylum. These ndings are consistent with
previous studies. For instance, Vendrame et al.39 described that
wild blueberries, a rich source of polyphenols, signicantly
increased the number of Bidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus
acidophilus, and Neyrinck et al.40 demonstrated that a poly-
phenol-rich extract of pomegranate peel increased the caecal
content weight and caecal pool of Bidobacteria spp. The antimicrobial activity of resveratrol could
not explain these results.