In this review, we describe the pronounced microbial
changes
female, as well as
in the pregnant
provide an overview of the initial exposure of the fetus to
microbiota—from the placenta,
through birth and infancy. Moreover, we suggest that the
changes in the human microbiome are deeply connected to
the host’s physiological status, and that
these associations
have developed throughout co-evolution of microbiome and
host
to ensure improved ﬁtness. While many consider pregnancy to be an
anti-inﬂammatory state, others consider pregnancy to be a multi-
stage process including inﬂammatory stages at implantation
and parturition, and anti-inﬂammatory stages in mid-pregnancy,
when the fetus grows rapidly (Mor and Cardenas, 2010)..

the ﬁrst to the third trimester, the gut microbiota composition
changes dramatically. 2015), are signiﬁcantly decreased in the. Using whole genome shotgun sequencing (WGS) of samples
from 320 subjects, Aagaard et al. reported that the placenta
contains a unique microbiome (Aagaard et al., 1992; Jeﬀerson, 2012;
Mysorekar and Cao, 2014; Prince et al., Additionally,
several studies (Figure 1), using cultivation and PCR techniques,
found microbes in amniotic ﬂuid and umbilical cord blood in
healthy asymptomatic women, as well as in those with pregnancy
complications (DiGiulio et al., 2012b) once
again alluding to a prenatal eﬀect on microbial composition. The notion of early microbial colonization of the fetus suggests
that from the very beginning of development, there are dual
interactions between the developing host and microbiota, and
that there is some type of early inheritance of the maternal
microbial components..

Interestingly, the mode of delivery has an eﬀect on the infant’s
oral microbiome, as well (Lif Holgerson et al., In a diﬀerent study of infants infected with S. mutans,
involved in dental caries, those delivered by C-section acquired
infection almost 1 year earlier than did vaginally delivered
infants, and the genotype of these bacteria, was similar to that
of their mothers (Li et al., Moreover, the administration of probiotics (including
Lactobacillus sp.) However,
none of
these studies directly tested the role of bacteria
colonizing the newborn in the development of disease. found lower levels of
the T helper cell-related chemokines CXCL10 and CXCL11
in the blood of
infants delivered by C-section compared
with vaginally born infants. In obese pregnant women,
higher abundance of the genus Staphylococcus, namely S. aureus
was reported over the ﬁrst 6 months of lactation, as well as
higher abundance of Lactobacillus in the ﬁrst month, compared
with samples from mothers of normal weight (Cabrera-Rubio
et al., The
remaining small sugars can be further metabolized by glycolytic
microbes present in the infant,
including lactate-producing
bacteria such as Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, and Enterococcus.