Microbiome  5:158 

Page 2 of 19

infant nutrition, and common clinical practices in neonatal
care  We hypothesize that assembly and function
of the preterm infants’ gut microbiota is associated with
postnatal growth patterns and represents a yet unexplored
personalized therapeutic potential for optimizing infant
development. We first defined the phases and phase transition points
in longitudinal gut microbiota samples from two cohorts
of preterm and full-term infants from the multicenter
Prematurity and Respiratory Outcomes Program (PROP)
and Respiratory Pathogens Research Center (RPRC) at the
University of Rochester School of Medicine. Results
Overview of preterm infant cohort
Our study examined associations between preterm infant
PMA, growth, nutrition, clinical factors, and gut microbiota

development in a cohort of 95 preterm and 2 full-term in-
fants from PROP and 23 full-term infants from RPRC at
the University of Rochester School of Medicine. A total of 2 rectal swabs were collected from
the 2 PROP full-term infants, and 46 rectal swabs from the
23 RPRC full-term infants: one near birth (≤ 20 day of life
[DOL]) and—for the RPRC subjects only—a second at
1 month of age  The longitudinal
analyses included 719 samples from preterm and 48
samples from full-term infants. The groupings
and bars within each group indicate the phases of the first and second sample of a pair of consecutive samples, respectively, and are ordered as
described in c. Transition probabilities are included in the table below the graph. The average composition of the samples
in each phase at the genus level is shown in Fig. Changes in
taxa abundance would suggest adaptation of the micro-
biota in response to factors that the preterm infant en-
counters while in the NICU and may affect development
of a mature, functional gut microbiota. Early and late periods of the preterm infant microbiome
To demonstrate the utility of modeling the microbiome
as three compositionally defined phases, we compared
gut microbiota development using two constant time pe-
riods based solely on PMA. 0

10

20

30

50

60

70

80

40
Day Of Life

Grier et al. Microbiome  5:158 

Page 9 of 19

(See figure on previous page.) Beta values are the estimated regression coefficients and p values are
computed from the likelihood ratio tests. For clarity, only significant associations are reported in this table. It has
in preterm infants, passage of
been established that
meconium as stool is both delayed and prolonged and is
observed well beyond the first stool, with final clearance
occurring up to several weeks after birth 

To identify potential associations between the presence
of meconium and P1 of the microbiota, we examined the
relationship between clearance of the meconium from the
stool and the initial transition of the microbiota out of P1
,
but did not survive beyond the first weeks in the NICU. The remaining 38 infants that were observed to be
in P1 at their first rectal sample were included in a linear
regression model using gestational age at birth and the
DOL of their last P1 sample before their initial transition
to another phase as explanatory variables, with the DOL
of meconium clearance as the dependent variable. In contrast, a
higher proportion of protein is significantly negatively asso-
ciated with a P2 microbiota, with increased proportions of
total nutrition lipids and protein in P2 strongly associated
with higher weight Z-score. Read pairs were assembled
using fastq-join from the ea.-utils package, requiring at
least 40 bases of overlap and allowing a maximum of
10% mismatched bases. Operational taxonomic
units (OTU) were picked using the reference-based
USEARCH (version 5.2) pipeline in QIIME, using the
May 2013 release of the GreenGenes 99% OTU database
as a closed reference  An indexed word length
of 128 and otherwise default parameters were used with
USEARCH. Microbiome  5:158 

Page 15 of 19

assessed at each taxonomic level using the metagen-
omicsSeq zero-inflated Gaussian test  and the re-
sults are summarized in Additional file 5: Tables S4A–C.
Testing for differential functional capacity between the
phases was performed using LEfSe with per-sample
normalization to 1 M total counts, minimum effect size
of 2.0, alpha of 0.1, an all-against-all strategy, and other-
wise default parameters. The results are summarized in
Additional file 7: Table S6. Association between nutrition/medication and growth
We performed linear mixed-effect regression analysis
similar to the above model on both early and late pe-
riods (Model A) and three phases (Model B) to test
the association between the nutrition/medication factors
(as covariates) and weight Z-score as a proxy for growth
(as the response variables). As an example, the linear associations of P2
and percent lipids * P2 with the weight z-score are both
significant (beta = − 0.7766 for P2 and 5.658 for lipids *
P2); meaning that while P2 is correlated with a smaller
weight z-score as compared with the baseline (P3), a
higher percent of lipid intake for P2 subjects increases
the weight Z-scores for subjects in P2. Number of Dirichlet components vs.
model fit. Colors on the row and
column labels indicate these correspondence relationships, and colors
internal to the table identify sets of samples where the phase-based and
DMM component classifications are in agreement. ( C. Results of differential abundance tests
(metagenomeSeq zero-inflated Gaussian) of all bacterial taxa between
microbiome phases 1 and 3. ( DOCX 14 kb)

Additional file 10: Table S9. nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs00001297.v1.p1 and
url http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=
phs00001347.v2.p1. AG, XQ, HAK, TJM,
LS, KMS, MTC, GSP, and SRG drafted the manuscript. All authors reviewed the
final manuscript. Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 4Division of Neonatology,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA. Received: 18 April 2017 Accepted: 23 November 2017