Diseases 2018, 6, 56

2 of 10

between the gut microbiome and CVDs to promote an understanding of the latest perspectives of the
role of the gut microbiome in CVDs. Moreover, we have raised several issues that should be considered
when interpreting previous evidence. Trimethylamine-N-oxide and CVDs

A close relationship between the gut microbe-dependent production of trimethylamine-N-oxide
(TMAO), derived from speciﬁc dietary nutrients such as choline and carnitine, and future
cardiovascular events has been widely recognized  Trimethylamine (TMA), which is produced by
the gut microbial enzymes TMA lyases, is a precursor of TMAO. Moreover, a recent
clinical trial has shown that ﬁsh consumption increases the circulating TMAO levels, highlighting
the substantial limitations in our current understanding of the relationship between diet and gut
microbial TMAO production  Moreover, all available clinical studies are cross-sectional studies
or cohort studies, not interventional studies. 2015 J. Card Fail

Patients who were undergoing elective
diagnostic cardiac catheterization

Stable heart failure patients underwent
elective coronary angiographic evaluation

Chronic systolic heart failure with
comprehensive echocardiographic evaluation

112 in USA

Adverse clinical events
(death/transplantation)

2016 Heart

Acute heart failure

972 in UK

All-cause mortality (death) and a
composite of death or re-hospitalization
due to heart failure (death/HF)

2016

Am. These metabolites have
also been reported to have a link to CVDs. Last year, a metagenome-wide association
study of fecal samples from 218 CAD patients and 187 healthy subjects from China was reported 
The abundance of Enterobacteriaceae was signiﬁcantly higher in the CAD patients compared to the
healthy subjects. was also signiﬁcantly higher in the patients
with CAD than in the healthy subjects. may
have the potential to regulate atherosclerosis progression. The negative

Diseases 2018, 6, 56

5 of 10

correlations between Streptococcus spp. On the other hand, the positive correlation between Bacteroides spp. and Erysipelotrichaceae bacterium
was seen only in the healthy subjects. Ruminococcus, Acinetobacter, and Veillonella increased in the HF patients,
whereas Alistipes, Faecalibacterium, and Oscillibacter decreased. Year

Study Population

Country

Analysis

Results

2012 Nat. 12 patients with symptomatic atherosclerosis
(myocardial infarction or cerebrovascular events)
and 13 age- and sex-matched healthy individuals. Japan

Terminal restriction fragment
length polymorphism

Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio ↑, Lactobacillales ↑, Bacteroides + Prevotella ↓ in CAD. China

Gut metagenome

Enterobacteriaceae (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., and Enterobacter aerogenes),
Streptococcus spp., have reported a metagenomic shotgun sequencing study with 218 CAD patients and 187 healthy
subjects  They revealed alterations in gut microbial functional modules in CAD patients, such as
the phosphotransferase system, amino acid transporters, vitamin metabolism, lipopolysaccharide
biosynthesis, and the activities of SCFAs and TMA lyases. It may take a little more time to conduct a large cohort study or a translational
study to promote a deeper understanding of how the gut microbiome directly contributes to CVD. Further studies, focusing on a more speciﬁc and mechanistic understanding of the gut
microbiome in the pathogenesis of CVD, are necessary to develop novel diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies for CVD. Author Contributions: T.Y. conceived and wrote the manuscript and made critical revisions. K.H. searched the bibliography and made critical revisions. Funding: This research was funded by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 24591114, 16K09516 (T.Y.) and 17K09497
(K.H.), The Japanese Circulation Society Translational Research Foundation (K.H.), Uehara Memorial Foundation
(K.H.), Takeda Scientiﬁc Foundation (T.Y.), Senshin Medical Research Foundation (T.Y.), Yakult Bioscience Research
Foundation (T.Y.), Hyogo Science and Technology Association (T.Y. and K.H.), and Kondou Kinen Medical
Foundation (T.Y.). Article Processing Charges was sponsored by MDPI. Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.