Cho and Blaser

Page 2

Characterizing the microbiome

Tools for studying the metagenome

individuals, and possibly, their disease risks. Animals have had residential microbes performing metabolic functions for at least 500
million years, at a conservative estimate6,7. By categorizing metagenomic sequences based on

Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 October 01. Nevertheless, the enormous bacterial biomass also
provides many unique or minimally redundant bacterial genes19. The trophic
organization of species-rich communities is similar to other complex network topologies, in
that it shows extreme heterogeneity, with a relatively small number of highly connected
nodes dominating47. However,
with repeated perturbations, the effects of gene loss can be amplified by downstream effects
on co-colonizing microbes (secondary extinctions) and on the host. All are subject to perturbation in the course of
normal development and aging, and especially with disease. Caesarian section instead of vaginal delivery is an
obvious example of the potential impact of medical practice on microbiota composition,
with substantial differences in founding population54, that may persist for months56 (Figure
3). In many host species, paternal contributions to offspring traits have been well
documented57,58; these observations have been extended to the microbiome, where paternal
contributions to offspring H. pylori allele composition have been shown59, In any event,
there is evidence for extensive horizontal gene transfer (HGT) within human populations,
functional classes, and ecological niches60, indicating the site-specificity and dynamism of
selection on the human microbiome. The diseases listed below review some current recent
investigations (Table 1). Investigations are preliminary, but some observations are
promising. Studies to
explore these findings using HTS are currently underway89. Cutaneous microbiome shifts, such as an increased abundance of
Pseudomonadaceae in patients with chronic ulcers treated with antibiotics and an increased
abundance of Streptococcaceae in diabetic ulcers have been noted91. In H. pylori-negative individuals, gastric
microbiota diversity is high; most of the prominent gastric phylotypes (Streptococcus,
Actinomyces, Prevotella, Gemella) also are abundant in the oropharynx of these
individuals93; indicating that either many constituents are swallowed from more proximal
sites, or that close relatives of the oral microbiota colonize more distally. H.
pylori is a classical AMPHIBIONT; the presence (or absence) of an H. pylori dominated gastric
microbiota is strongly associated with particular diseases with important age-related
differences85. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 8

The colon microbiota and inflammatory bowel disease

eliciting host responses, for example, by stimulating exaggerated immune responses,
potentially via Th17 cells99. Among twins discordant for
ulcerative colitis, those affected had significantly reduced bacterial diversity, but increased
proportions of Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria114. NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cho and Blaser

Page 9

The gut microbiota and pbesity

exposure disturbs the gut microbiome118,119, but roles for the microbiome in steatosis are
unresolved. This may be a
mechanism in rheumatoid arthritis, another chronic idiopathic inflammatory condition. examined top-scoring non-
linear abundance relationships133. Although the known principles of evolution and genetics apply, study of the
microbiome provides new applications, and will lead to new understandings of complex
traits. Acknowledgments

Biographies

This work was supported by R01GM63270, R01DK090989, UH2 AR057506, 5 P30 CA016087, and
1UL1RR029893 from the National Institutes of Health, the Diane Belfer Program for Human Microecology, the
Michael Saperstein Medical Scholars Fund, and the Levin Fellowship in Gastroenterology. He is an Assistant Professor of Medicine at the NYU Langone Medical
Center, USA. His current research focuses on antibiotic-induced
changes in the human and mouse microbiome and their effects on disease development. Genetic differences between selected and
non-selected hosts are a source of selectable variation

The anatomic structure around each hair shaft that consists of the
hair shaft and follicle, the sebaceous gland, and the erector pili
muscle

An organism (e.g. microbe) that may have a pathogenic or symbiotic
relationship with another organism (e.g. its host), depending on
context.