First we explored in detail the in vitro inhibitory effects of a selection of LGC strains against growth and 
pathogenic properties (adhesion to vaginal cells and hyphae formation) of Candida albicans. It is increasingly 
appreciated that a combination of targeting both the inhibition of pathogenic growth and virulence factor expres-
sion has superior efficacy in eliminating pathogens15. This gel was supplied to patients 
with acute VVC for 10 days. In the spot assay, it yielded the largest inhibition zones and its cell 
free supernatant reduced the optical density at stationary planktonic growth of C. albicans by 43.5% and delayed 
the lag phase by approximately 5 hours (Supplementary Fig. When applying the strains simultaneously with C. albi-
cans, the strains were able to reduce adhesion of C. albicans, e.g. L. pentosus KCA1 by 78.0% . Plate count viability assays confirmed that the lactobacilli remained viable over multiple 
months of storage at 5 °C and 25 °C (Supplementary Fig. Subsequently, we evaluated whether L. plantarum 
WCFS1, L. pentosus KCA1 and L. rhamnosus GG formulated in the gel were able to modulate the vaginal micro-
biome over a four-week period in 20 patients suffering from acute VVC . The participants were asked to 
administer 2.5 ml of gel by use of an applicator in recumbent position at bedtime. This corresponded to 2.5.109–
1010 CFU of bacteria per application or 2.5-250 times the amount of bacteria in 1 ml of vaginal discharge29. Because fluconazole is available as standard care, this study 
design with a rescue arm was preferred over a placebo-controlled trial. Of the twenty women included in the study, nine women did not need the RM. The regular growth medium without 
any added microorganisms was used as a negative control. ( We also investigated the bacterial community present in the samples. Seven of the most dominant LGC ASVs matched with the four species typically observed in the 
vaginal microbiota, more precisely L. iners (LGC 1, 4 and 8), L. crispatus (LGC 2 and 9), L. gasseri (LGC 3) and L. 
jensenii (LGC 6). First, future in vitro screening should include 
experiments predicting the in vivo survival and adaptability to the vaginal environment, given that our strong 
antimicrobial L. rhamnosus GG strain did not persist well in the vagina. L. pentosus KCA1, L. plantarum WCFS1 and L. 
rhamnosus GG, were selected for a proof-of-concept trial in patients.