The majority of these techniques are based on the extraction of DNA and the ampliﬁcation of the 16S
ribosomal RNA gene (rRNA)  16S rRNA sequencing has become the most useful technique to
highlight diversity and abundance of the microbiome. Moreover, recent studies have identiﬁed a
critical role for commensal bacteria and their products in regulating the development, homeostasis,
and function of innate and adaptive immune cells  It is paradoxical to note that the gut microbiota
functions are highly preserved between individuals, whereas each individual’s gut microbiota are
characterized by a speciﬁc combination of bacterial species due to inter-individual and intra-individual
variations throughout human life. The Firmicutes phylum is composed of more than 200 different genera such
as Lactobacillus, Bacillus, Clostridium, Enterococcus, and Ruminicoccus. Examples of taxonomic gut microbiota composition. Variations in the Same Individual

Human gut microbiota vary taxonomically and functionally in each part of the GI tract and
undergo variations in the same individual due to infant transitions, age, and environmental factors
such as antibiotic use. Microbiota variations within individuals are summarized in Table 1. Microorganisms 2018, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 23  Figure 1. Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

4 of 22

2.1.1. Infant Transitions

Birth Gestational Age

Birth gestational age is a major determinant of gut microbiota colonization. The microbiota
composition of preterm infants (<37 weeks of gestation) is different from term counterparts (Table 1). have an
enzyme named lacto-N-biosidase, which facilitates the assimilation of GOS  If Biﬁdobacterium
quantity increases, the quantity of HMOs in feces decreases causing elevated acetate and lactate
concentrations and decreasing pH  an HMO consumption by Biﬁdobacteria in the infant’s
gut may suggest a prebiotic effect of HMOs on gut infant microbiota by selectively stimulating
Biﬁdobacterium spp. A decrease in anaerobic bacteria such
as Biﬁdobacterium spp. Microbiota variations within individuals. Lachnospiraceae *
Peptostreptococcaceae *
Clostridiaceae *

Lactobacillus↑
Staphylococcus ↑

Clostridium↑
Clostridium difﬁcile↑
Lactobacillus↑

Firmicutes *↑
Lactobacilli↑
Clostridium coccoides↑

Bacteria
Diversity

Ref. ↓

↑

↑

↓

↑

↓

↑















Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

8 of 22

Actinobacteria

Bacteroidetes

Firmicutes

Proteobacteria

Fusobacteria

Verrucomicrobia

Euryarchaeota

Bacteria
Diversity

Ref. Enterotypes seem to be principally deﬁned according to dietary
habits. demonstrated that the microbiota of obese children are provided with
an elevated Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio compared to the microbiota of lean children 
low relative proportions of Biﬁdobacterium vulgatus and high concentrations of
Furthermore,
Lactobacillus spp. Studies have
demonstrated that gut microbiota variations are correlated with increased or depleted production
of SCFAs that may respectively contribute to the pathophysiology of obesity or AN. Ethnicity, Dietary Habits, and Cultural Habits

While the microbiome of a healthy individual is relatively stable, gut microbial dynamics can
certainly be inﬂuenced by lifestyle and dietary cultural choices  A study of European children
(fed with the Western diet) and Burkina Faso children (assuming a diet rich in millet/sorghum +
local vegetables containing very few lipids and animal proteins) revealed that African children’s
microbiota have a remarkable abundance of Prevotella and Xylanibacter. Furthermore, Shigella and
Escherichia are widely under-represented. suggested associations of exercise frequency with gut microbiota composition
of young children and adolescents. It is often difﬁcult to ascertain whether the change is beneﬁcial
or detrimental. Therefore, these ﬁndings demonstrated a loss of
microbial richness that may be involved in amino acid synthesis, in the integrity of cellular junctions,
and in inﬂammatory response, suggesting a weakness of the epithelial barrier functions partially
explaining IBS symptoms. indicated a diminution of Lachnospiraceae and Bacteroidetes
microbial populations and an increase in Proteobacteria families in IBD patients compared to control
gut microbiota. Gut microbiota variations may play a signiﬁcant role in the pathogenesis of CD; indeed, dysbiosis
is linked with an inﬂammatory milieu in celiac patients  Celiac disease is caused by the interplay
between gluten, genetic factors, and environmental factors such as gut microbiota 

Studies have demonstrated that Biﬁdobacterium spp., and lower proportions of Bacteroides spp. The extension of these ﬁndings may lead to strategies able to manipulate microbiota
to prevent colorectal cancer as well as to identify individuals at high risk 

3.2. and an increase in various opportunistic pathogens (Clostridium spp., Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic, rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated
with impaired cognition and cerebral accumulation of amyloid-beta peptides. Fecal microbiota of
cirrhotics were signiﬁcantly higher in Enterobacteriaceae, Alcaligenaceae, and Fusobacteriaceae and
lower in Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae compared with controls  moreover, altered higher
levels of Veillonellaceae were found in HE patients compared with cirrhotics without HE. The mechanisms by which stress inﬂuences gut microbiota composition are unclear
but include microbial habitat alterations following stress-induced changes in intestinal mobility and
mucin secretion 

Other studies revealed that chronic psychological stress is reﬂected in the microbiota
composition.