Mei Wang

Sharon M. Donovan

Introduction

Over the past decade, the essential role that the gut micro-
biota plays in the developmental programming of the neo-
nate, including growth trajectories, metabolism, and immune 
and cognitive development, has been demonstrated  
Thus, fostering the development of the microbiome in the 
first 1000 days of life is critical to supporting lifelong health. Ho and colleagues 
reported  that  non-exclusively  BF  infants  have  a  lower 
abundance of Proteobacteria, but only among those deliv-
ered via cesarean section (C-section)  However, breast-
feeding  appears  to  moderate  the  detrimental  effects  of 
C-section delivery and intrapartum antibiotics on the early 
microbiota, producing a microbiota profile more similar to 
that of vaginally delivered infants or those not receiving 
antibiotics  Geography and ethnicity are also important 
to take into account. Among the dairy group, yogurt explained 9% 
of the variance in microbiota 

Young Childhood to Adolescence 

Moving beyond the first 1000 days of life, Berding and cow-
orkers investigated the temporal stability of the fecal 
microbiota and whether dietary patterns were associated 
with microbial taxa and composition in American 4–8-year-
olds at 3 time points over a 6-month period. Dietary pat-
tern 2, defined by intake of grains, dairy and legumes, nuts 
and seeds, was associated with higher Cyanobacteria and 
Phascolarctobacterium abundance and lower Dorea and 
Eubacterium abundance  Additionally, the intake of 

snacks and sweets and refined carbohydrates were nega-
tively correlated with both Shannon and the Chao1 Indices, 
respectively, demonstrating reduced microbial diversity with 
greater intake of sugars and refined grains. Residing in rural vs. urban environments can also affect 
food availability and choices, which has been investigated 
in a series of studies. Vegetables comprised < 1.0% of total cal-
orie intake in urban children compared to 7.3% in rural chil-
dren. The fecal microbiome of the rural children displayed 
significantly greater alpha diversity (Chao1 index). The 
microbiota of rural children was enriched by bacteria in the 
order Clostridiales, containing families such as Peptostrep-
tococcaceae and unclassified Ruminococcaceae, compared 
to higher proportions of Actinobacteria, Bacteroidales, and 
Selenomadales in urban dwellers. was negatively correlated with fish and beef 
intake 

A similar study of healthy 7- to 12-year-olds from China 
and Malaysia, living in three different cities, showed that 
geographical-related factors (including diet), rather than 
other potential mediating factors, such as ethnicity (e.g., 
Southern Chinese or Malay children), was a major delinea-
tor of microbiome changes  Four genera (Bacteroides, 
Fecalibacterium, Bifidobacterium, and Collinsella) showed 
significant associations with the 15 food groups under obser-
vation. Additionally,  children  may  also  be 
more similar to each other than adults are. while children displayed enhanced Bifi-
dobacterium spp., and members of 
Lachnospiraceae  However, the current literature on 
the impact of diet in this age group has some noted limita-
tions. While dietary intake differs between rural 
and urban communities, many other environmental factors 
are also likely contributing, including socioeconomic status, 
exposure to agricultural species and routine medical care, 
which could also be influencing the gut microbiota. In the USA, 
the recommended dietary fiber intake is 14 g/1000 kcal or 
25 g for females and 38 g for males. Most Americans only 
consume about half of the recommended intake (13.5 and 
18 g, respectively)  The fiber intake recommendations 
for children between the ages of 1 and 13 years, range from 
5 to 31 g/day, depending on the organization, however, in 
most cases children are not meeting the recommended fiber 
intakes  Thus, various strategies have been developed 
for modulation of gut microbiota, including administration 
of DFs, pre- or/and probiotics. Most prebiotics are DF, but not all DF 
are considered to be prebiotics. Both are well 
tolerated  and  support  age-appropriate  growth  of  infants 
 A multicenter, randomized, double-blind trial com-
pared the fecal microbiota of healthy infants fed formula 
with 2′-FL and LNnT from < 14 days to 6 months of age 
to infants consuming with control formula. Further large-scale studies are 
needed with different fiber sources. Probiotic Interventions in Children on Gut 
Microbiota

Probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered 
in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” 
 The most commonly administered probiotic bacteria 
belong to the genera Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus, 
but can be provided either as single or mixtures of strains. For example, supplementation of pregnant and 
lactating women with L. rhamnosus GG (LGG), L. acidophi-
lus La-5 and B. animalis subsp. Probiotics have been administrated directly to infants and 
children (Table 4). These studies varied in terms of 
age of the children (newborns to age 18), type of probiotic, 
dose administered, and duration of the intervention. Long-term consequences of such admin-
istration should be carefully evaluated 

Future Directions

There is a need for more dietary intervention studies in 
healthy populations, as the majority of currently published 
studies describe dietary interventions in the context of dis-
ease states, such as obesity, which is represented by micro-
bial dysbiosis  In particular, randomized, controlled 
clinical trials on the effects of DFs, prebiotics, and probiotics 
are needed in pediatric populations, particularly in adoles-
cence to young adulthood  where there is a 
paucity of data available. For example, it is not known 
whether or not early-life acceleration toward an adult-like 
microbiome has negative downstream effects on health. 1 3 

Digestive Diseases and Sciences

year, ↑indicates significantly increased, ↓ indicates significantly decreased, ↔ indicates no effect
interspace profiling, mo month, qPCR quantitative PCR, T-RFLP terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism, RT-qPCR reverse transcription quantitative PCR, VD vaginally delivered, y 
BB-12 Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. •  The addition of HMO and prebiotics to infant formula at 
concentrations found in human milk promotes the growth 
of bifidobacteria and narrows the differences between BF 
and FF infants.