Gut microbiota are composed of several species of microorganisms, including bacteria, yeast,
and viruses. The Firmicutes phylum is composed of more than 200 different genera such
as Lactobacillus, Bacillus, Clostridium, Enterococcus, and Ruminicoccus. Clostridium genera represent
95% of the Firmicutes phyla. Bacteroidetes consists of predominant genera such as Bacteroides and
Prevotella. Indeed, an analysis of the meconium of newborn infants revealed a
strong correlation between the microbiota of the newborn digestive tract and the microbial communities
of the mother’s vagina: Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Sneathia. 24,
29]. Escherichia, Shigella, and Bacteroides species are underrepresented in infants born by cesarean
delivery  The intestinal microbiota of neonates delivered by cesarean delivery are less diverse in
terms of bacteria species than the microbiota of vaginally delivered infants . Studies have demonstrated that formula-fed infants are more often colonized with Escherichia coli,
Bacteroides, and Clostridium difﬁcile compared with breastfed infants  Regarding Actinobacteria
abundance, Biﬁdobacterium spp. have an
enzyme named lacto-N-biosidase, which facilitates the assimilation of GOS  If Biﬁdobacterium
quantity increases, the quantity of HMOs in feces decreases causing elevated acetate and lactate
concentrations and decreasing pH  an HMO consumption by Biﬁdobacteria in the infant’s
gut may suggest a prebiotic effect of HMOs on gut infant microbiota by selectively stimulating
Biﬁdobacterium spp. SCFAs are higher in obese children suggesting
elevated substrate utilization. Results showed that AN intestinal microbiota
showed a signiﬁcant increase in Enterobacteriaceae and Methanobrevibacter smithii compared with healthy
controls  On the contrary, the genera Roseburia, Ruminococcus, and Clostridium were depleted in
line with the observed reduction in AN of the total SCFAs . and lower proportions of Bacteroides spp. compared gut microbiota composition from patients with and
without a diagnosis of AD and revealed a lower microbial diversity compositionally distinct from
control-age and sex-matched individuals, with a decrease in Firmicutes and Biﬁdobacterium abundance
and an increase in Bacteroidetes abundance in the microbiome of AD participants..

The bidirectional interactions of gut–brain mean that the brain can also alter gut microbiota
composition demonstrated that exposure
to stress results in substantial changes in gut microbiota composition: a decrease in Bacteroides spp. abundance and an increase in Clostridium spp. abundance have been observed in stress-induced mice. and
an increase in Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas spp.