There are several recent reviews on sequencing and anal-
ysis  of  the  microbiome,  although  a  full  discussion  of  these 
methods  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  review.28-31  In  brief,  com-
monly  used  methods  to  study  the  microbiome  use  either 
amplicon sequencing methods that analyze the partial genome 
or whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing. Through profiling the 
entire genome, this method allows for resolution at the species 
and  even  strain  level  in  addition  to  the  definition  of  bacterial 
function through mapping the genome to reference databases..

Analysis of both 16s rRNA and metagenomic sequencing 
has traditionally relied on comparing the relative abundance of 
various  genera,  species,  and  strains  between  different  groups. In contrast, 
quantitative profiling of absolute counts of absolute microbial 
abundances may be as or more relevant to defining the role of 
microbiome  in  human  disease.32  A  small  study  of  29  patients 
with CD revealed microbial counts that were 3 times lower than 
those of healthy control patients and differences in defining an 
association between Bacteroides (noted only in relative profiling) 
and Prevotella (only in quantitative microbial profiling) in CD.32. investigators obtained fecal samples from 33 patients with CD 
who  stopped  infliximab  therapy  (as  part  of  an  interventional 
study  to  assess  the  rate  of  relapse  after  biologic  cessation). Fecal  samples  were  obtained  at  therapy  cessation,  2  months, 
6 months, and the end of follow-up. Cross-sectional compari-
sons  were  also  made  with  29  healthy  control  patients. Over 
follow-up, 19 patients relapsed and 14 remained in remission. Note  that  the  culture  supernatant  also  had  a  similar  effect  in 
reducing the severity of this particular colitis, suggesting that 
the  effect  of  F.  prauznitzii  may  be  mediated  in  part  through 
the  production  of  anti-inflammatory  metabolites. Two OTUs affiliated with Faecalibacterium and Bacteroides were more abundant at . The primary outcome, remission at week 14, was attained by 31 
patients. This  difference  was  noted  primarily  at  the 
species  level. Two  species,  Roseburia  inulinivorans 
and Burkholderiales, were significantly more abundant at base-
line in CD patients who achieved remission than in those who . One prior study examined the role of microbial compo-
sition in predicting response to ustekinumab therapy. Stool sam-
ples were obtained at baseline and weeks 4, 6, and 22. A com-
bined random forest predictive model that incorporated clinical 
and baseline microbial data performed significantly better than 
clinical data containing models alone (AUC = 0.84 vs 0.62). The  PROTECT  cohort  recruited  400  children