The majority of these techniques are based on the extraction of DNA and the ampliﬁcation of the 16S
ribosomal RNA gene (rRNA)  16S rRNA sequencing has become the most useful technique to
highlight diversity and abundance of the microbiome. Moreover, recent studies have identiﬁed a
critical role for commensal bacteria and their products in regulating the development, homeostasis,
and function of innate and adaptive immune cells  It is paradoxical to note that the gut microbiota
functions are highly preserved between individuals, whereas each individual’s gut microbiota are
characterized by a speciﬁc combination of bacterial species due to inter-individual and intra-individual
variations throughout human life. Gut Microbiota Variations

Gut microbiota are composed of several species of microorganisms, including bacteria, yeast,
and viruses. Clostridium genera represent
95% of the Firmicutes phyla. Examples of taxonomic gut microbiota composition. Microbiota variations within individuals are summarized in Table 1. Microorganisms 2018, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 23  Figure 1. After birth, a rich and dynamic ecosystem
develops from mother’s skin, vaginal and fecal microbiota, and environment microbiota contacts. Another prebiotic effect of β-palmitate, a natural human milk fatty acid
and a component of some infant formulas, on gut infant microbiota was demonstrated by positively
inﬂuencing Biﬁdobacterium spp. ( The abundance of genera Biﬁdobacterium, Clostridium coccoides, and
Bacteroides are predominant after weaning  The microbiota of breastfed children and the microbiota
of children previously fed with formula milk become closer to each other (Table 1). The introduction of high-ﬁber and carbohydrate foods (traditional foods)
causes an increase in Firmicutes and Prevotella, whereas the introduction of high-ﬁber and animal
protein foods causes an increase in Bacteroidetes demonstrated
that northern European countries are associated with a higher proportion of Biﬁdobacteria in the
infant gut microbiota, whereas higher levels of Bacteroides and Lactobacilli characterize southern
European countries. A decrease in anaerobic bacteria such
as Biﬁdobacterium spp. Speciﬁc properties of antibiotics such as
antimicrobial effects or mode of action are powerful forces for the selection of intestinal microbiota
and are partially responsible for the shifts in bacterial composition during antibiotic therapy 

Each class of antibiotics has different properties and excretion systems, resulting in different

patterns of alteration in the microbiome composition 

A cultivation-independent survey of gut microbiota composition of three persons before, during,
and after two exposures to the same antibiotic (ciproﬂoxacin) has been conducted. Microbiota variations within individuals. Lachnospiraceae *
Peptostreptococcaceae *
Clostridiaceae *

Ruminococcus spp. ↓

↑

↑

↓

↑

↓

↑















Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

8 of 22

Actinobacteria

Bacteroidetes

Firmicutes

Proteobacteria

Fusobacteria

Verrucomicrobia

Euryarchaeota

Bacteria
Diversity

Ref. Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

10 of 22

2.2.3. However, a chronic external stimulation may be
stressful and disruptive for an unstructured ecosystem. In particular, 16S
rDNA sequences belonging to the family Lachnospiraceae within the phylum Firmicutes are in greater
abundance in the IBS clone library 

Other studies conﬁrmed and revealed some phyla and genera variations in IBS patients
compared to healthy controls: an increase in the Firmicutes-to Bacteroidetes-ratio, a decrease in some
Firmicutes families (Lactobacilli, Faecalibacterium) and the Actinobacteria population (Biﬁdobacteria,
Collinsella), and an increase in some Firmicutes families (Veillonella, Streptococci, and Ruminococcus spp.) and in Proteobacteria (Enterobacteriaceae spp.). indicated a diminution of Lachnospiraceae and Bacteroidetes
microbial populations and an increase in Proteobacteria families in IBD patients compared to control
gut microbiota. These results suggest that counterbalancing dysbiosis using Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii as a probiotic is a promising strategy in CRD treatment 

Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14

13 of 22

These results do not demonstrate a causal relationship between microbial dysbiosis and IBD
pathophysiology, but they rather suggest that gut microbial unbalances are likely to contribute to
disease severity. Biﬁdobacterium longum, Clostridium
histolyticum, C. lituseburense, and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii group proportions are less abundant in
untreated CD patients than in healthy controls. and lower proportions of Bacteroides spp. and an increase in various opportunistic pathogens (Clostridium spp., Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic, rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated
with impaired cognition and cerebral accumulation of amyloid-beta peptides.