Microbiota and Neurodevelopmental Trajectories Ann Nutr Metab 2019;74(suppl 2):16–27DOI: 10.1159/000499144Dynamics of the Maternal Microbiota during 
Pregnancy
Pregnancy is a unique period in human life, and both 
the gut and vaginal microbiome have evolved to follow an 
optimum trajectory to support the mother and the devel-
oping fetus and allow for the ideal handover of microbi-
ome at birth, informing maternal and child health out-
comes. . Preclinical Models of Early-Life Microbiota Trajectory
Similar to humans, mice and rat intestinal and vaginal 
microbiota  go  through  compositional  changes  during 
pregnancy,  providing  a  robust  preclinical  model  for 
studying the link between maternal gut environment and 
offspring brain development  Early gestation is 
characterized  by  a  transitional  increase  in  the  relative 
abundance of Akkermansia and Bifidobacterium, which 
in late pregnancy decrease to levels seen in non-pregnant 
mice. In contrast, Bacteroides remain relatively elevated 
throughout  pregnancy    Interestingly,  microbiota . Mode of Nutritional Provision in Early Life
The stability and composition of the early-life gut mi-
crobiota community is also dependent on diet  Ac-
cumulating evidence suggests that breastfeeding and for-
mula-based nutrition leave a distinctive fingerprint in the 
intestinal  microbiota  (Table  2). Gut  bacterial  composi-
tion  of  infants  exclusively  breastfed  is  characterized  by 
higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Bifidobacte-
rium compared to the one from formula-fed infants [108, 
116]. Furthermore, breastfeeding had a positive effect on 
myelination and increased general, verbal and non-verbal 
cognitive abilities during childhood  The implica-
tions of these findings are still unclear, but longitudinal 
studies are starting to shed light on the effect of early-life 
nutrition on the temporal course of microbiota matura-
tion. . Probiotics and Prebiotics
Most of the evidence available on the effect of early-life 
exposure to pre- and probiotics comes from preclinical 
studies. Early-life prebiotic administration in humans has 
shown effects on reducing the risk of atopy, an autoim-
mune disease  but neurodevelopmental outcomes 
have not been studied yet. In preclinical studies, oligosac-
charides have been shown to modulate the gut-brain axis, 
highlighting  the  role  of  breastfeeding  in  neurodevelop-
ment. Administration  of  the  human  milk  oligosaccha-
rides 3’Sialyllactose to mice 
exposed  to  social  disruption  prevented  stress-induced  
colonic  microbial  disruption  and  anxiety-like  behavior 
  Furthermore,  fructo-oligosaccharide  (FOS)  and 
GOS administration attenuated corticosterone release in 
response to an acute stressor and protected the mice from 
the impact of chronic stress on the microbiota  . ment by maternal high-fat diet exposure  In mater-
nally separated rat pups, a combination of Lactobacillus 
rhamnosus and Lactobacillus helveticus reduced pup cor-
ticosterone  responses  to  stress  and  normalized  fear  be-
haviour  Another probiotic, Bifidobacte-
rium  infantis,  normalized  behavioural  deficits  in  adult 
rats exposed to maternal separation