Human 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

SPECIAL ARTICLE

Disease Models & Mechanisms 

Table 1. Humans also have an appendix,
which  is  absent  in  mice. These

Disease Models & MechanismsDisease Models & Mechanisms 

Human

A

B

G

V

V

C

L

P

M

M

SM

L

MM

C

Fig. Overall, the mammalian digestive tract is strongly conserved, with
major differences between species being likely driven by diet. The morphology of mouse and human colons also
differs: the human colon is divided into haustra, whereas the mouse
colon is rather smooth. Although these differences do not mean
that  the  murine  model  is  not  valuable  to  study  host-microbiota
interactions, care must be taken in making direct parallels between
murine  and  human  gut  with  regard  to  microbiota  composition,
because host-microbiota co-evolution could have been influenced
by these anatomical divergences. Composition of the gut microbiota in healthy humans and mice
Overall, the gut microbiota of human and mice are dominated by
two  major  phyla,  Bacteroidetes  and  Firmicutes  (Eckburg  et  al., Considering the restrictions referred to previously, the analysis is
based on a limited number of samples: five murine fecal 16S rDNA
studies  (Nagy-Szakal  et  al., On the other hand, a study by the MetaHIT consortium
investigating metagenomes from 124 European individuals discovered
that 90% of the individuals of the cohort share a common core of nine
genera, at a 10% sequence coverage threshold (i.e. species being only
considered  present  if  a  minimum  of  10%  of  their  genome  was
recovered in the sequenced metagenome) (Qin et al., Enterotypes  were  also  identified  in  the  laboratory  mouse  gut
microbiota  (Hildebrand  et  al., A reduced ratio
of Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes was also found in a study linking gut
microbiota composition and metabolic adaptations in mice on high-
fat diets (Serino et al., The discrepancies in the importance
of the Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes ratio found across studies could be
linked to the heterogeneity in age of subjects, because the ratio of
Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes has been found to change with age (Mariat
et  al., Histological features of murine DSS-induced colitis. ( C, intestinal crypts; G, goblet cells; L, lamina
propria; ME, muscularis externa; MM, muscularis mucosae; MT: muscularis tunics; SM: submucosa; V: villi. Mouse studies have also detected changes in abundance of bacterial
phylotypes that solely happen in mice, such as of Tenericutes and
Deferribacteriaceae (Nagalingam et al., 2010) were found only
in human Crohn’s disease studies. content in diets of both humans and mice (Akaza, 2012; Menon et
al., Murine  models  are  usually  inbred  in  order  to  reduce  the
phenotypic  variation  that  arises  from  genetic  heterogeneity. A typical example is colitis, for which there are currently
about  60  different  mouse  models  (Peloquin  and  Nguyen,  2013;
Wirtz and Neurath, 2007). IBD research
has  yielded  several  mouse  models  (usually  referred  to  as  colitis
models  because  the  pathology  mostly  resembles  ulcerative  colitis
symptoms,  as  mentioned  above),  including  genetically  modified
models,  where  a  candidate  gene  involved  in  IBD  development  is
altered or knocked out, and models in which chemicals or infectious
pathogens are used to induce gut inflammation and changes in gut
microbiota  composition,  leading  to  colitis. Furthermore,  the
chemical  itself  might  affect  the  composition  or  function  of  the
resident gut microbiota before the onset of colitis (Nagalingam et
al., This study shows that the gut
microbiota  composition  of  humanized  mice  in  general  does  not
differ significantly from that of the initial human donors, except for
the absence of many low-abundance Firmicutes, but these mice fail
to recapitulate a comprehensive response to infections. Similarly,  although  the  gap  between  humanized
mouse models and the human gut microbiota within its original host
needs to be acknowledged, these models provide unique possibilities
to manipulate the human microbiota and potentially assess causality
in the role of the gut microbiota in health and disease. Furthermore,  it  was  hypothesized  that  the
differences  between  mice  and  rats  in  recapitulating  the  human
donors’  microbiota  is  due  to  the  intrinsic  differences  in  genetic
backgrounds of the recipient models, which might control for the
establishment of the transferred microbiota (Wos-Oxley et al., More  recently,  another  study  employed  metagenomic
approaches to compare the gut microbiota composition of humans
and guinea pigs (Hildebrand et al., The  pig  gut  microbiota  is  becoming  an
increasingly intensive area of study owing to the scale of the pig
husbandry  industry,  as  well  as  to  the  similarities  in  anatomy,
physiology  and  immunology  to  the  human  gastrointestinal  tract
(Litten-Brown  et  al., It is, however,
important to keep in mind that models always have some degree of
dissimilarity  with  the  system  modeled. In  addition,  even  well-controlled  gut  microbiota
experiments  using  mouse  models  show  important  inter-study
variations due to confounding factors in the experimental setup, such
as mouse house origin, maternal effects, environmental conditions
(food composition, light, stress factors, pathogen infection), genetic
backgrounds  and  in  the  downstream  analysis  methods  applied. Competing interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests. Funding
T.L.A.N. is supported by VIB international PhD program. Supplementary material
Supplementary material available online at
http://dmm.biologists.org/lookup/suppl/