/  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306   316–327 

317

given  ecosystem. The  laboratory  mouse  is  currently  the  primary  experimen-
tal  model  organism  in  preclinical  research. A  large  variety  of
genetically-engineered  strains  and  mouse  models  for  human  dis-
eases  exist  (Eppig  et  al., 2015),  and  mouse  strains  can  be  relatively
easily  re-derived  germ-free  (Macpherson  and  McCoy,  2015),  which
has  set  the  stage  for  the  establishment  of  gnotobiotic  models  (i.e.
mice  colonized  with  deﬁned  bacterial  strains  or  mixtures). In  addition,
maintenance  of  germ-free  mice  is  demanding  and  requires  special-
ized  equipment  and  experienced  staff. Recently,  the  cultivation  of  bacteria  experienced  a  great
upswing. These  collections  are  essential  to  carry  out
microbial  reconstitution  experiments  in  germ-free  model  orga-
nisms. However,  to  investigate  microbiota  evolution  and  functions
including  host-speciﬁcity,  the  scientiﬁc  community  needs  public
bacterial  collections  derived  from  mice,  which  presently  do  not
exist. In  this  review,  we  revisit  current  knowledge  of  the  mouse
gut  microbiota,  the  relevance  of  mouse  models  for  microbe–host
interactions  studies,  and  give  an  outlook  on  future  challenges  and
opportunities  in  the  ﬁeld. Humanized  mice  from  a  microbial  perspective:  Hybrid
models  of  clinical  relevance

A

  number  of  pioneering  studies  have  employed  human-derived
Escherichia  coli  and  Bacteroides  spp. as  model  organisms  to  elucidate
key  principles  of  microbe–host  interactions  in  gnotobiotic  mice. These  bacteria  can  be  genetically  manipulated  and  allow  functional
genetic  analysis. This  model  allows  a
number  of  fundamental  principles  underlying  bacterial  induction
of  mucosal  immune  responses  to  be  addressed. several  fundamental  principles  under-
lying  host–microbe  interactions  have  been  elucidated. Their
genomes  encode  a  vast  number  of  enzyme  systems  that  mediate
degradation  of  polysaccharides  derived  from  the  diet  and  mucosal
secretions  (Xu  et  al., 2003),  which  shapes  the  mutualistic  relation-
ship  between  Bacteroides  spp. and  their  human  host  (Comstock,
2009). Speciﬁcally,  B.  theta  can  modify  host  epithelial  differen-
tiation  in  a  way  that  supports  its  own   growth:  it  promotes  the
production  of  fucosylated  glycans  by  the  host  and  in  turn  uses
them  as  nutrient  sources  (Bry  et  al., B.  fragilis  produces  a  polysaccharide  with  immune  modulatory
activities  (Mazmanian  et  al., Co-
colonization  with  methanogenic,  sulfate-reducing,  and  acetogenic
bacteria  also  yielded  valuable  insights  into  the  metabolism  of  these
generally  lowly  abundant  members  of  mammalian  gut  ecosys-
tems  (Rey  et  al., Although  models  harboring  only  few  bacteria  have  been
very  helpful,  care  must  be  taken  when  interpreting  data. In  sim-
pliﬁed  bacterial  communities,  the  context  of  a  fully  diverse  and
competitive  bacterial  ecosystem  is  lacking. Germ-free  mice  can  also  be  used  to  investigate  functions  of
complex  human-derived  microbiota. Nevertheless,  they  allow  mining  the  human  micro-
biome  for  speciﬁc  functions  and  address  microbiota-speciﬁc  effects
on  the  immune  system  and  metabolome  and  study  inter-individual
differences  (Ahern  et  al., Moreover,
mice  with  a  humanized  microbiota  make  it  possible  to  test  whether
a
  complex  human  disease  phenotype  can  be  transmitted  by  micro-
biota  transplantation  (Ridaura  et  al.,