This vast array of data has contributed
to a deeper understanding of the role of the gut microbiome in health and disease, the factors which
shape it, and the potential to harness its therapeutic potential for optimal health. The gut microbiota serves the host by interacting directly or indirectly with host cells, the latter of
which comes about through microbially-produced bioactive molecules, thus the microbiota is capable
of regulating numerous biological pathways involved in immunity and energy homeostasis, while also
protecting the host against pathogens through colonisation resistance. In terms of metabolic function, genes involved in the
de novo biosynthesis of folate have been shown to be enriched in the infant microbiome across three
diﬀerent populations (Malawian rural communities, Amerindians from the Amazonas of Venezuela,
families from the USA) relative to adults  By three years of age, obligate anaerobes have been
shown to dominate the microbiota in breast-fed infants which is trending towards an adult-like
composition. identiﬁed a core microbiota of 46 species common to both adults and
adolescents who consumed a standard Western diet, however, the abundances of the
genera Biﬁdobacterium and Clostridium were signiﬁcantly higher in adolescents relative to adults. Indeed, while Bacteroidetes was
found to be the dominant phylum in an elderly Irish cohort (age 65 years and older), the proportion of
Bacteroidetes within individual composition datasets ranged from 3% to 92%, while the proportion of
Firmicutes ranged from 7% to 94% reported a change in the ratio of Firmicutes:
Bacteriodetes with age, which was recorded as 0.4 in infants  10.9 in adults
 of which the latter two consumed an
unrestricted Western-type diet. In a study involving 178 elderly Irish subjects  Claesson et
al. Remarkably, a study investigating the semi-supercentarian
microbiota revealed not only a decrease in saccharolytic butyrate producers
(Faecalibacterium, Coprococcus, Roseburia) and an increase in potential opportunistic bacteria, as expected,
but also an enrichment and/or higher prevalence in health associated bacterial groups, including
Akkermansia, Biﬁdobacterium and Christensenellaceae. It is involved in energy
regulation (as discussed in Section 5). For example, a single bacterial species, namely Clostridium scindens, was shown to confer colonisation
resistance against C. diﬃcile infection in vivo  In this instance, secondary bile acids generated by
C. scindens from host-derived bile cells were found to inhibit the pathogen. Furthermore, SCFAs were signiﬁcantly more abundant in the African children. Obese individuals within the LGC group were found to gain more weight over time. These changes were associated with receipt of broad-spectrum antibiotics. However, a recent study reported the presence

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

13 of 45

of C. scindens and C. diﬃcile in the same stool sample and suggested that the former does not inhibit
the latter but the study does not provide data on bile acid proﬁles or the 7-α -dehydroxylating
activity of C. scindens, the enzyme responsible for secondary bile acid production. Inulin prevented penetrability of the inner colonic mucus layer while Bif. Diet-Derived Microbial Metabolites—Many Are Beneﬁcial but Speciﬁc Metabolites Are
Associated with Risk of Metabolic Disease

Metabolic disease refers to any disease in which the normal metabolic processes in the body are
disrupted and examples include obesity, type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome, all of which are risk
factors for cardiovascular disease. This observation was also corroborated by Turnbaugh et al. who also noted a higher proportion
of Actinobacteria in obese subjects. However, dietary fat is not a homogenous macronutrient, since the structure and function of
diﬀerent fatty acids can vary greatly depending on chain length and absence or
presence of carbon-carbon double bonds  Saturated fatty acids (SFAs) have no double bond,
monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) contain a single double bond, while polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFAs) have two or more double bonds. consisted of 75.1% fat composed of SFAs, MUFAs and PUFAs. Principal component
analysis revealed distinct microbiota on days 7 and 14, whereby the soy protein group was separate
from the meat and casein groups  In another similar study, soy protein was associated with
increased faecal SCFAs in rats compared to rats fed white meat, red meat or casein  The soy group
also had a higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which are the major propionate and
other SCFA producers  Lactobacillus, a genus known for its beneﬁcial eﬀects was increased in the
gut microbiota by ingestion of meat proteins. This was accompanied by an expansion of taxa proposed to be involved
in bile acid biotransformation. Mungbean protein also
proved superior to casein in reducing high fat diet induced weight gain in mice  The mungbean
protein caused elevated secretion of GLP-1, an increase in the cecal and faecal bile acid pool with a
dramatically elevated secondary: primary bile acid ratio; eﬀects which were abolished in germ free
mice. Interestingly in humans, a three-week isocaloric supplementation with casein, soy protein or
maltodextrin, which served as control, had no impact on the gut microbiota but altered bacterial
metabolite production  Compared to maltodextrin, both soy protein and casein caused a decrease
in faecal butyrate which the authors suggest may be due to the combination of an increase in protein
intake and a decrease in indigestible carbohydrate intake. Casein speciﬁcally increased p-cresol
sulfate. More recently, a low protein diet
for six months was reported to reduce serum uremic toxin levels, including p-cresol
sulfate, in non-dialysis, chronic kidney disease patients  DGGE indicated a change in the intestinal
microbiota proﬁle. A position paper by the MyNewGut Study group analysed
PubMed-referenced publications involving human intervention studies to clarify beneﬁcial versus
deleterious eﬀects of high protein diets on metabolic and gut related health parameters, including
interactions with the gut microbiota  The study concluded that high protein diets are generally
associated with decreased body weight and improvement in blood metabolic parameters but they also
modify various bacterial metabolites and co-metabolites in faecal and urinary contents. compared
the impact of diﬀerent oligo- and polysaccharides (galacto- and fructooligosaccharides, resistant starch,
levan, inulin, arabinogalactan, xylan, pectin and chitin), as well as a glycoprotein mucin, representing
an indigenous substrate, on the growth and metabolism of the faecal microbiota. The overall results strongly suggest that strategies to increase microbial diversity should employ
complex nondigestible substrates mixtures. Since the number of members from the genera Coprococcus and Ruminococcus were increased by the
high fructose diet but reduced by antibiotics and faecal transplant, the results suggest a correlation
between their abundance and metabolic syndrome. Thus, modiﬁcation of the gut microbiota through diet, probiotics and
prebiotics may oﬀer viable opportunities for preventing many of these ‘Western-associated’ diseases,
particularly in the case of metabolic-related diseases for which microbiota quality and quantity can
be an essential aspect. In Part II of this review, we
also look at speciﬁc examples of how the microbiota is already being used as a biomarker to predict
responsiveness to speciﬁc dietary constituents and highlight further research which is necessary to
make precision nutrition through the microbiome a reality.