The gut microbiota serves the host by interacting directly or indirectly with host cells, the latter of
which comes about through microbially-produced bioactive molecules, thus the microbiota is capable
of regulating numerous biological pathways involved in immunity and energy homeostasis, while also
protecting the host against pathogens through colonisation resistance. Thuricin CD is an example
of a sactibiotic bacteriocin produced by a human gut isolate, Bacillus thuringiensis  While it has a
narrow spectrum of inhibition, thuricin CD is capable of killing a wide range of C. diﬃcile isolates, its
antimicrobial activity being as potent as the antibiotics vancomycin and metronidazole, but without the
concomitant damage to other members of the microbiota  Bacteriocin production can also aid niche
occupation of the producing strain. of C. scindens and C. diﬃcile in the same stool sample and suggested that the former does not inhibit
the latter but the study does not provide data on bile acid proﬁles or the 7-α -dehydroxylating
activity of C. scindens, the enzyme responsible for secondary bile acid production..

Furthermore, Sonnenburg et al. In a more recent study, the same group investigated
the eﬀect of extra virgin olive oil on mouse gut microbiota compared to butter using more in-depth
analysis  Highest levels of systolic blood pressure were recorded for mice fed butter which
correlated positively with Desulfovibrio sequences in faeces, which were signiﬁcantly higher in mice fed
butter compared to olive oil. There was also an increase in spermine
which has been shown to be extremely toxic in rats  The following bacteria, which are generally
regarded as being beneﬁcial, decreased in abundance on the high protein diet, including the butyrate
producer F. prausnitzii (by 3.5 fold), Ruminococcus (by 8.04 fold) which contains butyrate producers,
and the mucin degrader Akkermansia (not detected in high protein diet group). Principal component
analysis revealed distinct microbiota on days 7 and 14, whereby the soy protein group was separate
from the meat and casein groups  In another similar study, soy protein was associated with
increased faecal SCFAs in rats compared to rats fed white meat, red meat or casein  The soy group
also had a higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which are the major propionate and
other SCFA producers  Lactobacillus, a genus known for its beneﬁcial eﬀects was increased in the
gut microbiota by ingestion of meat proteins.