Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

2 of 49

is diet, an element which we can control. Improving microbial diversity can be achieved through healthy
eating and consuming the recommended daily intake for ﬁbre (25 g/day for women and 38 g/day
for men . For example,
consumption of the probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Biﬁdobacterium lactis BB12 from T1
of pregnancy in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of GDM
(P = 0.003)  However, probiotic supplementation for four weeks (weeks 24 to 28 of gestation)
in obese pregnant women did not inﬂuence maternal metabolic proﬁle, fasting blood glucose, or
pregnancy outcomes  It is possible that the short-term probiotic consumption in this study did not
permit the probiotic to induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota and hence host metabolism. reported that maternal probiotic administration during breastfeeding (from birth to introduction of
solid food) did not alter breast milk immune markers. Very preterm infants (<32 weeks) and extremely preterm infants (<28 weeks)
are at signiﬁcant risk of sepsis, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), feeding intolerance and mortality 
The preterm infant microbiota has been shown to be lacking in the health-promoting Biﬁdobacterium
species and as a consequence of antibiotic administration can be dominated by Enterobacteriaceae,
Enterococcus and Staphylococcus and has
an increased abundance of Proteobacteria  In a study investigating the distortions in intestinal
microbiota development and late onset sepsis in preterm infants, Mai et al. In order to gain widespread acceptance, Aceti et al. However, in order to incite greater conﬁdence
in both the medical profession and the public in general there is a need for large cohort, possibly
multi-centre randomized controlled trials that focus on speciﬁc prebiotics, probiotics and synbiotics
which assess their impacts and modes of action on the gut microbiota, infant health and wellness and
the long-term outcomes for these parameters. longum Bar33 and Lactobacillus
helveticus Bar13) per day for one month was found to revert the age-related increase in the following

Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

11 of 49

opportunistic pathogens, C. diﬃcile, Clostridium cluster XI, Clostridium perfringens, Enterococcus faecium,
and the enteropathogenic genus Campylobacter in elderly volunteers  Consumption of a fermented
oat drink containing Bif. Decreases in the levels of Ruminococcaceae and Parabacteroides
have been pinpointed as the main microbial shifts associated with ageing in mice  Slight
reductions were observed in Oscillospira (positively associated with leanness and health  and
the sulphate-reducing Desulfovibrio following L. rhamnosus GG with soluble corn ﬁbre consumption,
whereas only Desulfovibrio decreased following intake of L. rhamnosus GG PB12 with corn ﬁbre. These studies indicate that dietary interventions involving ﬁbre, prebiotics and probiotics in the
elderly, and especially those in residential care, can induce beneﬁcial changes to the gut microbiota with
potential to improve immune function and gut homeostasis. A later study in mice showed that LC-Plasma-activation of pDC in turn
attenuates the concentration of fatigue controlled cytokine TGF-β and muscle degenerative genes 
Consumption of a probiotic powder containing L. rhamnosus GG and Bif. lactis BB12
reduced the duration and severity of upper respiratory tract infections in college students and fewer
school days were missed 

®

Administration of Lactobacillus fermentum (PCC

) to male (n = 64) and female (n = 35) competitive
cyclists for 11 weeks generated mixed results in terms of gastrointestinal illness and lower respiratory
illness symptoms  Males experienced a reduction in the severity of gastrointestinal illness
which became more pronounced as training load increased. Nutrients 2019, 11, 1468

17 of 49

Table 1. Potential beneﬁts of probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and ﬁbre on diﬀerent life stages. The studies are discussed in this section and are summarized in Table 2. Probiotic

Subject Information

Duration

Eﬀect

Reference

Bif. lactis

Overweight and obese
adults

6 months

— Lowered fat mass
— Improved some blood

parameters related to liver
function and inﬂammation

— Lowered body fat mass and

percent body fat

— Decreased triglyceride levels
and improved bHDL
cholesterol from baseline

— Controlled body fat mass and
reduced weight circumference
and food intake
— Lowered circulating
zonulin levels









L. gasseri
BNR17

Systematic review of
human studies

-

— Reduced weight gain

aBMI, body mass index; bHDL, high density lipoprotein. longum, followed later on by absence of the HMAGM resulting
in deﬁcient energy harvest, immune protection and vitamin biosynthesis which are associated with
malabsorption, systemic pathogen invasion and diarrhoea used a
combination of culturomics and metagenomics to analyse the stool samples of healthy children and
kwashiorkor patients to identify potential probiotics to treat SAM. A six-month synbiotic supplementation to children with failure to thrive, a common
problem in children in underdeveloped countries, resulted in a significant increase in weight gain
compared to control children  Indeed, by the end of the six-month trial, the mean weight of the
control group was 11.760 ± 0.17 kg which increased from 10.75 ± 0.16 kg initially, while the mean weight
of the synbiotic group was 12.280 ± 0.190 kg, increasing from 10.25 ± 0.2 kg initially. Another example is
the direct modulation of colonic microbiota with short-chain GOS to metabolize lactose in lactose
intolerant individuals  In this case, GOS failed to elicit a biﬁdogenic response in three out of
30 participants; however, an increase in biﬁdobacteria was associated with a decrease in pain and
cramping revealing its signiﬁcance in terms of symptoms. A full list of microorganisms found in the sample and their relative
abundances is provided. A scoring system rates thousands of diﬀerent foods and food combinations based
on the consumer’s biometrics, gut microbiome analysis, lifestyle factors and health
questionnaire to yield a unique nutrition proﬁle that enables blood-sugar balance. Furthermore, in terms of time, the tests can take anything from two to eight weeks before the
consumer receives the results such that gut microbiota changes may have taken place within this time
frame depending on the consumer’s circumstances (e.g., dietary changes, medical treatment, antibiotic
administration, etc) and hence the results may prove meaningless by the time of receipt, a factor the
consumer must be made aware of. While the analysis is capable of providing an insight
into the necessary dietary recommendations to achieve a ‘healthy’ gut microbiome, one must question
the utility of this information at present given that we have yet to deﬁne a universal ‘healthy’ gut
microbiome, which may not be possible given the suspected level of speciﬁcity that can be associated
with an individual’s ‘healthy’ gut. Analytical validity—a measure of the accuracy of the genotyping. The probability term is the overall judgement of the
evidence provided and is based on the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) guidance document
expressing uncertainty in scientiﬁc assessment to help describe the likelihood of an outcome
where ﬁrm conclusions are diﬃcult to draw.