This vast array of data has contributed
to a deeper understanding of the role of the gut microbiome in health and disease, the factors which
shape it, and the potential to harness its therapeutic potential for optimal health. These studies have been presented
and critically assessed in a recent review by Perez-Mu ˇnoz et al. Remarkably, a study investigating the semi-supercentarian
microbiota revealed not only a decrease in saccharolytic butyrate producers
(Faecalibacterium, Coprococcus, Roseburia) and an increase in potential opportunistic bacteria, as expected,
but also an enrichment and/or higher prevalence in health associated bacterial groups, including
Akkermansia, Biﬁdobacterium and Christensenellaceae. It prevents pathogen colonisation directly or indirectly through a
phenomenon referred to as colonisation resistance. More recently, a co-culture experiment revealed that
GABA produced by Bacteroides fragilis was essential for the growth of a gut isolate termed KLE1738
which is believed to be an unreported bacterial genus  This led to the isolation of a variety
of GABA-producing bacteria and the Bacteriodes species in particular were found to produce large
quantities of GABA. The tryptophan-metabolising
strain Peptostreptococcus russellii provided a protective eﬀect against colitis in mice, which the authors
suggest is linked to its ability to produce the tryptophan metabolite and AhR ligand, indoleacrylic acid
which mitigates inﬂammatory responses and promotes intestinal barrier function  The authors
also noted a diminishment of tryptophan-metabolising capacity in stool samples of IBD patients. The specific
genetic locus referred to as commensal colonisation f actors (ccf ) was shown to be up-regulated in
Bac. Furthermore, SCFAs were signiﬁcantly more abundant in the African children. Furthermore, it seems that long term improvements to dietary habits may be required to improve
and stabilise gut microbial diversity which agrees with the observations of Klimenko et al. For example, human studies have shown that the presence of the gut pathogen
C. diﬃcile is associated with decreased gut microbiota diversity in CDI patients  as well as in
asymptomatic carriers also reported a dramatic increase in endotoxin-producing
opportunistic pathogens and lactate-producing phylotypes in CDI patients. Other viral infections have also been associated with
low-diversity dysbiosis, including hepatitis C 

While the exact mechanisms underlying the link between low microbial diversity, diet and disease
are not fully understood, SCFAs undoubtedly play a role given that low MAC diets are directly linked
to low SCFA levels reported a signiﬁcant decrease in the proportion
of the SCFA-producing Clostridial Clusters IV/XIVa in intensive care unit patients 72 h following
hospital admission which was associated with reduced gut microbiota diversity and community
stability over time. These changes were associated with receipt of broad-spectrum antibiotics. This observation was also corroborated by Turnbaugh et al. Furthermore, faecal SCFA concentrations tend to be higher in obese
individuals  The obese gut microbiota has also been characterised by reduced diversity and
altered representation of bacterial genes and metabolic pathways  More recently, a systematic
review investigated the link between the gut microbiota and low-grade inﬂammation, a hallmark of
obesity which plays a major role in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in humans  Fourteen,
mostly observational studies were included with n = 10 to 471 participants. For example, a high fat diet rich in saturated fat in the form of palm oil (PUFA:
SFA ratio = 0.4) induced higher body weight gain and liver triglyceride content in mice compared
with diets rich in polyunsaturated fats (olive oil, PUFA: SFA ratio = 1.1, or saﬄower oil, PUFA: SFA
ratio = 7.8)  Interestingly, the overﬂow of dietary fat to the distal intestine was greater on the
palm oil diet compared with the others. However, given that CLA supplements are commercially available,
the authors suggest that fatty acid mixtures with equal proportions of CLA isomers or probiotics and
prebiotics may balance such negative eﬀects 

In a recent review investigating the available evidence on the impact of dietary fat on
the gut microbiota and low-grade systemic inﬂammation and clinical implications for obesity,
Cândido et al. Additionally, in a mouse model of glioma, mice fed
the ketogenic diet had slightly increased survival compared to mice fed the control diet and showed
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in several key microorganisms  The ketogenic diet generally includes fats

Nutrients 2019, 11, 923

22 of 45

of all chain lengths thus increases in blood ketone levels could be responsible for the observed
gut microbiota changes 

7.2. Principal component
analysis revealed distinct microbiota on days 7 and 14, whereby the soy protein group was separate
from the meat and casein groups  In another similar study, soy protein was associated with
increased faecal SCFAs in rats compared to rats fed white meat, red meat or casein  The soy group
also had a higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which are the major propionate and
other SCFA producers  Lactobacillus, a genus known for its beneﬁcial eﬀects was increased in the
gut microbiota by ingestion of meat proteins. In another study, soy fed hamsters were found
to have a more consistently diverse microbiota in the small and lower intestine compared to hamsters
fed milk protein isolate and the largest diﬀerences were found within the Bacteriodetes phylum 
Indeed, the milk protein isolate fed group had a greater relative abundance of Bacteroidaceae and
Porphyromonadaceae compared to the soy fed groups. This was accompanied by an expansion of taxa proposed to be involved
in bile acid biotransformation. More recently, a low protein diet
for six months was reported to reduce serum uremic toxin levels, including p-cresol
sulfate, in non-dialysis, chronic kidney disease patients  DGGE indicated a change in the intestinal
microbiota proﬁle. Resistant starch
is an important non-digestible carbohydrate, of which there are four types, (RS1 to RS4)  A diet
high in type 3 resistant starch for 10 weeks was found to stimulate the growth of Firmicutes bacteria
related to R. bromii and Eub. rectales in almost half of these individuals. Thus, modiﬁcation of the gut microbiota through diet, probiotics and
prebiotics may oﬀer viable opportunities for preventing many of these ‘Western-associated’ diseases,
particularly in the case of metabolic-related diseases for which microbiota quality and quantity can
be an essential aspect. In Part II of this review, we
also look at speciﬁc examples of how the microbiota is already being used as a biomarker to predict
responsiveness to speciﬁc dietary constituents and highlight further research which is necessary to
make precision nutrition through the microbiome a reality. Funding: This research received no external funding

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.