Lactobacillus crispatus  CTV-05  (Lactin-V,  Osel) 
is  a  live  biotherapeutic  product  that  contains  a 
naturally occurring vaginal strain of L. crispatus. Lactin-V  is  designed  to  promote  a 
community  state  type  (i.e.,  microbial  composi-
tion) with a predominance of  L. crispatus11 after 
treatment with vaginal 0.75% metronidazole gel. In previous clinical trials, no serious or grade 3 
adverse events that were considered to be related 
to the use of Lactin-V were reported.13-18 On the 
basis of the results from a phase 2a clinical trial 
of Lactin-V,16 the current phase 2b trial was de-
signed to assess whether treatment with Lactin-V 
after  a  5-day  course  of  metronidazole  to  treat 
bacterial vaginosis would result in a significantly 
lower  incidence  of  recurrence  of  bacterial  vagi-
nosis than placebo..

regimen for reevaluation of their eligibility. After 
providing written informed consent to partici-
pate in the trial, eligible women were randomly 
assigned,  in  a  2:1  ratio,  to  receive  Lactin-V  at 
2×109  CFU  per  dose  or  matching  placebo  and 
subsequently  received  a  carton  containing  25 
vaginal applicators. At  each  time 
point,  vaginal  swabs  were  obtained  for  assess-
ment  of  Amsel  criteria,  determination  of  the 
Nugent  score,  and  detection  of  L. crispatus  (all 
strains  and  the  CTV-05  strain  specifically)  by 
means of quantitative polymerase-chain-reaction 
(PCR) assays; the swabs were also used for re-
peat STI testing if clinically indicated. The 
data from the questionnaire are not reported here.). The percentage of participants in each group 
who had detectable L. crispatus species (any strain) 
and L. crispatus CTV-05 at any time after baseline 
through week 24 were calculated, along with risk 
ratios  for  these  outcomes. In contrast, in 
the  placebo  group,  L. crispatus  CTV-05  was  de-
tected in 2 to 6% of participants during weeks 4, 
8, and 12 and in 2% of participants at week 24. The  results  were  materially  unchanged  across 
the  analysis  populations. Among  the  partici-
pants  with  detectable  L.  crispatus  CTV-05,  the 
median  concentration  in  the  Lactin-V  group 
ranged from 1.7×106 to 6.2×106 CFU per millili-
ter during the treatment phase through week 12 . There were no apparent associations between 
the detection of L. crispatus CTV-05 at week 12 or 
week  24  and  adherence  to  the  assigned  treat-. Participants with detectable
L. crispatus CTV-05 . The use of Lactin-V after treatment with vaginal 
metronidazole for bacterial vaginosis resulted in 
a significantly lower incidence of recurrence of 
bacterial  vaginosis  at  12  weeks  than  placebo, 
and  the  benefit  appeared  to  persist  through 
week  24. Overall,  adherence  to  the  assigned 
treatment  was  high. We did not find that the occurrence of menses 
since the last visit or the occurrence of sex with-
out the use of a condom affected the detection 
of L. crispatus CTV-05.