it

Introduction
Asthma is a common chronic disorder during pregnancy, affecting between 8% and 13% of pregnant
women 
is often a comorbid condition with food and environmental allergies  Asthma
exacerbation rates during pregnancy are high  and more severe asthma or poor symptom control have
been associated with low birthweight  A greater risk for childhood asthma following uncontrolled
versus controlled maternal asthma during pregnancy has been reported  These variations in risk to the
offspring point to a potential in utero influence of maternal asthma. Postnatally, depending on the Lactobacillus species, since weight promotion
is species-specific, the dominance of lactobacilli in the infant gut will determine the extent of weight gain
and subsequent atopic disease  Altogether, evidence is mounting for a programming role of
prenatal asthma that might affect the infant gut microbiome. Written informed
consent was obtained from all mothers. Hospital birth records
provided data on mode of delivery, sex and infant exposures during birth. Parents were instructed to refrigerate
soiled diapers prior to retrieval by a CHILD research assistant during a home visit. Faecal samples were
then transported to the laboratory in a cooler, where they were divided into aliquots and stored at −80°C
prior to DNA extraction and sequencing. The sequences were then quality filtered by removing reads having more than 10 sites with
a Phred quality score less than 20. The metrics of OTU (microbial) relative
abundance and diversity (Shannon and Simpson diversity indices, Chao1 species richness index) were
generated in QIIME to profile infant gut microbiota in individual faecal samples. Statistical analysis
The statistical analysis of data was performed with the Statistical Analysis Systems (SAS) Software (version
9.4.; Restriction to Caucasian ethnicity also allowed us to test
associations within a population at highest risk for infant wheeze: male Caucasian infants 

To test the a priori research question on infant sex and adjust for putative confounding factors, analyses
were stratified by infant sex, birth mode, breastfeeding status and intrapartum antibiotic exposure (also a
strong marker for infant antibiotic use; . Using the adjusted rank transform (ART) nonparametric test
for interaction  the p-value for the interaction between infant sex and maternal prenatal asthma on
Lactobacillus abundance was 0.001. This genus was not differentially abundant
by maternal asthma status in non-Caucasian infants (data not shown). No differences in gut

https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00280-2017

3

ASTHMA | P.T. KOLEVA ET AL. Other sex-specific differences
were uncovered. Comparisons were performed
using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. The false discovery rate (FDR) was used to adjust p-values for multiple
testing and crude p-values <FDR p-values are indicated by “#”. The p-values <0.1 are reported and
p-values <0.05 are indicated in bold. ¶: comparison of Lactobacillus was the primary hypothesis. Differences were
also evident at the Bacteroidaceae family level ( p=0.02, supplementary table S2) in all female breastfed
infants born vaginally without
the
Firmicutes phylum ( p<0.05). restricted to Caucasian, vaginally delivered, breastfed infants not
exposed to maternal antibiotics during birth; +: comparison of Lactobacillus was the primary hypothesis. Unclassified Megasphera species (LDA score 3.34, p=0.003) were
comparatively less abundant and Bacteroides fragilis (LDA 3.29, p=0.02) were more abundant in female
Caucasian infants born to mothers with atopic asthma. Discussion
In a birth cohort study of 1021 full-term Canadian infants, we detected alterations to gut microbial
composition at 3–4 months following pregnancy complicated with asthma versus pregnancy without
asthma. Infants of mothers with asthma harboured fewer lactobacilli in their gut microbiota, especially if

https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00280-2017

6

ASTHMA | P.T. KOLEVA ET AL. OR: odds ratio; aOR: adjusted odds ratio; CI: confidence interval. they were male and of Caucasian ethnicity ( p=0.02). While no prior evidence exists for maternal prenatal asthma,
these findings are compatible with the reduced Lactobacillales abundance observed in the meconium of
newborns of mothers with eczema, and lower faecal colonisation with Lactobacillus species in infants of
atopic parents  In our study, male infants born to mothers with prenatal asthma were one-third
(aOR 0.26, 95% CI: 0.07–0.89) as likely to be colonised with high levels of lactobacilli, independent of
maternal overweight or atopy status, birth mode or infant diet. These associations were not present in
female offspring. lower abundance of Bacteroidetes or Ruminococcaceae, or higher abundance of the Clostridium cluster, but
these observations were evident either at a much younger or older infant age; furthermore, sex-specific
findings were not reported in these studies 

Maternal overweight during pregnancy has been linked to a higher risk of asthma and other atopic
diseases in offspring  In our study infants, maternal asthma comorbidity with this added risk for
offspring also yielded a reduction in the abundance of faecal Megasphaera in female infants and an
elevation in the abundance of Bacteroidaceae. Of interest, in the same cohort of
infants, we found that a lower ratio of the faecal abundance of Enterobactericeae to Bacteroidaceae
protected against food sensitisation  Hence, our findings suggest a programming role for maternal
asthma in shaping early gut colonisation, which cannot be attributed to caesarean delivery, antibiotic use
or formula feeding, and which differs by sex and might confer less immediate risk for allergy in female
infants 

There are several strengths to our research. Manitoba; F Ratjen, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto; A Sandford, University of British
Columbia; J Scott, University of Toronto; JA Scott, University of Toronto; MR Sears (Founding Director), McMaster
University; F Silverman, University of Toronto; E Simons, University of Manitoba; P Subbarao (Director), The Hospital
for Sick Children and University of Toronto; T Takaro, Simon Fraser University; SJ Tebbutt, University of British
Columbia; T To, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto; SE Turvey (Co-director), University of
British Columbia. A.L. Kozyrskyj conceived the study and obtained funding, designed the analyses and wrote the final
version of the manuscript.