Female infants are generally born smaller than male infants; however, in response to maternal asthma, the
Caucasian male fetus is more likely to have a lower birthweight and show growth retardation when
delivered at term than the female fetus recently reported less colonisation of stool
with Lactobacillus species at birth and during the first month of life among full-term male infants in
comparison to female infants. Postnatally, depending on the Lactobacillus species, since weight promotion
is species-specific, the dominance of lactobacilli in the infant gut will determine the extent of weight gain
and subsequent atopic disease  Altogether, evidence is mounting for a programming role of
prenatal asthma that might affect the infant gut microbiome. These observations led us to study the
influence of maternal asthma status during pregnancy on infant intestinal microbiota in the Canadian
Healthy Infant Longitudinal Development (CHILD) general population birth cohort. Specifically, we
determined whether the genus Lactobacillus was reduced in the gut of infants born to an asthmatic
mother, especially in the gut of male infants. Second, we sought evidence for a fetal programming role of
maternal asthma that was independent of birth mode and related events, and was enhanced by maternal
comorbid conditions, such as overweight and atopic disease..

the species level (figure 1), an unclassified
Finally, using the LEfSe method to test differences at
Lactobacillus species was found to be less abundant in male Caucasian infants born to mothers with atopic
asthma (LDA score 2.93, p<0.05). Unclassified Megasphera species (LDA score 3.34, p=0.003) were
comparatively less abundant and Bacteroides fragilis (LDA 3.29, p=0.02) were more abundant in female
Caucasian infants born to mothers with atopic asthma..

Maternal overweight during pregnancy has been linked to a higher risk of asthma and other atopic
diseases in offspring  In our study infants, maternal asthma comorbidity with this added risk for
offspring also yielded a reduction in the abundance of faecal Megasphaera in female infants and an
elevation in the abundance of Bacteroidaceae. The latter remained statistically significant after adjustment
for the FDR; both species were identified as statistically more abundant by the LEfSe method. Both
Megasphaera and Bacteroidaceae microbes produce propionate, but under opposing conditions. The
Megasphaera species utilise lactate as a substrate to produce propionate  whereas Bacteroides species
produce propionate when lactate levels are low  Propionate is absorbed by the host for liver
gluconeogenesis, possesses anti-inflammatory and satiety properties  and protects against the
development of allergic asthma in a murine model