Abstract: Pregnancy induces a number of immunological, hormonal, and metabolic changes that are
necessary for the mother to adapt her body to this new physiological situation. Hence, the microbiome modulates the
inﬂammatory mechanisms related to physiological and pathological processes that are involved in
the perinatal progress through diﬀerent mechanisms. Indeed, it has been described that maternal
microbiota composition during pregnancy is related to maternal diet  and by pre-pregnancy
weight and weight gain over the course of pregnancy  Koren et al. argued the weakness of evidence supporting the. An increase in the microbial load in the oral cavity during pregnancy has been described. One underlying mechanism refers to estrogens being substituted
for vitamin K in bacterial anaerobic respiration, especially for black-pigmented Bacteroides such as
Bacteroides melaninogenicus and Prevotella intermedia . However, recent data have questioned
the traditional accepted dogma of human microbiome acquisition, proposing that neither the placenta,
the amniotic ﬂuid, nor the fetus are sterile..

However, it is unclear where the fetal microbiota comes from, and when is the ﬁrst fetal exposition. Microorganism may pass through the
placenta and colonize the fetus ascending from the vagina, from the oral cavity, from the urinary track,
or from the intestinal lumen of the mother. Furthermore, bacterial richness and diversity were lower in the infant gut of babies born after
elective C-section and higher in emergency C-section, suggesting that colonization may be aﬀected
diﬀerently in both situations. It is important to highlight that emergency C-section and vaginal delivery
labor are frequently accompanied by rupture of fetal membranes, and exposing the fetus to maternal
vaginal bacteria . In contrast, Paenibacillus predominated in term placental specimens 
Other authors have proposed that the fetal intestinal microbiota derives from swallowed amniotic ﬂuid,
and that they may trigger an inﬂammatory response which leads to premature birth  Considering
that some Lactobacillus strains may possess potential anti-inﬂammatory activities, and could regulate
blood glucose levels in diabetic humans  the low abundance of Lactobacillus in placentas of low
birth weight neonates reported by Zheng et al. might be related to a pro-inﬂammatory status in
these pregnancies. Liu et al analyzed the gut microbiome in pregnant women aﬀected by preeclampsia. They showed an overall increase in pathogenic bacteria such as Clostridium perfringens and Bulleidia
moorei and a reduction in probiotic bacteria Coprococcus catus. Furthermore, the slowing down of intestinal transit, frequent drugs (sedatives, opioids, catecholamines),
and the alteration of the mechanisms of microbial elimination (decreased production of bile salts and
IgA, pharmacological alkalinization of pH, etc.) may also inﬂuence the alteration of the digestive
functions  Freedberg et al.