Competing interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist. Maternal fasting glucose concentrations were correlated positively with the rela-
tive abundance of phylum Actinobacteria and genus Acinetobacter, and negatively with the
phylum Bacteroidetes and the genus Prevotella  We hypothesized that maternal dietary
habits and metabolic characteristics may impact on the offspring gut microbiota. Materials and methods
Patients recruitment

All pregnant women routinely performed an oral glucose tolerance test at 24–28 gestational
weeks at the “Città della Salute e della Scienza” Hospital of Turin. Two dieticians checked all questionnaires for completeness, internal coherence
and plausibility 

Patients were considered to be compliant to the given dietary recommendations in the pres-
ence of all the following criteria: at least 20 g/day fiber consumption (or increasing fiber intake
more than 50% than enrolment), sugar reduction to less than 10% of total energy and abolition
of alcohol intake. Ethical aspects

The present study conforms to the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. Data relative to the type of delivery, birth weight, gestational age and the type of feeding were
extracted from medical records. Containers were immediately
stored at −80 ˚C for DNA extraction. ADONIS and ANOSIM statistical test were used
to detect significant differences in the overall microbial community by using the unweighted
UniFrac distance matrices or OTU table. Multiple regression analyses were performed to evaluate the associations between infant
microbial taxa abundance (dependent variable) and maternal nutrient intakes or laboratory
variables, after adjusting for gestational weight change, breastfeeding and Cesarean section
(Statistica, ver. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0226545.g002

Infant gut microbiota and maternal dietary habits and laboratory variables

No clear separation of the infant gut microbiota was observed (anosim P > 0.05) according to
the maternal compliance to dietary recommendations (S2 Fig). The correlation plot between
maternal nutrient intakes and infant gut microbiota showed a higher number of significant
associations with maternal variables at enrolment than at the study-end (Fig 3). Two out of 29 women were treated with insulin;
none received metformin. PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0226545 December 16, 2019

6 / 18

GDM offspring gut microbiota composition

Fig 3. Only correlations with P-values <0.002 are shown. The β–diversity calculation based on unweighted UniFrac distance matrices assessed by
Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) showed a separation of the infant microbiota only as a
function of the type of feeding (breast vs formula) as confirmed by ANOSIM and ADONIS sta-
tistical test (P <0.001) (Fig 4). At phylum level, we observed that breastfed infants showed a higher abundance of Actino-
bacteria and Proteobacteria, while in formula-fed infants we observed a higher proportion of
Firmicutes phyla (Fig 5A). Gut microbiota signature at sub-genus level

In order to explore the possible mother-to-infant gut microbiota transmission at sub-OTUs
level, we carried out oligotyping on sequences of Blautia, Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium
since these were the only genera showing a Shannon entropy index sufficient to identify all

PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0226545 December 16, 2019

8 / 18

GDM offspring gut microbiota composition

Fig 5. Relative phylum-level abundance profiles. We considered the dominant oligotypes
shared by mothers and their offspring only to explore possible mother-to-child oligotype
transmission. Accord-
ingly, these bacteria have been detected in the feces or meconium of full-term newborns in
several studies 

A distinct microbial composition was found in our breastfed GDM offspring when compar-
ing them with breastfed neonates from healthy controls, consistent with literature 
In particular, a significantly higher relative abundance of Escherichia and Parabacteroides was
found in our GDM infants. Con-
trarily to a few previous human studies showing that the infant gut microbiota was associated
with the last-trimester maternal diet  we found stronger associations between infant gut
bacteria composition and early maternal nutrition. This hypothesis needs
to be confirmed by further studies. Infant fecal samples were collected between the 3rd and the 5th days of life. Heatplot showing OTUs of
GDM patients at enrolment (red bars), study end (green bars) and their offspring (blue bars). Formal analysis: Valentina Ponzo, Ilario Ferrocino, Adriana Zarovska, Maria Bernadette

Amenta, Clara Monzeglio, Roberto Gambino, Simona Bo.