378

Turk J Urol 2018; 44 377-83


Among  these  treatment  approaches,  probiotic  applications  are 
among the promising alternatives. Urinary microbiota

The  structure  of  microbiome  in  humans  has  been  a  topic  of 
immense  interest  in  recent  years. Other less frequently found bacterial 
strains are Alloscardovia, Burkholderia, Jonquetella, Klebsiella, 
Saccharofermentans,  Rhodanobacter  and  Veillonella. It  has 
been reported that the urine collection method (midstream urine 
specimen,  first  voided  urine  specimen,  suprapubic  aspiration, 
transurethral  catheterization)  and  the  technique  to  identify  the 
UM  are  the  factors  that  could  lead  to  formation  of  different 
UM profiles. UM reported in healthy women is summarized in 
Table 1. Suitable  nutrients  for  these  bacteria  may  be 
found in the environment and at the same time virulence factors 
that  may  cause  infection  in  most  organisms  may  be  detected. Stapleton explained this condition by suggesting that unchange-
able host factors play a role in the colonization of these organ-
isms. Are the host and the 
bacteria  developing  all  together? are dominant bacteria and form UM 
which demonstrates antimicrobial activity. Since  the  vaginal  microflora  is  intended  to  be  corrected,  pro-
biotics  that  prevent  and  treat  genitourinary  infections  should 
contain Lactobacillus species. It has been shown that healthy 
microbial  populations  of  Lactobacillus  species  have  a  strong 
inhibitory effect on E. coliInfections treated using antibiotics 
reduce drug abuse, leading to drug resistance and render the nat-
ural barrier of the urinary system vulnerable to infections. It has also been emphasized 
that oral probiotics may be more comfortable for patients than 
for  vaginal  administration,  and  that  patient  compliance  with 
treatment may be better. Abad  and  Safdar  reviewed  25  clinical  trials  in  a  systematic 
review  they  published  in  2009  and  investigated  the  presence  of 
Lactobacillus-containing probiotics in the prevention and treatment 
of urogenital infections. It is also stated that 
additional studies are needed to clearly define the optimal dose 
and duration of application. In  a  recent 
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2 study, Stapleton et al. These patients were 
divided into two groups and for 10 weeks following an episode 
of cystitis placebo treatment was given to 48 patients, and other 
48  patients  received  intravaginal  probiotics  (Lactin-V)  contain-
ing  Lactobacillus  crispatus    The  results  of  this 
study showed that the incidence of recurrent UTIs in patients who 
received  intravaginal  Lactobacillus  treatment  decreased  signifi-
cantly compared to the placebo group. These risk factors include 
recent  sexual  intercourse,  use  of  spiral  or  condom  containing 
spermicide, history of UTI, and recent antibiotic use. The role of probiotics in women with recurrent urinary tract infections

381

Table 3. Other risk 
factors can be described as factors that cause vaginal coloniza-
tion of uropathogens and decrease in the number of Lactobacilli 
which pass through ascending route into the urinary system. in UTIs devel-
oped as a result of changes in the balance of vaginal flora in sexu-
ally active women have been reported in the literature, studies with 
postmenopausal women have not seem to be at an adequate level. Researchers noted that 
the combination was well tolerated and effective. Oral, vaginal, and liquid formulations 
are being used. Even the 
question of whether UM analysis should be done before treat-
ment of the patients has been revived. In clinical practice, an integrality should be established between 
scientific  evidence,  clinical  experience  and  patients’  desire. Author Contributions: Concept - T.A.; Design - T.A., T.K.; Supervision - 
T.A.; Resources - T.A.; Materials - T.A.; Data Collection and/or Processing 
- T.A., T.K.; Analysis and/or Interpretation - T.A., T.K.; Literature Search 
- T.A., T.K.; Writing Manuscript - T.A.; Critical Review - T.A., T.K. 

Conflict of Interest: Authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. Financial  Disclosure:  The  authors  declared  that  this  study  has 
received no financial support.