Several studies have demonstrated modulation of colonic 
microbiota by prebiotic inulin or inulin-type fructans. These included 
modulation  of  goblet  cells  to  enhance  mucosal  barrier 
function  a direct protective effect on intestinal barrier 
function  and inhibiting adherence of enteropathogenic 
Escherichia coli to Caco-2 enterocyte and Hep-2 epithelial 
cells . The effects of butyrate on the human colonic mucosa 
were examined following administration of butyrate enemas 
at physiologically relevant concentrations in healthy volun-
teers. Transcription analysis of microbiome revealed that 
butyrate induced differential expression of multiple genes 
involved in fatty acid oxidation, electron transport chain and 
oxidative stress pathways  In addition, butyrate led to 
dose-dependent decreases in visceral sensitivity  How-
ever, butyrate enemas administered to patients with UC in 
clinical remission had relatively minor effects on inflamma-
tory and oxidative stress parameters, although the selection 
of patients with chronically mild levels of inflammation and 
oxidative stress may have limited the scope of this study . This study highlighted a 
relationship between the microbiome and multiple extrinsic 
and host factors, comprising 60 dietary factors, 31 intrinsic 
factors, 19 drug categories, 12 diseases, and 4 smoking cat-
egories. PPIs depleted ben-
eficial bacteria such as the Ruminococcaceae family and 
Bifidobacterium, and increased potentially harmful bacte-
ria including Enterococcus, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus 
genera and Escherichia coli. Given the profound effect of PPIs on the gut microbiome 
and the fact that over 11% of population in The Netherlands 
and other European countries are using PPIs on prescription 
(not including over the counter use of PPIs) implies a major 
PPI-dependent influence on the gut microbiome taxonomy 
and function on a populational scale..

The human gut microbiota contains bacteria that are ben-
eficial to the host, and bacteria with pathogenic potential, 
termed ‘pathobionts’  An important role of beneficial 
bacteria is the metabolic production of SCFAs by cross-feed-
ing . Fiber-degrading bacteria include Ruminococcus 
callidus, Ruminococcus albus, Blautia obeum and Prevo-
tella spp. F. prausnitzii uses riboflavin (vitamin B2) as a media-
tor for extracellular electron transfer, as demonstrated in a 
microbial fuel cell system  A Human oxygen-Bacteria 
anaerobic (HoxBan) co-culture system has been developed 
in which F. prausnitzii was cultured with adherent Caco-2 
cells. Staphylococcus, Propionibac-
terium and Corynebacterium  Feeding formula milk 
is associated with increased bacterial diversity, increased 
prevalence of Bacteroides fragilis, Clostridium difficile, and 
E. coli, and a decreased prevalence of bifidobacteria . Further studies on the role of the maternal 
microbiome in development of the neonatal microbiome are 
necessary..

Preclinical studies have shown effects of the gut micro-
biota on nociceptive reflexes  feeding, emotional and 
social behavior  and brain neu-
rochemistry  The gut microbiota is essential for 
normal social development in the mouse and is implicated 
in neurodevelopmental disorders including autism spectrum 
disorder  Germfree mice have an exaggerated 
stress response compared with control animals. These mice 
also exhibit increased motor activity and lower anxiety-like 
behavior compared with control mice  Administra-
tion of the probiotic L. rhamnosus (JB-1) to mice reduced . lactis, 
Streptococcus thermophiles, and two Lactobacillus spp. produced significant changes in brain activity assessed by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), in response 
to an emotional faces attention task. plus Bifidobacterium bifidum produced a significant 
decrease in Beck Depression Inventory total scores, sig-
nificant decreases in serum insulin levels and serum high-
sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) concentrations in 
addition to a significant increase in plasma total glutathione 
concentrations  A RCT of patients with Alzheimer’s 
disease found that ingestion of a probiotic containing three 
Lactobacillus spp.