riage patterns far exceeded what was initially
suspected (Aagaard et al. Thus, it is critical-
ly important to ﬁrst discriminate when in the
course of the lifespan there is normal and antic-
ipated variation in the human microbiome,
in which body niches such variation occurs,
and what other covariates (such as host disease-
susceptible genotype, host metabolic milieu and
associated disorders, as well as age, gender, race/
ethnicity, and medications and diet) may con-
tribute to any observed variation. 2012b

posterior
fornix, and
mid-vagina

Romero et al. 2014b

Vaginal introitus,

Next-Gen

V3V5

Cross-

Characterized healthy,

sequencing

sectional

gravid vaginal
microbiome

Posterior fornix Next-Gen

V1V2

Longitudinal Characterized healthy,

sequencing

Walther-

Posterior fornix,

Next-Gen

V3V5

Longitudinal Characterized healthy,

V1V2

Longitudinal Characterized ﬁrst and
third trimester stool

V1V3 and
WGS

Population-

based, cross-
sectional

Anto´ nio
et al. Continued

Reference

Site

Technique(s)

Study design

Findings

Koenig et al. 2014b Colon, anus,

Next-Gen

V3V5

stool

sequencing

Nonhuman
primate

necrotizing colitis had
predominantly one
bacteria dominating

microbiome in VLBW
infants

neonatal microbiome
from birth to 4 mo
while examining mode
of delivery and feeding

Examined the role of
maternal IgA on
intestinal microbiome

Examined the role of
maternal diet on
juvenile microbiome

16S-Based Metagenomics

Sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene using Next-
Gen technology has recently been widely ex-
ploited to characterize the human microbiome
(Jonasson et al. This is challenging because of the lack of refer-
ence genomes, which results in de novo assembly
of microbial genomes with the potential to dis-
tort the species abundance and generate chime-
ric genomes (Pop 2009). However, re-
cent studies have shown the caution that must
be used when performing analysis such as CSTs
(Koren et al. An additional method that may be use-
ful to examine microbiome communities across
ethnicities is to use single nucleotide poly-
morphisms (SNPs) in mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), which provides more precision in
analysis (Ruiz-Pesini et al. We have re-
cently used this method in conjunction with
analysis of the microbiome through data lever-
aged from the HMP to examine associations

Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a023051

7

www.perspectivesinmedicine.org

A.L. Prince et al. Although we
did see similar microbiome communities as
the Ravel group, our analysis has provided a
molecular basis in which to describe the struc-
ture of microbiome communities (Ma et al. Using inferred
function analysis obtained from WGS sequenc-
ing data, the HMP consortium noted that a
decrease in the vaginal pH corresponded to
an increase in metabolic activity, speciﬁcally
when examining the phosphate transport sys-
tem (Human Microbiome Project 2012c). In women with healthy vaginal micro-
ﬂora, glycogen metabolism resulted in the pro-
duction of lactic acid although subjects with
BV had an increase in succinate production
(Macklaim et al. Thus, this study exempliﬁes the need
for further metatranscriptomic and metabolo-
mic studies involving large cohorts to under-
stand the role of the reproductive microbiome
in health and disease. Nearly every organ
system changes during pregnancy to promote
pregnancy maintenance or prepare for parturi-
tion. When com-

Perinatal Microbiome and Pregnancy

pared with the HMP nonpregnant reference
subjects, we found that pregnancy was associat-
ed with an altered vaginal microbiome and
marked by a decrease in alpha diversity at the
subgenus level . And on
probing at the species level using supervised
machine learning approaches, such as linear
discriminate analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe)
and Boruta feature selection, we discovered that
the vaginal microbiome during pregnancy was
enriched in L. iners, L. crispatus, Lactobacillus
jensenii, and Lactobacillus johnsonii (Aagaard
et al. On the other hand, 56.5% of gravi-
dae with a lactobacilli-diminished vaginal
microbiome during the ﬁrst trimester gained
prevalence of this genus. Haplogroup association;
Ethnic variation

Preterm birth

??? In a separate study, the
vaginal microbiome was examined longitudi-
nally during gestation using the V3V5 amplicon
of 16S rRNA in 12 subjects that were mostly
Caucasian (Walther-Anto´ nio et al. This group determined that infants
born vaginally had increased diversity in their
intestinal microbiome when compared with ce-
sarean delivered infants. Furthermore, a Canadian study using Next-
Gen sequencing techniques for the V5, V6, and
V7 regions of the 16S rRNA gene showed that
Escherichia shigella and Bacteroides were signiﬁ-
cantly diminished in the intestinal microbiome
of infants born by cesarean section (Azad et al. The ELGAN studies constituted a
large effort that systematically identiﬁed bacte-
ria from PTB placentas under this assumption
(Olomu et al. Vaginal microﬂora likely contribute to the initial seeding of the neonatal microbiome during vaginal deliveries,
but the discovery that the uterine environment may not be sterile suggests that colonization of the infant may
happen before birth. Although the vag-
inal microbiome may be implicated in these
neonatal diseases, signiﬁcant differences in
the abundance of placental bacteria have been
found when comparing preterm and term pla-
centas (Jones et al. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported in part by a
grant to Baylor College of Medicine from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the
Med into Grad Initiative.