The microbiological diagnosis of a ‘normal’ or dis-
turbed vaginal microbiota has historically been based on
the Nugent score, the current gold standard diagnostic
method that relies on Gram stain of vaginal smears 
The ‘normal’ vaginal microbiota in non-pregnant repro-
ductive aged women is understood to be dominated by
Lactobacillus species, while an abnormal microbiota
(defined as bacterial vaginosis) is characterized by low
abundance of lactobacilli and an overgrowth of anaer-
obic bacteria, such as Gardnerella vaginalis, Prevotella
spp., and Mycoplasma
hominis  In low-risk pregnant women, it has been
shown that the vaginal microbiota has reduced richness
lactobacilli
and diversity and increased abundance of
compared to those of non-pregnant women  An
abnormal microbiota has been previously associated
with preterm birth  but only a few in depth
culture-independent studies of the vaginal microbiota of
women who had preterm birth have been published,
with inconsistent conclusions . The objective of this study was to assess whether there
are differences in the vaginal microbiota composition,
early in gestation, of women who had spontaneous pre-
term birth (sPTB) and term delivery that could be fur-
ther investigated as diagnostic indicators of preterm
birth risk. Microbiome profiling was based on sequen-
cing of the cpn60 universal target, which provides higher
resolution than 16S rRNA variable regions and al-
lows the resolution of Gardnerella vaginalis subgroups,
a hallmark bacteria in the disturbed microbiota . Conventional PCR
Some Mollicutes (Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma) species
lack a cpn60 gene  Thus, we performed a family-
specific semi-nested PCR targeting the 16S rRNA gene
to detect Mollicutes  and a PCR targeting the
multiple-banded antigen gene to detect Ureaplasma spp. PCR products from U. parvum and U. urealyticum can
be differentiated by size . Hierarchical clustering of vaginal microbiota profiles
resulted in seven community state types
I
(CST):
(Lactobacillus crispatus dominated),
(Lactobacillus
gasseri dominated), III (Lactobacillus iners dominated),
IVA (Gardnerella vaginalis subgroup B or mix of differ-
ent species), IVC (G. vaginalis subgroup A dominated),
IVD (G. vaginalis
subgroup C dominated) and V
(Lactobacillus jensenii dominated) . Overall microbiota profiles did not cluster together
based on gestational age at delivery (Figs. The CST IVA was the
most heterogeneous group, represented by the domin-
ance of Lactobacillus delbrueckii, Bifidobacterium den-
tium, Bifidobacterium infantis, Atopobium vaginae,
Bifidobacterium breve or a mixture of different bacteria
species. The CST IVC was dominated by G. vaginalis
subgroup A and Megasphaera spp., Eight OTU/species were more abundant in the term
group in comparison with preterm, all of which were
considered rare members of the bacterial community
. were associated with both term and pre-
term. It is important to note that
read depth distribution did not differ between term and
preterm cohorts (t test, p > 0.05); therefore, the differ-
ences observed here in bacteria prevalence were unlikely
to be driven by cohort sequencing bias..

although we cannot address this question, it is possible
that sPTB driven by an ascending infection would be
more evident in a high-risk cohort or extreme preterm
cases. Differences in the
prevalence of several other taxa between groups were
also observed. For example, more women in the term
group had Prevotella amnii and P. tannerae detected in
their vaginal samples, whereas P. timonensis, P. bivia, P.
corporis and P. bucalis were more frequently detected in
samples from women in the preterm group (Table 3). have been previously associated with bac-
terial vaginosis and preterm labour  and our
results indicate that different Prevotella species might
have different roles in sPTB.