bioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/641019

The copyright holder for this preprint

doi: 

. 1D. 4% of the study population were pre-diabet-
ic with HbA1c% > 5.7. The  study’s  Research  Protocol  was  approved  by  an 
accredited  IRB  committee  and  all  study  participants  consented  to 
participating in the study. All study participants were at least 18 years 
old. Provided meals 

accounted for 66% of all meals and free meals 34%. Both  provided  and  free  meals  were  recorded  by  all  participants 
during  the  entire  study  period,  using  a  smartphone  app  (Bitesnap). A total of 9 distinct meals shown in Figure 2D were repeated 
over the course of the 14 day diet schedules (omnivore and vegetar-
ian/gluten-free)  to  collect  information  regarding  intra-person  vari-
ability; each repeat meal was consumed twice by study participants. In either of these cases, we dis-
carded the respective meal data. Meal  data  was  pre-processed  as  follows. For the samples provided by the 550 
participants in this study, 6587 unique microbial KOs were detected, a 
mean of 2941.9 per sample (s.d. Metabolic  and  signaling  pathway  activities  are  scored  using  ex-
pression levels of genes encoding specific protein functions (KEGG 
mappings  are  used  primarily),  compared  with  a  reference  cohort  of 
samples supplied by Viome customers. Protein and fat suppress and 
delay the response as shown. The fucose metabolism pathways activity score considers expres-
sion levels of all the genes that encode enzymes known to carry out 

5

biochemical reactions that result in processing and catabolic conver-
sions of fucose – a glycan that microbes may obtain from the host’s 
gut lining mucosal layer, or food components. The  score  is  derived 
with the same approach as the indoleacetate score, and assess the 
levels of activity of various pathway axes leading to microbial produc-
tion of glutamate (or glutamic acid). We also present predictions from the fixed-effect part of our model 
after  zeroing  out  certain  components. Two hypothetical meals A and 
B (similar to repeat meals from Figure 2D with carbs approximately 
25g and 50g respectively) are shown to illustrate that two users (blue 
and red lines) have the opposite glycemic responses (iAUC of 14 & 20 
vs iAUC of 37 & 27 respectively) due to the crossover of their iAUC 
response  lines  between  the  two  meals  —  this  effect  was  shown  in 
Figure 3D using the raw data. This is a 
gradient boosting machine [Chen 2016] built on the same predictors 
already discussed as well as a number of additional features. Gut microbiome activity contributes to individual variation in glycemic response in adultsbioRxiv preprint first posted online May. 19, 2019; 
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Boxplots show the interquartile range; whiskers cover the middle 95th percentile. It  is  evident  from  our  data  that  accounting  for  individual  differ-
ences is crucial in providing a full description of PPGRs. The two meals where intra-person 
variability  is  close  to  inter-person  variability  are  meals  that  contain 
little to no carbohydrates. This process is often carried out by microbes known as mucin 
degraders,  such  as  certain  species  of  genus  Ruminococcus  [Crost 
2016].  We  therefore  hypothesize  that  higher  fucose  consumption 
activity,  as  reflected  by  the  microbiome  pathway  score,  may  be  as-
sociated with microbiomes of those individuals who are either more 
likely  to  fast  or  whose  internal  ecosystem  and  overall  body  state 
resembles the conditions of fasting or calorie deprivation. 4C: Actual glycemic response (iAUC) against (a) calories, 
(b) carbs, (c) predictions from model including all fixed 
effects (standard linear regression), and (d) the fit of the full 
mixed-effects model. Glutamine  production  pathways  score,  when  “Low,”  showed  a 
direct relationship with higher PPGR. Modeling methods and model evolution
The  multilevel  mixed  effects  model  presented  first  in  the  previous 
section was deliberately chosen to better understand the incremental 
effects  of  the  significant  features,  especially  the  functional  gut  mi-
crobiome  activity  features.