the commonality that relates both BV and vaginal pH to HPV
infection (independent of HIV) is the RA of certain Lactobacil-
lus species, most notably L. crispatus. Women with rapidly progression of
HIV-associated immunosuppression had a lower CD4+ T-cell
count than HIV-infected women with stable immune status
and HIV-uninfected women (P < .001). HIV-uninfected
women were less likely than HIV-infected women to use con-
doms in the past 6 months (P = .001). Self-report of Trichomo-
nas vaginalis infection, BV, candidiasis, or STIs within the past. Figure 2 displays a heat map of the RA data for the 25 most
abundant genera or species and how they cluster within each
CST. L. crispatus dominated CST I, CST II was dominated by
Lactobacillus gasseri, both CST III and IV-A were dominated
by Lactobacillus iners, and CST V was dominated by Lactobacil-
lus jensenii. Figure 2 additionally shows the SDI for each study
visit, and as expected CSTs I through IV-A and V (each dom-
inated by a single Lactobacillus species) had a low SDI, com-
pared with CST IV-B. The ﬁgure also presents the proportion
of oncogenic HPV–positive women-visits for each CST..

Table 3 shows multivariate GEE logistic regression models of
the associations between CSTs and the prevalent detection of
HPV. While CST I (L. crispatus dominated)
had an inverse association with detection of any HPV and espe-
cially with any oncogenic HPV, the relationship was of border-
line statistical signiﬁcance (eg, odds ratio [OR] for oncogenic
HPV was 0.30 [95% conﬁdence interval {CI},
.08–1.11];
P = .07). Nor did exclusion
of pH from the above models discernibly alter any ﬁndings
(data not shown). The implications may be
especially important for HIV-infected women, since the inverse
L. crispatus–oncogenic HPV associations we observed were
independent of HIV and host immune status and therefore
indicate similar potential beneﬁt among those with a low
CD4+ T-cell count..

IV-B, lowa Lactobacillus
I, L. crispatus. D-lactic acid (but not L-lactic acid) levels have been
inversely associated with the ability of HIV to transverse cervi-
covaginal mucous  An antiviral effect of D-lactic acid would
be consistent with our results for oncogenic HPV, since L. crisp-
atus produces D and L isoforms of lactic acid, whereas L. iners. On the other hand, bacteriocins produced by
L. crispatus may have antiviral effects. L. crispatus has additionally been
noted to have potential immunomodulatory activity. Relation of Lactobacillus crispatus Relative Abundance to Detection of Human Papillomavirus (HPV). This was addressed in part
by the use of efﬁcient analytic methods able to incorporate all
available serial HPV and microbiome data. The study
also focused on only premenopausal African American women,
which was done to reduce the number of factors being studied..

In summary, our results suggest a beneﬁcial effect of L. crisp-
atus on the burden of HPV in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected
women that is unrelated to pH. Further research to better un-
derstand these relationships is strongly warranted, including
large prospective cohort studies and laboratory research to un-
derstand the mechanisms that underlie the relation of the cer-
vicovaginal microbiota with HPV infection.