2014) and mammalian carni-
vores (Menke et al. Although the report
provided useful insight into the microbiomes of adults
of these three species, it primarily emphasized the over-
all gap in knowledge regarding the identity of microor-
ganisms and the roles that microbial communities play
in pathogen transmission, infectivity and pathogenicity
within tick vectors (Clay & Fuqua 2010). Our comparison of the microbial community in
ﬁeld-collected larvae and freshly hatched,
laboratory-
reared, unfed larvae allowed us to examine the tick
microbiome prior to exposure to the ﬁeld environment,
thus examining the potential for transovarial transmis-
sion of bacteria. In addition to investigating the internal
microbial communities found within whole ticks, we
focused on the microbiomes within two speciﬁc tissues
in adult female ticks, salivary glands and the midgut,
as these are important for maintenance and transmis-
sion of many tick-borne pathogens associated with
I. scapularis (Spielman et al. © 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

M I C R O B I O M E O F B L A C K L E G G E D T I C K S 4965

DNA isolation

All laboratory procedures were performed under a lam-
inar ﬂow hood (AirClean Systems)
to ensure that
microorganisms from the surrounding environment did
not contaminate the samples; negative controls were
used throughout. Illumina adaptor sequences were
attached as tails to the PCR primers. The ~460-bp bands were excised from the gel
and puriﬁed using QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qia-
gen), with elution in 40 lL of nuclease-free, PCR-grade
ddH2O.

thus

samples

allowing all

Library preparation. Samples were indexed using 25 lL KAPA HiFi HotS-
tart Ready Mix (Kapa Biosystems), 10 lL sdH2O, 5 lL
Nextera XT Index 1 Primer, 5 lL Nextera XT Index 2
Primer and 5 lL puriﬁed PCR product as suggested by
Illumina. The sequence processing workﬂow is
depicted in Fig. The UPARSE pipeline includes de novo chi-
mera removal, followed by referenced-based chimera
removal using the UCHIME algorithm and the GOLD
16S rRNA gene database (Reddy et al. All four measures were calculated based on sequences
rareﬁed at a depth of 100 000 among life stage cate-
gories and a depth of 200 000 for whole adult females,
female midguts and salivary glands based on the lowest
minimum sequence depth for each category. phylogenetically

informed weighted

b-Diversity was calculated using jackkniﬁng (use of
subsets of available data) at a rarefaction depth of
100 000 sequences for developmental stage categories
and a depth of 200 000 for whole adult females and
their organs in QIIME. First, we
isolated 4 315 478 sequences matching the genus Rick-
ettsia using the ‘ﬁlter_fasta.py’ script in QIIME and col-
lapsed them into 91 519 unique sequences using FASTX-
(Gordon 2011). This was carried out using the evolutionary place-
ment analysis (EPA) procedure in RAXML. Field-collected larvae, nymphs and males exhibited sim-
ilar levels of a-diversity, but males contained the richest
bacterial communities when abundance was taken into
consideration (Table S2, Supporting information, Fig. OTUs were assigned to 332 taxa (Table S3, Supporting
information). The remaining OTUs were

Larvae  
(Lab) 

Larvae  
(Field) 

Nymphs

Males

Females

Larvae  
(Lab) 

Larvae  
(Field) 

Nymphs

Males

Females

(B)

50

40

30

20

10

0

Phylogenetic diversity

(D)

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Simpson's index

4968 C . Both Borrelia and Anaplasma were only found in
nymphs and adults. across

Bacterial

F = 9.33,

R2 = 0.79,

communities

P = 0.001). Dermacentor and Haemaphysalis ticks (Piesman & Gage
2004), Rickettsia amblyommii isolated from the American
lone star tick Amblyomma americanum (Stromdahl et al. Distinct
clustering was observed for each organ and the whole
tick when abundance data were not considered (un-
weighted UniFrac PCoA) explaining 39.53% (Axis 1)
and 22.35% (Axis 2) of the variation . B) Weighted Unifrac distances, abundance is considered. Conﬁdence ellipsoids
around samples display degree of variation. [ 2015), with
Rickettsia occurring in the highest proportion in

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

blacklegged ticks (Moreno et al. Recently, the name Rick-
ettsia buchneri has been proposed for this species (Kurtti
et al. We interpret this as an indication of sufﬁcient evolution-
ary informativeness
identiﬁcation of our
sequences at the clade level grosso modo, combined with
the observation of greater divergence patterns of this
locus in Rickettsia. As Rickettsia
represented over 99% of the taxa in lab larvae and stea-
dily decreased to an average of 66% in adult males
throughout development, it seems likely that other bac-
teria replace Rickettsia. An earlier study identi-
ﬁed Rickettsia in only half of their I. scapularis nymphs
examined (n = 10) compared to all of the larval samples
(n = 10) and concluded that the decrease in Rickettsia
between the larval and nymphal stages was due to the
possibility that male ticks lose Rickettsia species through
each subsequent moult (Noda et al. The high relative abundance of Rick-
ettsia observed in females (mean = 97.8%) was observed
at an even higher relative abundance in the lab-raised
larvae  potentially due to certain bacteria found
in females that are not transferred to their offspring. It is
likely that ﬁeld-collected ticks acquired these bacteria
in their host-seeking environment, where they spend
the majority of their life cycle, potentially via spiracle,
oral or genital openings (adults only), as opposed to
during a bloodmeal. This work was partially funded by

4974 C .