relationships
between internal microorganisms and I. scapularis have
focused on commonly studied human pathogens. Furthermore,
infection with
B. burgdorferi has been shown to affect questing beha-
viour and movement of
this tick, possibly affecting
survival and/or pathogen transmission (Lefcort &
Durden 1996). However, little is known regarding the
range of microbes the tick comes in contact with or
maintains throughout
its entire life cycle. This tick
experiences a 2-year life cycle, feeding once per life
stage (larva, nymph, and adult) on vertebrate blood. for additional symbioses
Consequently,
I. scapularis may be
involving microbes that beneﬁt
quite high..

blacklegged ticks (Moreno et al. Rickettsia are obligate, intracellular bacteria associ-
ated with eukaryotes,
including arthropods (Perlman
et al. Although many Rickettsia species are non-
pathogenic (Ahantarig et al. 2015) and is believed to be
the only Rickettsia species found in this tick (Gillespie
et al. Recently, the name Rick-
ettsia buchneri has been proposed for this species (Kurtti
et al. Although
individual short sequences could not be assigned to sin-
gle tree branches with full conﬁdence, they were mostly
assigned to neighbouring branches within a clade of sis-
ter endosymbionts isolated from the same tick species. We interpret this as an indication of sufﬁcient evolution-
ary informativeness
identiﬁcation of our
sequences at the clade level grosso modo, combined with
the observation of greater divergence patterns of this
locus in Rickettsia..

Given the overwhelming abundance of Rickettsia
across life stages and organs, we attempted to dissect
its subgeneric diversity using phylogenetic criteria and
found the vast majority of the sequences to cluster
with bona ﬁde Ixodes tick rickettsial endosymbionts. I. scapularis is known so far to harbour one
endosymbiotic rickettsial species (Gillespie et al. 2015), but ﬁner taxonomic resolution using
more informative genetic markers at
the subgeneric
and strain levels may provide additional insight into
population-level variation and adaptation to intracellu-
lar
life in coexistence with pathogens. Our study
focused on an area with one of the highest pathogen
prevalence levels in blacklegged ticks. Future studies
examining the functional interplay between tick micro-
biomes and pathogens over a larger geographic region
are warranted.