2014) and mammalian carni-
vores (Menke et al. Although the report
provided useful insight into the microbiomes of adults
of these three species, it primarily emphasized the over-
all gap in knowledge regarding the identity of microor-
ganisms and the roles that microbial communities play
in pathogen transmission, infectivity and pathogenicity
within tick vectors (Clay & Fuqua 2010). 2014); R. turanicus in Israel (Lalzar et al. For
example, infection of blacklegged ticks by A. phagocy-
tophilum (the causative agent of granulocytic anaplas-
mosis in humans) has been shown to induce protein
expression that increases cold tolerance and, depend-
ing on weather patterns, may aid in tick survival
(Neelakanta et al. In addition to investigating the internal
microbial communities found within whole ticks, we
focused on the microbiomes within two speciﬁc tissues
in adult female ticks, salivary glands and the midgut,
as these are important for maintenance and transmis-
sion of many tick-borne pathogens associated with
I. scapularis (Spielman et al. © 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

M I C R O B I O M E O F B L A C K L E G G E D T I C K S 4965

DNA isolation

All laboratory procedures were performed under a lam-
inar ﬂow hood (AirClean Systems)
to ensure that
microorganisms from the surrounding environment did
not contaminate the samples; negative controls were
used throughout. Based on Illumina’s protocol and the out-
comes of preliminary PCR optimization procedures, the
thermal cycling conditions consisted of an initial denat-
uration at 98 °C for 3 min, followed by 30 cycles of
98 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 30 s, fol-
lowed by a ﬁnal extension for 5 min at 72 °C on a
Techne Prime Elite Thermal Cycler (Bibby Scientiﬁc). A subset of
the PCR products for all
sample pools and the one negative were indexed
using 25 lL KAPA SYBR FAST qPCR Master Mix
(Kapa Biosystems), 10 lL sdH2O, 5 lL Nextera XT
Index 1 Primer, 5 lL Nextera XT Index 2 Primer and
5 lL puriﬁed PCR product. The UPARSE pipeline includes de novo chi-
mera removal, followed by referenced-based chimera
removal using the UCHIME algorithm and the GOLD
16S rRNA gene database (Reddy et al. The adonis function, that performs a permuta-
tional multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA),
was used, with 999 permutations, to determine the per
cent variation explained by developmental stages, as
well as
size for both
weighted and unweighted UniFrac distance matrices. First, we
isolated 4 315 478 sequences matching the genus Rick-
ettsia using the ‘ﬁlter_fasta.py’ script in QIIME and col-
lapsed them into 91 519 unique sequences using FASTX-
(Gordon 2011). This was carried out using the evolutionary place-
ment analysis (EPA) procedure in RAXML. In an effort to
reach a good trade-off between speed and accuracy, we
restricted the number of candidate branches for place-
ment to 10% of the total 479 branches using a heuristic. The remaining OTUs were

Larvae  
(Lab) 

Larvae  
(Field) 

Nymphs

Males

Females

Larvae  
(Lab) 

Larvae  
(Field) 

Nymphs

Males

Females

(B)

50

40

30

20

10

0

Phylogenetic diversity

(D)

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Simpson's index

4968 C . Seven taxa were
found in all female and all freshly hatched larvae sam-
ples (matching to the genera Rickettsia, Phyllobacterium,
Burkholderia, Sphingomonas, Pseudomonas and the families
Comamonadaceae
and Oxalobacteraceae); however,
females harboured more observed OTUs than freshly
hatched larvae . the developmental
stages were signiﬁcantly different according to a PER-
MANOVA (unweighted F = 4.16, R2 = 0.62, P = 0.001,
weighted
The
unweighted UniFrac (which does not account for abun-
dance data) PCoA explained 41.78% (Axis 1) and
12.03% (Axis 2) of the variation among developmental
stages and showed clustering separation for lab-raised
larvae and females . Taxonomic classiﬁcation includes genus when possible. Rickettsia represents the most
abundant genus for all samples, but decreased in relative abundance from larvae to nymphs to adult males. 3 Principal coordinate analysis of b-diversity measures for all developmental stages. Dermacentor and Haemaphysalis ticks (Piesman & Gage
2004), Rickettsia amblyommii isolated from the American
lone star tick Amblyomma americanum (Stromdahl et al. At a rar-
efaction depth of 200 000 sequences, whole females
exhibited the highest a-diversity for observed number
of OTUs and phylogenetic diversity, with female mid-
guts exhibiting the lowest measures . 4 Measures of a-diversity for whole female ticks, midguts and salivary glands. B) Weighted Unifrac distances, abundance is considered. Conﬁdence ellipsoids
around samples display degree of variation. [ 2015), with
Rickettsia occurring in the highest proportion in

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

blacklegged ticks (Moreno et al. IBM Research-Almaden and by Fordham University’s Research
John McCloskey Research Grant
Support Grant and Fr.