Development of the premature infant gut microbiota
has recently been shown to evolve in a patterned pro-
gression associated with postmenstrual age (PMA; gesta-
tional age at birth plus week of
life), dominated by
Bacilli at early PMA, followed by Gammaproteobacteria
and then Clostridia [5]. In our study, we introduce two
models to identify associations between the microbiota,
nutritional intake, medication, and preterm infant growth:
a categorical model based on three quantitatively defined
“phases” (P1, P2, and P3) that corresponds to three states
of the microbiota and a PMA-based model with the three
composition-based phases replaced by two constant time
periods identified as early (< 34 weeks PMA; n = 362 data
points) and late (≥ 34 weeks PMA; n = 343 data points).
Our analyses identified more significant associations with
phase, which led us to use the phase-based framework to
explore potential functional relationships between the pre-
term microbiota, nutrition, and growth.
We first defined the phases and phase transition points
in longitudinal gut microbiota samples from two cohorts
of preterm and full-term infants from the multicenter
Prematurity and Respiratory Outcomes Program (PROP)
and Respiratory Pathogens Research Center (RPRC) at the
University of Rochester School of Medicine. The distin-
guishing composition and putative functional capacity of
each phase was assessed, along with the properties of tran-
sitions between phases. Our data suggest phase-specific
microbiota functions and demonstrate the effect of nutri-
tional intake and clinical factors on phase and period-
specific microbiota development. Furthermore, our results
in-
indicate significant associations between nutritional
take, the phase of the microbiota, and preterm infant
growth. Finally, we demonstrate that transition out of
phase 1 (P1) occurs simultaneously with transition from
meconium to normal postnatal stool, a milestone that can
be unambiguously identified at the bedside.
development in a cohort of 95 preterm and 2 full-term in-
fants from PROP and 23 full-term infants from RPRC at
the University of Rochester School of Medicine. A total of
719 rectal swab samples were collected weekly from the
PROP preterm infants while in the NICU, spanning PMA
from 24 to 46 weeks with a good representation across ges-
tational ages. A total of 2 rectal swabs were collected from
the 2 PROP full-term infants, and 46 rectal swabs from the
23 RPRC full-term infants: one near birth (≤ 20 day of life
[DOL]) and—for the RPRC subjects only—a second at
1 month of age (20 < DOL ≤ 50) (Table 1). The longitudinal
analyses included 719 samples from preterm and 48
samples from full-term infants. Relevant available age
metrics were gestational age at birth, day of
life
(DOL), and PMA. To select the age metric for our
analyses, we used functional data analysis to fit nutri-
tion and growth variables, as well as the abundance of
operational taxonomic units (OTUs)
in the micro-
biota, first using PMA and then DOL as the age vari-
able [21]. The overall fitting variance using PMA was
lower for OTU abundance and, for most metrics of
growth and nutrition, consistent with previous findings
that the temporal dynamics of the preterm infant gut
microbiota correspond better to PMA than to DOL [5].
Table 1 Demographic and clinical variables
Variables (N = 120)
Necrotizing enterocolitis diagnosis
(medical, surgical, N)b
Received antimicrobials (any, ≥ 7 days, N)c
Received diuretics (any, N)c
Received postnatal corticosteroids (any, N)c
Received proton pump inhibitors (any, N)c
Received H2 receptor antagonist (any, N)c
Received motility agents (any, N)c
aOther race includes those unknown
bNecrotizing enterocolitis diagnosis (medical, surgical) diagnosis for one baby
is unknown because of early withdrawal from study
c Medication received within 1 week prior to microbiome sample collection.
Sample collection occurred approximately weekly throughout the majority of
the hospitalization as clinically permitted. If the interval between samples was
greater than 7 days apart, then short portions of the hospital stay are not
covered by this analysis. Therefore, subjects who had the respective
medication, but not within 1 week prior to sample collection, are not counted
in this summary table
We quantified the pattern of progression of the gut
microbiota with respect to the order of phase transition
events using the sequence of phases observed in the
consecutive samples from each individual infant to com-
pute the transition probabilities between the phases. For
each phase, the probability that the subsequent sample
from the same individual will be in the same phase is
higher than the probability of transitioning to a different
phase (Fig. 1d). Transition from one phase to the next
consecutive phase is more likely than the transition from
a higher phase to a lower phase (e.g., P2 to P1) or from
P1 to P3 directly. Accordingly, we found a strong rela-
tionship between PMA and microbiota phases (Fig. 1e).
For this preterm cohort, 70% of all P1 samples were
observed at PMA of 29 weeks or less; 84% of all P2
samples were observed from 28 weeks to 36 weeks
PMA; and 78% of all P3 samples at 33 weeks or later.
Eighty six percent of all samples from 37 weeks PMA
and later were in P3, suggesting that preterm infant
24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46
Post Menstrual Age In Weeks
Fig. 1 Overview of the preterm infant gut microbiota phases and properties. a The decision tree for classifying a microbiota sample into one of
the three phases. b A composition bar chart with each sample grouped by phases 1–3 (P1–P3) from left to right. Green, gray, orange, and blue
represent Bacilli, Gammaproteobacteria, Clostridia, and Bacteroidia, respectively. c Bar charts representing the average weighted UniFrac distance
between consecutive samples of each individual infant. The bars are grouped into three major categories from left to right according to the
initial phase of the consecutive samples being assessed. Each bar within a category corresponds to the phase of the second consecutive sample.
The height of the bar indicates the average dissimilarity between consecutive samples of the corresponding phases, with exact values included in
the table below the graph. d Bar charts indicating the transition probability between consecutive samples within an individual. The groupings
and bars within each group indicate the phases of the first and second sample of a pair of consecutive samples, respectively, and are ordered as
described in c. Transition probabilities are included in the table below the graph. e The distribution of samples over corrected gestational age in
weeks. The dashed line separates the samples into early (< 34 weeks PMA) and late period (≥ 34 weeks PMA), based on functional variance of
microbiota composition across all 81 individuals. f Bar charts showing the average composition of the samples in each phase at the genus level,
with prominent genera labeled. For two Enterobacteriacaea and one Clostridiacaeae, the genus could not be determined and the family is indicated
instead (See Additional file 2: Comment on Figure 3F). Lines connecting segments between phases indicate that the segment represents the same
genus in each bar. A complete list of the genera represented here and their relative abundances can be found in Additional file 4: Table S3
The longitudinal patterns of rectal microbiota phase
transitions for 95 preterm and 25 full-term subjects are
shown in Fig. 3a relative to gestational age at birth.
Growth of the subjects is shown as change in weight Z-
score from birth to NICU discharge for preterms and
birth to 1 month for full terms. Comparison of preterm
infants in P1 (N = 42; mean birth GA (gestational age) =
27.43 weeks) with those in P2 or P3 (N = 55; mean birth
GA = 30.29 weeks) at the time of their first microbiota
sample showed significant difference (p < 0.0001)
in
mean birth GA between these two groups. Furthermore,
the most premature subjects (< 29 weeks birth GA) were
significantly more likely to be in P1 than the full-term
subjects at their first sample (61.8 vs 32.0%, p = 0.025).
The change in weight Z-score is associated with length
of time in each phase, with the lowest change (at the red
end of the spectrum in Fig. 3a) in subjects (i.e., JE573,
J5028, J1B12) who remain in phase 1 or 2 for prolonged
periods. The largest negative change in weight Z-scores
was associated with delays in transition to a P3 gut
microbiota (p = 0.0023). Delayed achievement of P3 was
also associated with prematurity, with full-term subjects
reaching P3 by 1 month of age much more frequently
than preterm subjects (100 vs 53.4%, p = 0.0001).
Similarly, greater PMA-adjusted growth by discharge
(preterms) or 1 month (full terms) was observed in
the full-term subjects than in the preterm subjects
(mean change in weight Z-score − 0.033 vs − 1.269,
p ≈ 0.0). Eleven infants were treated for necrotizing
enterocolitis (NEC) and two of these died of the dis-
In those who survived, NEC was frequently
ease.
followed by more than 2 weeks in P2 (J6B6F, J900B,
J00F9, J2B52, and J8648). One infant who required a
jejunal ostomy remained in P1 for an extended period
of time (J0BE5). Thus, prolonged periods in P1 and P2
may represent the effects of lengthy antibiotic treat-
ment and/or lack of enteral nutrition. Although the
number of cases is insufficient for statistical assess-
ment, our data suggest an association between delayed
transition to P3 and a long-standing feeding intoler-
ance in the NICU that results in administration of
elemental amino acid-based formula (maroon ‘E’
in
the right-hand margin of Fig. 3a).
Early and late periods of the preterm infant microbiome
To demonstrate the utility of modeling the microbiome
as three compositionally defined phases, we compared
gut microbiota development using two constant time pe-
riods based solely on PMA. Specifically, all preterm longi-
tudinal samples (n = 705) were divided into two groups or
periods of equal functional variance based on fitted micro-
biota taxa abundance, an early period (< 34 weeks PMA;
n = 362) and a late period (≥ 34 weeks PMA; n = 343)
(Fig. 1e and Additional file 2: Figure S5). This separ-
ation into early and late periods was used as an un-
biased point of comparison to assess the utility of the
phase-based approach relative to a purely temporal
approach in the context of a nutrition-medication-
microbiota-growth model. Using linear mixed-effects re-
gression models as described for the phase-based nutrition
analysis (Methods-Model A) with the weight Z-score as
proportion of calories from enteral feeding are signifi-
cantly associated with the phase of the microbiota in both
periods. A higher proportion of nutritional lipids is con-
sistently positively associated with the infant gut micro-
biota being in P2 and negatively associated with P1, while
a higher proportion of proteins is positively associated
with a P1 microbiota at an earlier PMA, negatively associ-
ated with being in P1 at later PMA, and negatively associ-
ated with being in P2 irrespective of PMA. Antibiotics are
positively associated with a P2 gut microbiota, significant
in the later PMA period (p = 0.0015), and nearly
significant in the earlier period (p = 0.0778). The vari-
ables used in these analyses, as well as their p values
and beta estimates, are provided in Table 3A–B and
Additional file 9: Table S8A–B.
aResults of mixed-effects logistic regression analysis between nutrition/medication and microbiome phases during the EARLY period (< 34 weeks PMA). Phases 1
and 2 are considered as binary outcome variables (yes/no) and are analyzed separately. Beta values are the estimated regression coefficients and p values are
computed from the likelihood ratio tests. For clarity, only significant associations are reported in this table. Full results are reported in Additional file 9: Table S8A
bResults of mixed-effects logistic regression analysis between nutrition/medication and microbiome phases during the LATE period (≥ 34 weeks PMA). Phases 1
and 2 are considered as binary outcome variables (yes/no) and are analyzed separately. Beta values are the estimated regression coefficients and p values are
computed from the likelihood ratio tests. For clarity, only significant associations are reported in this table. Full results are reported in Additional file 9: Table S8B
sought to identify dynamic aspects of host biology that
correspond to phase transition. Emerging evidence sug-
gests that the initial newborn infant gut microbiota is
partially acquired by maternal transmission from the
amniotic fluid and placenta before birth [10–13]. In
utero, the fetus swallows large quantities of amniotic
fluid that is colonized with bacteria in those mothers
who deliver prematurely [11, 33]. Genera in common
between amniotic fluid and the meconium, the earliest
fecal material passed by infants, suggests that pioneer
colonizers of
the infant gut are from this maternal
source. In addition to amniotic fluid that has been con-
sumed, meconium is formed from sloughed off gastro-
intestinal epithelial cells which are generated as debris
during periods of rapid digestive tract development and
convolution of the intestinal epithelial surface. It has
in preterm infants, passage of
been established that
meconium as stool is both delayed and prolonged and is
observed well beyond the first stool, with final clearance
occurring up to several weeks after birth [34].
To identify potential associations between the presence
of meconium and P1 of the microbiota, we examined the
relationship between clearance of the meconium from the
stool and the initial transition of the microbiota out of P1
(Fig. 3b). Two infants remained in P1 (J7F5C and J8560),
but did not survive beyond the first weeks in the NICU.
Two infants cleared their meconium by discharge but
their last microbiota sample was still in P1 (J0BE5 and
J5633). The remaining 38 infants that were observed to be
in P1 at their first rectal sample were included in a linear
regression model using gestational age at birth and the
DOL of their last P1 sample before their initial transition
to another phase as explanatory variables, with the DOL
of meconium clearance as the dependent variable. This
model explained approximately half of the variation in the
day of life of stool transition from meconium to normal
infant stool (R-square = 0.51). Phase transition was found
to be highly significant in this model (p < 0.0001), while
gestational age at birth and the intercept did not exhibit
significant associations (p values = 0.35 and 0.23, respect-
ively), indicating that the time of stool transition was not
associated with prematurity or PMA once microbiota
phase transition was controlled for. On average, the last
P1 sample before the initial phase transition occurred
4.7 days before stool transition was observed (Fig. 3b). To
assess the similarity between the meconium and P1
microbiota samples, we first categorized all 721 samples
as meconium or not, depending on whether the sample
was collected from an infant that had not transitioned to
normal stool, and as P1 or not, according to the decision
tree. A majority of meconium samples were in P1 (59.8%)
and P1 samples in meconium (64.4%) (Additional file 2:
Figure S6A). We next used linear regression analysis to
identify the taxa significantly associated with meconium
The succession of gut microbiota in our preterm co-
horts revealed a low level of initial diversity in P1, which
is dominated by facultative anaerobes, followed by in-
creasing diversity and abundance of obligate anaerobes
and a shift to fermentation based metabolism in P3.
Consistent with other studies, we determined that this
programmed, non-random developmental succession of
microbiota is largely determined by PMA [5, 6]. What
drives this patterned succession toward a homeostatic
relationship between the infant and colonizing microbiota
is not known, but likely involves complex interactions be-
tween the mucosal immune system as well as metabolic
interactions within the gut microbial community and the
surrounding tissue and microenvironment, which remain
dynamic during periods of gastrointestinal development in
early life. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) produced by
Paneth cells (PCs) in the epithelium of the small intestine
establish a feedback loop between the host and com-
mensal bacteria that is essential for intestinal homeostasis
and microbiota colonization [39]. Although the number of
immune-competent PCs are significantly higher after
37 weeks of gestation when compared to preterm infants,
the number of immune-competent PCs are higher in in-
fants with GA above 29 weeks compared to infants with
GA under 29 weeks [42]. This period around PMA
29 weeks corresponds to the PMA ~ 30 weeks where we
observed the transition from P2 to P3 in our preterm co-
horts, suggesting that PC AMPs are one factor that modu-
lates the shift toward a community dominated by obligate
anaerobes. Streptococcus and Veillonella in P3, which fre-
quently co-occur and interact metabolically in microbial
communities, through the production of lactic acid by
Streptococcus which is used as a carbon source by Veillo-
nella [43]. Similar metabolic interactions that contribute
Methods
Clinical methods
All study procedures were approved by the University of
Rochester School of Medicine Internal Review Board (IRB)
(Protocol # 37933). Infants included in the study were from
the multicenter Prematurity and Respiratory Outcomes
Program (PROP) and the Respiratory Pathogens Research
Center (RPRC) at the University of Rochester School of
Medicine and were cared for in a single-center Newborn
Intensive Care Unit (NICU). Clinical care in terms of type
and duration of antibiotic treatment, corticosteroids, di-
uretics, motility agents, and H2 receptor agonists as well as
the timing and volume of feeds was at the discretion of
treating physicians. Rectal swabs were used to collect fecal
material from consented infants from 24 PMA until dis-
charge and again at 6 months and 1 year for preterms and
birth and 1 month for full terms. Each sample was collected
by inserting a sterile Copan flocked nylon swab (Copan
Diagnostics, Murrieta, CA) moistened with normal saline
beyond the sphincters into the rectum and then twirled.
Each sample was immediately placed into sterile buffered
saline and stored at 4 °C for no more than 4 h. Samples
were processed daily, which involved extraction of the fecal
material from the swab in a sterile environment and imme-
diately frozen at − 80 °C until DNA extraction. All sampling
swabs, plasticware, buffers, and reagents used for sample
collection and extraction of nucleic acids were sterile and
UV-irradiated to insure no contamination from sources
outside of the infant and sample.
is the sum of total calories per kilogram per day for the
7 days prior to sampling. The proportion of enteral calo-
ries computed as the ratio of (grams of lipids/protein
per kilogram) divided by (total calories per kilogram) for
each day, summed over the 7 days prior to sampling.
“Enteral calorie ratio past week” was computed as the
total calories per kilogram consumed enterally in the
week prior to sampling divided by the total calories per
kilogram consumed (enterally and parenterally) in the
same period.
Genomic DNA extraction
Total genomic DNA was extracted with a modified
method using the QIAGEN Fecal DNA kit and FastPrep
mechanical
lysis (MPBio, Solon, OH). 16S ribosomal
RNA (rRNA) was amplified with Phusion High-Fidelity
polymerase (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and
dual indexed primers specific to the V3-V4 hypervari-
able regions (319F: 5′ ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG
3′; 806R: 3′ ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG 5′) [57].
Amplicons were pooled and paired-end sequenced on
an Illumina MiSeq (Illumina, San Diego, CA) in the
University of Rochester Genomics Research Center.
Each sequencing run included (1) positive controls con-
sisting of a 1:5 mixture of Staphylococcus aureus, Lacto-
coccus lactis, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Streptococcus
mutans, and Escherichia coli and (2) negative controls
consisting of sterile saline.
16S rRNA microbiota data pre-processing
To ensure the quality of statistical analysis, microbiome
samples with < 12,000 total reads were excluded from the
subsequent data analyses. Microbiota abundance data
were
(level 2:
PHYLUM–level 7: SPECIES). For characterization of the
microbiota phases and within phase abundance analyses,
raw relative abundance values were used. For beta diver-
sity calculations, normalization by rarefaction at a depth
of 12,000 reads was performed. For longitudinal abun-
dance analyses, at each taxonomic level we excluded OTU
units (taxa) with equal or more than 98% of exactly zero
reads among the 705 samples. In total, 140 genera and
198 species are used for these statistical analyses. The
abundance data were log2 transformed (log2(x + 1)) fol-
lowing normalization by cumulative sum scaling [64].
assessed at each taxonomic level using the metagen-
omicsSeq zero-inflated Gaussian test [64], and the re-
sults are summarized in Additional file 5: Tables S4A–C.
Testing for differential functional capacity between the
phases was performed using LEfSe [67] with per-sample
normalization to 1 M total counts, minimum effect size
of 2.0, alpha of 0.1, an all-against-all strategy, and other-
wise default parameters. The results are summarized in
Additional file 6: Table S5. An exploratory test of the
equality of the median of the week-to-week differences
of samples within individual subjects between the cases
where the phase remains the same and the cases where the
phase changes was performed using the Wilcoxon rank-
sum test. The p value reported for this test is approximate
due to the paired nature of beta-diversity and the presence
of repeated measures from the same subjects.
Here, x⋅;v tð Þ represents the sample mean abundance
function calculated from all subjects. V tð Þ represents the
overall temporal variance at the species level. The max-
imum of V tð Þ occurred at PMA = 34 weeks (rounded to
integers), which is illustrated in Additional file 2: Figure S5.
Based on this cutoff, we define the EARLY period of PMA
to be (0,34) and the LATE period to be [34,∞). The EARLY
interval has 362 data points; the LATE interval has 343
data points.
Here, NutriMed(i,k) (tj) is the kth clinical covariate for
the ith subject measured at the jth time point. βk is the
corresponding linear coefficient (fixed effect); αi
is a
random-effect term that quantifies the within-subject
dependence; and ϵij is the i.i.d. measurement error. In
summary, model A associates weight Z-score to the
time periods (EARLY versus LATE), nutrition and
medication variables, and their interactions. Model B is
much like model A except
it uses microbiota
phases to quantify the developmental stages of micro-
bial community instead. For model A, LATE is consid-
ered as the baseline phase (coded as 0) and EARLY is
coded as 1. For model B, phase 3 is considered as the
baseline phase (coded as 0); phases 1 and 2 are coded
as 1 in two separate binary variables. The interactions
included in both models are defined as the products of
the nutrition/medication variables and period/phase-re-
lated covariates. The significance of associations is de-
test with Satterthwaite’s
termined by regression t
approximation. Due to the use of large number of co-
variates in these models, stepwise model selection
based on the Akaike information criterion (AIC) was
used to reduce model complexity. The results of model
B for weight Z-score are summarized in Table 2 of the
main text. As an example, the linear associations of P2
and percent lipids * P2 with the weight z-score are both
significant (beta = − 0.7766 for P2 and 5.658 for lipids *
P2); meaning that while P2 is correlated with a smaller
weight z-score as compared with the baseline (P3), a
higher percent of lipid intake for P2 subjects increases
the weight Z-scores for subjects in P2. Analyses were
performed in R 3.2.0 (R Foundation for Statistical Com-
puting, Vienna, Austria).
Additional file 1: Table S1. Number of significant associations
identified in the initial linear mixed-effects regression analysis. Specifically,
for each covariate listed in this table, we performed linear mixed-effects
regression analyses in which the response variables are microbial taxa
abundance and the regressors are as follows: (1) gestational age at birth,
(2) post-menstral age, (3) this covariate (main), and (4) the interation
between the main covariate and PMA. Regression t tests were used to
assess the statistical significance of associations. Benjamini-Hochberg multiple
testing procedure was used to control false discovery rate at 0.05 level. Listed
in this table are the numbers of taxa that are significantly associated with
each regressors in these initial regression analyses. (DOCX 17 kb)
Additional file 2: Figure S1. Composition bar charts by subject and
sampling method. Figure S2. Alpha diversity by subject and sampling
method observed OTUs. Figure S3. Number of Dirichlet components vs.
model fit. Figure S4. Weighted UniFrac Principal Coordinate Analyses of
phase and Dirichlet component. (A) Weighted UniFrac Principal
Coordinate Analysis plot colored by phase. (B) Weighted UniFrac Principal
Coordinate Analysis plot colored by Dirichlet Component. Figure S5.
Total functional variance based on the fitted microbiome abundance at
the species level relative to postmenstrual age (PMA). Figure S6. Linear
regression analysis of meconium samples and Phase 1 rectal samples.
Comment on Figure 3F. (DOCX 1141 kb)
Additional file 3: Table S2. Confusion table of phases vs. Dirichlet
multinomial mixture components. Each sample was classified as
representing a specific phase based on the ratios of Bacilli,
Gammaproteobacteria, and Clostridia, as described. Independently, each
sample was classified as representing a Dirichlet multinomial mixture
(DMM) component based on the abundances of all classes of bacteria
present. Each row of the table above indicates the number of samples
classified as a given phase, and each column indicates the number of
samples classified as a given DMM component. Row/column
intersections indicate the number of samples classified as the
corresponding phase (row) and DMM component (column). DMM
components are numbered automatically from the most common to the
least common, while phases are numbered according to their order in a
model of temporal progression. Phase 1 is equivalent to DMM
component 3; phase 2 corresponds to DMM component 2; and phase 3
corresponds to both DMM components 1 and 4. Colors on the row and
column labels indicate these correspondence relationships, and colors
internal to the table identify sets of samples where the phase-based and
DMM component classifications are in agreement. (DOCX 18 kb)
Additional file 5: Table S4. A. Results of differential abundance tests
(metagenomeSeq zero-inflated Gaussian) of all bacterial taxa between
microbiome phases 1 and 2. B. Results of differential abundance tests
(metagenomeSeq zero-inflated Gaussian) of all bacterial taxa between
microbiome phases 2 and 3. C. Results of differential abundance tests
(metagenomeSeq zero-inflated Gaussian) of all bacterial taxa between
microbiome phases 1 and 3. (ZIP 536 kb)
Additional file 7: Table S6. Significant associations between bacterial
taxa and nutrition, medications, and other clinical factors, within each of
the three phases of the microbiome. (XLSX 34 kb)
Availability of data and materials
All phenotypic data, 16S rRNA sequence reads and generated datasets is
publically available through dbGaP accessions phs001297.v1.p1 (PROP
rectal samples n = 721, n = 97 subjects) and phs001347.v2.p1 (RPRC/PROP
fullterm samples n = 46 samples, n = 23 subjects, meconium and stool
samples, n = 10 samples, n = 5 subjects) through url  
nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs00001297.v1.p1 and
url  
phs00001347.v2.p1.
Received: 18 April 2017 Accepted: 23 November 2017
