Downloaded from  
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018
light on bacterial functionality. Such techniques have led to the
development of the first human intestinal gene catalog (Qin
et al. 2010) and enabled a better understanding of the link be-
tween obesity-associated comorbidities and reduced bacterial
richness (Cotillard et al. 2013; Le Chatelier et al. 2013). Although
predetermining functional effects to specific gene sets provides
first information about the functionality of a given microbiome,
these analyses do not always assess the true functionality of the
encoded genes in a specific environment. Metagenomic li-
braries, typically cloned into Escherichia coli vectors, permit func-
tional screening of microbiota in vitro (Troeschel et al. 2010). In
addition, the exact impact of the microbial presence on the host
can be studied using other ‘-omic’ approaches, providing a mul-
tifaceted view by combining metagenomics with metatranscrip-
tomics, metaproteomics or metabolomics (Raes and Bork 2009;
Holmes et al. 2012).
Downloaded from  
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018
Next, the DNA extraction protocol largely creates bias, as well
as the choice of PCR primers, number of PCR cycles and spe-
cific sequencing platform used (Brooks et al. 2015). The Micro-
biome Quality Control project (  was estab-
lished, aiming to identify the variation related to protocols and
techniques in microbiome analysis. Finally, analysis of the data,
starting with the extraction of usable sequences, and the use of
specific analytical or graphical methods to understand patterns
will drive the overall conclusions. It seems advisable to include
a standard level of analysis methods, looking systematically for
differences between a pre-defined set of taxonomic units, e.g.
phylum, genus and species level.
GF animals were applied in the study of the involvement of
microbiota in diabetes, rheumatic arthritis and IBD (Bleich and
Hansen 2012). For example, although the severity of colitis in
the commonly used dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) model criti-
cally depends on the presence of bacteria (Kitajima et al. 2001),
GF mice develop more severe colitis as compared to convention-
alized mice. This suggests that bacteria may play a protective
role in the metabolism of DSS, or that GF mice respond less ef-
ficient because of their immature intestinal immune system.
Important mechanistic insights in colonization resistance, the
mechanism whereby a microbial community is protected from
colonization of new and often harmful bacteria, were raised by
the use of sequential introduction of Bacteroides species into GF
mice (Lee et al. 2013), showing that colonization of Bacteroides
is species-specific and saturable. Finally, since immune struc-
tures in GF mice remain immature, much of our understanding
of host–microbe interactions involved in the development of the
immune system arose from the study of GF animals and is dis-
cussed in more detail later in this review.
Downloaded from  
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018
Artificial colonization of GF mice with specific pathogen-free
(SPF) flora partly reversed the response to restraint stress (de-
fined by an increase of plasma cortisol levels) when the flora
was introduced at 6 weeks of age but not at 14 weeks of age
(Sudo et al. 2004). Others demonstrated that gavage of 1-week-
old mice with a distinct microbiota did not result in colonization,
whereas inoculation of 3-week-old mice was successful (Hansen
et al. 2012). At a very young age, the microbiota originating from
the mother likely dominate the offspring microbiota. This idea
is supported by the observation that microbial colonization of
neonate GF mice resulted in normal numbers of iNKT cells in
lungs and colon, while they are typically elevated in GF mice. In
contrast, colonization of 8-week-old GF mice could not reverse
the elevated numbers of iNKT cells (Olszak et al. 2012). Accord-
ingly, the administration of probiotics might lead to optimal re-
sults only when given at early ages. The probiotic Lactobacillus
johnsonii strain La1, for example, was effective in inhibiting the
development of atopic dermatitis in NC/Nga mice only when ad-
ministered right after weaning (Inoue et al. 2007).
Although considerable literature exists about microbiota
transfer into GF animals, little is known about transferring mi-
crobiota into animals with non-GF intestines. Intuitively, one
would treat such animals with antibiotics to allow the introduc-
tion of the donor microbiota. However, antibiotic treatment is
not necessary to establish an exogenous microbiota (Manichanh
et al. 2010). In fact, antibiotic pretreatment even worsened the ef-
ficiency of engraftment. Transplantation has also been used in
mouse models of enteric infections. For example, mice infected
with C. difficile could be cured with feces from healthy mice
(Lawley et al. 2012), in accordance with the successful treatment
of human relapsing C. difficile colitis. In addition, a so-called coli-
togenic flora, retrieved from transgenic mice that spontaneously
develop colitis, can successfully transmit intestinal inflamma-
tion to wild-type mice (Garrett et al. 2007; Elinav et al. 2011). We
demonstrated that cohousing of mice from the age of 4 weeks
determines the sensitivity towards DSS-induced colitis, inde-
pendent of the specific genotype (Brinkman et al. 2013). Conse-
quently, randomly distributing and cohousing mutant and wild-
type mice in cages before the experiment could lead to loss of
phenotype as a result of microbiota transfer (Brinkman et al.
2013).
Downloaded from  
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018
Bifidobacteria. These early colonizers induce the expression of
mucins, the constituents of the mucus layer that forms a phys-
ical barrier between epithelial cells and the luminal content
(Bergstr ¨om et al. 2012). Accordingly, the thickness of the mucus
layer is decreased in GF rats and its composition differs dramat-
ically compared to conventionalized rats (Meslin, Fontaine and
Andrieux 1995). Especially in the first week after weaning, co-
inciding with the introduction of solid food, the pups are chal-
lenged by a rapidly changing microbiota until intestinal home-
ostasis is established, which generally occurs 11–17 days after
weaning (Schloss et al. 2012). The microbiota on day 17 closely
resembles the microbiota one year after weaning when mice are
kept under similar conditions. When the adult microbiome has
been established, the bacterial communities inhabiting the in-
testine are set and a clear distinction exists between the lumi-
nal and the mucus-adherent microbial populations. After con-
ventionalization of GF mice, microbial colonization of the colon
starts with the appearance of early colonizers on day 1, fol-
lowed by the slower establishment of a stable community. Inter-
estingly, homeostasis in the colon is reached within 8–16 days,
whereas establishment of homeostasis in the small intestine
takes about twice as long (El Aidy et al. 2012). Why the establish-
ment of this equilibrium in the ileum, which contains far less
bacteria compared to the colon, takes more time is speculative,
but indicates a higher complexity of the host–microbiome inter-
face in the ileal environment.
Despite continuous exposure to bacteria and bacterial
constituents such as lipopolysaccharides and flagellin, the
intestinal mucosa maintains a homeostatic immunological en-
vironment. The host preserves a state of tolerance towards col-
onizing bacteria, inhibits bacterial overgrowth and at the same
time acts appropriately towards pathogens (Kamada et al. 2013;
Lawley and Walker 2013; Sommer and B ¨ackhed 2013).Vice versa,
the established adult microbiota provides protection against
potential pathogens via direct inhibition or nutrient depletion.
In addition, bacterial metabolites such as short-chain fatty acids
are well-known regulators of the host immune response (Macia
et al. 2012), and the generation of antigen-specific populations
of Treg cells in response to the commensal microbiota is thought
Downloaded from  
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018
Emerging evidence demonstrates an important role of innate
signaling in preserving a healthy microbiome through the in-
teraction of PAMPs with NOD-like receptors (NLRs), Toll-like re-
ceptors (TLRs) and ILCs (Hooper, Littman and Macpherson 2012).
NOD2, one of the first and most replicated risk factors for ileal
Crohn’s disease, recognizes intracellular muramyldipeptide, a
constituent of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacte-
ria, and induces proinflammatory cytokines and stimulates de-
fensin production in the ileum. Mice deficient in Nod2 are not
able to control Helicobacter hepaticus infection. In addition, a sig-
nificantly higher amount of Bacteroides and Firmicutes is found in
the terminal ileum of Nod2-deficient mice compared with their
wild-type littermates. Of note, this difference is less prominent
in fecal samples (Robertson et al. 2013), probably reflecting the
highest expression of Nod2 in Paneth cells of the ileum. Genetic
inactivation of the Nlrp6 inflammasome results in increase sus-
ceptibility to DSS and the generation of a colitogenic flora (Eli-
nav et al. 2011). In general, intestinal epithelial cells are hypore-
sponsive towards bacterial sensing which is mediated by, for
example, the single Ig IL-1-related receptor, inhibiting IL-1 sig-
naling. Genetic deletion of this receptor in mice renders them
highly susceptible to pathogen colonization as a direct conse-
quence of the loss of a homeostatic commensal flora (Sham et al.
2013). In addition, TLR-MyD88 signaling in response to commen-
sal bacteria critically regulates defensin production by Paneth
cells (Menendez et al. 2013). Of high importance in orchestrating
intestinal barrier function and innate sensing are ILCs, which
are the resident immune cell regulators at epithelial surfaces
that share many of the CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell functions (Son-
nenberg and Artis 2012). Like T cells, ILCs develop from com-
mon lymphoid precursors; however, they are not selected for
antigen specificity and do not express antigen receptors. As in-
nate sensors, they respond and divide rapidly upon stimulation.
ILCs regulate barrier integrity and therefore the direct physical
border between microbiome and underlying lamina propria cells
through secretion of cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor and
interferon.
Unexpectedly, individual mice from certain strains, for ex-
ample C3HRI, DBAJR and WSB, appear to be more similar in their
microbiota than other strains such as C57BL6/J (Friswell et al.
2010; Campbell et al. 2012). This indicates that host genetic fac-
tors contribute to different levels of conformity and explains
why sufficient backcrossing of strains is crucial for the repro-
ducibility of animal experiments. Moreover, a common practice
is the use of embryonic stem cells from the 129 mouse strain to
generate genetically engineered mice in which germ transmis-
sion can be scored by a chimeric fur. This methodology requires
sufficient backcrossing in a particular mouse strain to reduce
the mixed genetic background. Unfortunately, the genetic his-
tory of mutant mice is often ambiguous when mice are shared
between institutions (Sellers et al. 2012). Although a strain is
considered stable when backcrossed for 10 generations, original
129 genes that are too close to the mutated gene to be segre-
gated by recombination will persist in the backcrossed genome
(Simpson et al. 1997; Lusis, Yu and Wang 2007) and may cause
microbial differences compared to wild-type mice. Comparative
genomic analysis of 129 and C57BL/6J mouse strains revealed
indels and single nucleotide polymorphisms resulting in alter-
native or aberrant amino acid sequences in 1084 genes in the
129-strain genome. Annotating these passenger mutations to
the reported genetically modified congenic mice that were gen-
erated using 129-strain ES cells revealed that nearly all these
mice possess multiple passenger mutations potentially influ-
encing the phenotypic outcome. A Me-PaMuFind-It web tool
has been developed to estimate the number and possible ef-
fect of passenger mutations in transgenic mice of interest (Van-
den Berghe et al. 2015). A dramatic illustration of the problem of
passenger mutations recently reemerged when Casp1-null mice
were found to carry an inactivating passenger mutation in the
neighboring Casp11 gene (Kayagaki et al. 2011). Essentially, the
strong protection observed in Casp1-null mice against a lethal
lipopolysaccharide challenge was found to be mainly due to this
inactivating passenger mutation in the Casp11 gene.
Downloaded from  
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018
Besides strain and gender differences, investigators have
studied the effects of the allelic absence of specific genes on
the intestinal microbiota by comparing knockout with wild-type
mice. These studies have demonstrated that deletion of a single
gene can cause substantial alterations in the microbiota (Vijay-
Kumar et al. 2010; Brinkman et al. 2011; Kellermayer et al. 2011;
Lynch et al. 2012). Still, even gene deletions that cause a remark-
able phenotypic abnormality, such as the Ob/Ob mouse, have
been shown to have a much weaker effect than a change in diet
on the microbial composition (Hildebrandt et al. 2009). In addi-
tion, the question remains whether the microbiota as a whole
or a specific bacterial community is responsible for phenotypic
differences in transgenic animals. For example, the spontaneous
colitis phenotype in mice lacking T-bet depends on the presence
of only 12 species (Powell et al. 2012).
Genotype-specific phenotypes can be microbiota dependent
and this dependence could lead to wrong conclusions when
phenotypes of different mutant lines of the same strain are
compared. For example, phenotypic differences between TLR-
deficient C57BL/6J mouse colonies mainly reflected a diver-
gence of the microbiota after extended isolated breeding of the
colonies (Ubeda et al. 2012). Thus, long-term breeding of separate
mouse lines that had been derived from the same strain appears
to result in marked changes in intestinal microbiota composi-
tion. This observation cautions for direct comparison of mutant
lines even when they are bred in the same facility. Therefore,
correct interpretation of study results requires reference litter-
mate mice that are bred from in-house heterozygous breedings.
Taken together, microbiota composition in genetically modified
mice may superimpose on the genetic effect causing a change
in host physiology.
Variation in the microbiological environment between research
institutions or commercial breeding facilities is a confounding
factor; however. the exact contribution to experimental out-
comes is poorly understood. The origin of the mice is extremely
important because laboratory mice are available as both outbred
stocks and inbred strains from various vendors. Viable counts
of the total bacterial load have revealed large differences in the
cecal microbiota among mice of the same strain from differ-
ent vendors (Hufeldt et al. 2010b). The presence of segmented
filamentous bacteria in the gut of mice of Taconic caused a
higher frequency of Th17 cells compared with mice from Jack-
son Laboratory who lacked these bacteria (Ivanov et al. 2009).
Other groups have also reported vendor-dependent differences
in disease outcome, but these studies did not focus on the mi-
crobiome. For example, variations in airway responsiveness in
C57BL6 mice obtained from five different vendors were reported
(Chang, Mitzner and Watson 2012). This type of variation is not
restricted to commercially available strains but also plays a role
when comparing studies performed in different animal labora-
Downloaded from  
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018
Diet-induced changes in bile acid composition can also be
an important cause of modifications to the gut bacterial com-
munity. For example, a diet high in saturated fats increased
the abundance of the sulfite-reducing bacterium deltaproteobac-
terium (Devkota et al. 2012). This effect was achieved by promot-
ing taurine conjugation of bile acids, hence increasing the avail-
ability of organic sulfur and providing more favorable conditions
for sulfite-reducing microorganisms. Vice versa, the conversion
from primary to secondary bile acids by bacteria defines the
composition of the gut microbiome (Cowles et al. 2002); however,
it is difficult to establish which is cause or consequence.
Downloaded from  
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018
(Konturek, Brzozowski and Konturek 2011). Bidirectional signal-
ing between the gastrointestinal tract and the central nervous
system, known as the brain-gut axis, appears to be vital for
maintaining immune homeostasis (Lyte 2013). The most reveal-
ing insights into the importance of the microbiota in animal be-
havior were obtained from comparison of GF mice with SPF mice
and by the use of antibiotics (Sudo et al. 2004; Bercik et al. 2011;
Neufeld et al. 2011). Stress-induced small bowel inflammation
can be elicited in rodents by placing them on a small platform
surrounded by water for 1 h daily. This results in stress-induced
visceral hyperalgesia and increased cortisol levels. Interestingly,
this hormone inhibits Nlrp6 expression, a component of the in-
flammasome that responds to commensal bacteria (Sun et al.
2013). Water-avoidance stress altered the gut microbiota, and co-
housed non-stressed mice developed enteritis.
Downloaded from  
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018
It is important to harmonize the exposure of the animals to
stressors such as noise and handling and minimize cage effects.
In line with the existence of a susceptibility window, relocation
effects were largest when the mice were between 4 and 8 weeks
of age, and negligible at older ages (Friswell et al. 2010). Minimiz-
ing differences in microbiota variation would therefore require
maintaining mice that are part of an experiment in the same
type of cage, in the same rack and in the same room of a facil-
ity. As a critical note, many environmental conditions cannot be
equalized between laboratories and different sites will inevitably
standardize to different local environments and particularities.
Instead of achieving the desired result of increased reproducibil-
ity between different institutes, the standardization measures
would thus reduce reproducibility between different sites, which
is also known as the so-called standardization fallacy (W ¨urbel
2000). The only way to stop this vicious circle of extreme local
standardization (environmental factors, genetic factors, exper-
imental setup) and apparent variation of phenotypes between
different animal housings is introducing systematic variation of
parameters within one research institution (W ¨urbel 2000).
Establishing a collection of different standardized microbiotas
in isobiotic mice to be shared between institutions for repro-
ducible experimentation has been proposed (Hooper, Littman
and Macpherson 2012). This would require considerable effort,
but it may be interesting to generate isobiotic mice lines in
highly specialized animal facilities at the providing institutions.
This has only a minor logistical, technical and financial im-
pact on the receiving institution and should be seriously con-
sidered. Commercial vendors are already studying methods for
archiving microbiota for reproduction of studies in different
labs or at different times (P156, AALAS 63rd National Meeting
2012). Protocols for the sequential colonization of rodents us-
ing donors or pure cultures have been suggested by Taconic
(  Along the same
line, the European framework program 7 has setup common
projects to share mouse breeding facilities between different in-
stitutes (‘mouse hotels’), while the experiments are done locally.
Such a policy would already seriously prevent the problem of ex-
treme local standardization and local genetic drift.
Downloaded from  
by LIU Libraries user
on 27 February 2018