Gut microbiota are composed of several species of microorganisms, including bacteria, yeast,
and viruses. Taxonomically, bacteria are classiﬁed according to phyla, classes, orders, families,
genera, and species. Only a few phyla are represented, accounting for more than 160 species [12].
The dominant gut microbial phyla are Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria,
Fusobacteria, and Verrucomicrobia, with the two phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes [13] representing
90% of gut microbiota. The Firmicutes phylum is composed of more than 200 different genera such
as Lactobacillus, Bacillus, Clostridium, Enterococcus, and Ruminicoccus. Clostridium genera represent
95% of the Firmicutes phyla. Bacteroidetes consists of predominant genera such as Bacteroides and
Prevotella. The Actinobacteria phylum is proportionally less abundant and mainly represented by
the Biﬁdobacterium genus [13]. Examples of taxonomic gut microbiota composition are illustrated in
Figure 1.
Microorganisms 2018, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 23  Figure 1. Examples of taxonomic gut microbiota composition. In the box are cited examples of bacteria belonging to Phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, representing 90% of gut microbiota. 2.1. Variations in the Same Individual Human gut microbiota vary taxonomically and functionally in each part of the GI tract and undergo variations in the same individual due to infant transitions, age, and environmental factors such as antibiotic use. Microbiota variations within individuals are summarized in Table 1. Microorganisms 2019, 7, 14
With regard to vaginal delivery, newborns acquire a microbiota composition resembling their
mother’s vaginal microbiota. Indeed, an analysis of the meconium of newborn infants [24] revealed a
strong correlation between the microbiota of the newborn digestive tract and the microbial communities
of the mother’s vagina: Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Sneathia. Biasucci et al. [25] showed that the
microbiota of vaginally delivered infants are also characterized by predominant groups such as
Biﬁdobacterium longum and Biﬁdobacterium catenulatum. Other facultative anaerobic species such as
Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus, Bacteroides fragilis, and Streptococcus colonize the infant gut [26–28].
On the contrary, infants born by cesarean section (C-section) acquire bacteria derived from
hospital environment and mother’s skin: Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium, Propionibacterium spp. [24,
29]. Escherichia, Shigella, and Bacteroides species are underrepresented in infants born by cesarean
delivery [29]. The intestinal microbiota of neonates delivered by cesarean delivery are less diverse in
terms of bacteria species than the microbiota of vaginally delivered infants [25].
Differences between the microbiota of C-section and vaginally born infants have been also detected
in analyses performed at 7 years of age [23]. Cesarean birth has been associated with an increased risk
of chronic immune disorders such as asthma, systemic connective tissue disorders, juvenile arthritis,
inﬂammatory bowel disease [30], and obesity [31].
Studies have demonstrated that formula-fed infants are more often colonized with Escherichia coli,
Bacteroides, and Clostridium difﬁcile compared with breastfed infants [29,32]. Regarding Actinobacteria
abundance, Biﬁdobacterium spp. have been associated with breastfeeding and formula milk [33,34].
However, breastfed infants generally harbor a more complex and diverse Biﬁdobacterium microbiota
than formula-fed infants [34]. Breastfed infants are provided with microbiota having more than a
two-fold increase in the number of Biﬁdobacterium cells compared to formula-fed infants [33]. Breastfed
infants have more beneﬁcial gut microbiota, with a higher richness and diversity of Biﬁdobacterium spp.
and a lower number of Clostridium difﬁcile and Escherichia coli than formula-fed infants [32] (Table 1).
Biﬁdobacterium spp. are responsible for the fermentation of galactooligosaccharide (GOS), one
of the main components of breast milk, to produce SCFAs [35]. Indeed, Biﬁdobacterium spp. have an
enzyme named lacto-N-biosidase, which facilitates the assimilation of GOS [36]. If Biﬁdobacterium
quantity increases, the quantity of HMOs in feces decreases causing elevated acetate and lactate
concentrations and decreasing pH [37]; an HMO consumption by Biﬁdobacteria in the infant’s
gut may suggest a prebiotic effect of HMOs on gut infant microbiota by selectively stimulating
Biﬁdobacterium spp. [37]. Another prebiotic effect of β-palmitate, a natural human milk fatty acid
and a component of some infant formulas, on gut infant microbiota was demonstrated by positively
inﬂuencing Biﬁdobacterium spp. (and Lactobacillus spp.) abundance [38].
Dietary habits, infant weaning, and feeding practices become determinants and play a crucial role
in gut microbiota variations. The introduction of high-ﬁber and carbohydrate foods (traditional foods)
causes an increase in Firmicutes and Prevotella, whereas the introduction of high-ﬁber and animal
protein foods causes an increase in Bacteroidetes [41]. Furthermore, Fallani et al. [40] demonstrated
that northern European countries are associated with a higher proportion of Biﬁdobacteria in the
infant gut microbiota, whereas higher levels of Bacteroides and Lactobacilli characterize southern
European countries.
muciniphila, Bacteroides, Veillonella, Clostridium coccoides spp., and Clostridium botulinum spp. [42].
Bervoets et al. [53] demonstrated that the microbiota of obese children are provided with
an elevated Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio compared to the microbiota of lean children [53].
low relative proportions of Biﬁdobacterium vulgatus and high concentrations of
Furthermore,
Lactobacillus spp. are observed in the obese microbiota [53]. Riva et al. [54] conﬁrmed that obesity
is associated with elevated levels of Firmicutes such as Ruminococcaceae and depleted levels of
Bacteroidetes such as Bacteroidaceae and Bacteroides. SCFAs are higher in obese children suggesting
elevated substrate utilization. These ﬁndings suggest that the dysbiosis of gut microbiota may
contribute to the pathophysiology of obesity and the increased ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes is
associated with the increased production of SCFAs and energy harvest from colonic fermentation [54].
The underweight BMI level also revealed profound gut microbiota variations. Borgo et al. [55]
performed a comprehensive data analysis comparing gut microbiota and anthropometric traits of 15
anorexia nervosa (AN) women and healthy controls. Results showed that AN intestinal microbiota
showed a signiﬁcant increase in Enterobacteriaceae and Methanobrevibacter smithii compared with healthy
controls [55]. On the contrary, the genera Roseburia, Ruminococcus, and Clostridium were depleted in
line with the observed reduction in AN of the total SCFAs [55].
Gut microbiota variations appear to be different between UC and CRD. Indeed, a decreased
abundance of the butyrate-producing bacteria Roseburia hominis and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii has
been observed in UC patients relative to controls [67], whereas the opposite has been observed in CRD
patients, who are provided with increased Faecalibacterium prausnitzii levels in addition to a reduced
overall diversity [68].
Sokol et al. [70] conﬁrmed the reduction of F. prausnitzii in CRD patients and also demonstrated
that an oral administration of live Faecalibacterium prausnitzii reduced the severity of colitis and tended
to correct the dysbiosis. These results suggest that counterbalancing dysbiosis using Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii as a probiotic is a promising strategy in CRD treatment [70].
Studies [73–76] have demonstrated that Biﬁdobacterium spp., Biﬁdobacterium longum, Clostridium
histolyticum, C. lituseburense, and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii group proportions are less abundant in
untreated CD patients than in healthy controls. Indeed, patients with CD show a reduction in beneﬁcial
species (Lactobacillus and Biﬁdobacterium) and an increase in those potentially pathogenic (Bacteroides
and E. coli) as compared to healthy subjects [74]. The mucosal layer of CD patients fails to stabilize the
gut microbiota and fails to prevent the host from the invasion of harmful antigens and pathogens [71].
This dysbiosis is reduced, but may still remain, after a gluten-free diet [71,73].
Colorectal cancer is the third most common cause of cancer mortality in the world [77].
Structural fecal bacterial segregations between CRC patients and healthy volunteers have been
demonstrated [78]. The gut microbiota of the CRC patients were enriched in Bacteroides fragilis,
Enterococcus, Escherichia/Shigella, Klebsiella, Streptococcus, and Peptostreptococcus and were impoverished
in Roseburia and other butyrate-producing bacteria of the family Lachnospiraceae [78]. The gut microbiota
of the healthy volunteers were enriched in Bacteroides vulgatus and Bacteroides uniformis. Therefore,
gut microbiota variations, such as a reduction of butyrate producers and an increase in opportunistic
pathogens, constitute a major structural imbalance of gut microbiota in CRC patients.
Shen et al. [79] demonstrated a higher abundance of Proteobacteria and a lower abundance of
Bacteroidetes in CRC cases compared to controls. At the genus level, CRC cases showed an increased
abundance of Dorea spp. and Faecalibacterium spp. and lower proportions of Bacteroides spp. and
Coprococcus spp. than controls.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic, rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated
with impaired cognition and cerebral accumulation of amyloid-beta peptides. Cattaneo et al. [97]
demonstrated that an increase in Escherichia/Shigella abundance and a reduction of E. rectale abundance
are possibly associated with a peripheral inﬂammatory state in patients with cognitive impairment
and brain amyloidosis. Vogt et al. [98] compared gut microbiota composition from patients with and
without a diagnosis of AD and revealed a lower microbial diversity compositionally distinct from
control-age and sex-matched individuals, with a decrease in Firmicutes and Biﬁdobacterium abundance
and an increase in Bacteroidetes abundance in the microbiome of AD participants.
The bidirectional interactions of gut–brain mean that the brain can also alter gut microbiota
composition [110]. A model of social disruption among adult mice [111] demonstrated that exposure
to stress results in substantial changes in gut microbiota composition: a decrease in Bacteroides spp.
abundance and an increase in Clostridium spp. abundance have been observed in stress-induced mice
Other studies [62] revealed that chronic psychological stress is reﬂected in the microbiota
composition. Indeed, depression due to chronic stressful life events is associated with an increase in
Enterobacteriaceae, whereas psychological stress is associated with a reduction in Lactobacilli spp. and
an increase in Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas spp.