Almost 30 years ago, it was proposed that prenatal and 
postnatal environmental factors interact with genetics to 
program health and disease in adulthood [6, 7]. Building 
on Barker’s hypothesis, it was recently proposed that the 
microbiota could play an important role in programming 
adult brain health and disease [8]. Whether diet or other 
factors, such as stress and drugs, interact with the micro-
biota in early life to program brain health is currently be-
ing  addressed  by  clinical  and  preclinical  studies.  This 
chapter reviews the natural trajectory of the composition 
of  the  microbiota  during  pregnancy  and  early  life  and 
outlines  the  current  knowledge  on  the  interaction  be-
tween the microbiota and neurodevelopment. 
Early-Life Neurodevelopmental Plasticity and the 
Microbiota
Dramatic  structural  and  functional  changes  in  the 
brain are characteristic of the first years of life. This neu-
rodevelopmental plasticity requires timely and adequate 
migration, division and differentiation of neuronal and 
glial  precursors  [9].  Neuronal  migration  and  axonal 
guidance  establish  short-  and  long-range  connections 
that enable the recruitment of multiple brain areas for 
the execution of complex behaviours [10, 11]. Differen-
tiated oligodendrocytes insulate neuronal axons with a 
myelin sheath to guarantee proper conductance of neu-
ronal signals [12]. A growing emphasis is now placed on 
the role of astrocytes and microglia in facilitating synap-
tic pruning during early life through adolescence, allow-
ing later in life the fine tuning of complex circuits [13]. 
Plasticity is a key feature of the standard neurodevelop-
mental trajectory and modulates the dynamics of synap-
tic connections and neural circuitry formation. Devia-
tions  from  the  neurodevelopmental  trajectory  can  ac-
count for increased susceptibility to brain diseases later 
in life.
There is a growing appreciation of the link between 
neurodevelopment and intestinal microbiota. Studies in 
germ-free  mice  have  shown  abnormal  brain  develop-
ment, especially in male mice [14–16]. More recent stud-
ies  in  these  microbiota-deficient  mice  have  shown  al-
tered expression of genes implicated in neurophysiology 
processes, such as neurotransmission, neuronal plastic-
ity,  metabolism  and  morphology  in  the  amygdala  [17] 
and  hippocampus  [18].  Hypermyelination  in  the  pre-
frontal cortex and abnormal microglia maturation char-
acterize the glia profile of these animals [19–23]. Further-
more, they showed increased blood-brain barrier perme-
ability  [24].  Functionally,  such  changes  translate  to 
increased stress response [14, 16], changes in anxiety [25] 
and fear recall [26], cognitive deficits [27], social changes 
[21, 28] and visceral pain responses [29]. Thus, the com-
plete absence of microbial colonization in early life has 
dramatic  effects  on  offspring’s  brain  development  and 
function. 
Microbiota and Neurodevelopmental Trajectories Ann Nutr Metab 2019;74(suppl 2):16–27DOI: 10.1159/000499144Dynamics of the Maternal Microbiota during 
Pregnancy
Pregnancy is a unique period in human life, and both 
the gut and vaginal microbiome have evolved to follow an 
optimum trajectory to support the mother and the devel-
oping fetus and allow for the ideal handover of microbi-
ome at birth, informing maternal and child health out-
comes. 
The human female gut microbiota undergoes dynam-
ic  compositional  changes  across  gestation  [30–32].  As 
pregnancy progresses, a reduction in the diversity of the 
intestinal microbiota takes place, characterized by an en-
richment in Proteobacteria [30]. This natural shift in the 
bacterial populations is functional to the increased meta-
bolic demands by the developing fetus. The Proteobacte-
ria expansion can help the body with the increased ener-
getic  requirement  that  is  characteristic  of  the  third  tri-
mester [33]. Interestingly, when gut microbiota from this 
time period was transferred to microbiota-depleted rats, 
they showed increased adiposity, reduced glucose toler-
ance  and  inflammation,  signs  of  metabolic  syndrome 
[30].  This  suggests  that  the  changes  in  gut  microbiota 
composition during pregnancy have an adaptive role for 
maternal and newborn health. 
The vaginal microbiota composition also changes dur-
ing pregnancy towards a less diverse configuration [34, 35]. 
As with gastrointestinal microbiota, the change in vaginal 
microbiota  has  a  specific  role  during  pregnancy.  An  in-
crease in the presence of Lactobacilli helps maintain a low 
pH, limiting bacterial growth opportunity for other bacte-
ria [35]. Furthermore, vaginal microbiota composition is 
critical in the context of vertical transmission of microbial 
populations [36]. Whether interventions in the physiologi-
cal trajectory of maternal microbiota could alter the prena-
tal environment and, in turn, deviate normal brain devel-
opment is a key question in neuroscience that is starting to 
be addressed both in preclinical and clinical areas.
Preclinical Models of Early-Life Microbiota Trajectory
Similar to humans, mice and rat intestinal and vaginal 
microbiota  go  through  compositional  changes  during 
pregnancy,  providing  a  robust  preclinical  model  for 
studying the link between maternal gut environment and 
offspring brain development [37–40]. Early gestation is 
characterized  by  a  transitional  increase  in  the  relative 
abundance of Akkermansia and Bifidobacterium, which 
in late pregnancy decrease to levels seen in non-pregnant 
mice. In contrast, Bacteroides remain relatively elevated 
throughout  pregnancy  [37].  Interestingly,  microbiota 
compositional changes also occur post-partum. The rela-
tive  abundance  of  Actinobacteria  increases  early  post-
partum, while the one of Bacteroidetes decreases [38]. 
The vaginal microbiota has its own trajectory in preg-
nant mice. After the first week of pregnancy, there is an 
increase in bacterial diversity characterized by a growth 
of the Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes phyla [40, 41]. The 
changes seen in mice gut microbiota during pregnancy 
and post-partum make it a solid approach to the study of 
interventions in the maternal microbiota and the impact 
on offspring’s neurodevelopment. 
External Challenges to Maternal Microbiota 
Dynamics
Given the importance of early-life microbiota in neu-
rodevelopment,  any  factor  that  affects  its  composition 
has the potential to influence brain health. Indeed, a va-
riety of exogenous factors affect the trajectory of micro-
biota composition during pregnancy. Diet, drugs, infec-
tion,  hospitalization,  prematurity  and  stress  are  among 
the  influences  that  divert  maternal  microbiota  from  its 
natural course and impact on offspring’s brain, immune 
system  and  the  hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal  axis 
(HPA) development. 
.........................................................................................................................
Inadequate intake of macronutrients  
or micronutrients during pregnancy  
has been related to altered maternal  
microbiota and offspring’s poor  
neurocognitive outcome
.........................................................................................................................
Diet and Maternal Microbiota
Diet is one of the major sculptors of the diversity and 
abundance of the intestinal microbiota [42]. Inadequate 
intake of macronutrients or micronutrients during preg-
nancy  has  been  related  to  altered  maternal  microbiota 
[43] and offspring’s poor neurocognitive outcome (Table 
2) [44]. This association suggests a role for the maternal 
microbiota in brain prenatal programming. 
One of the most common macronutrient consumption 
imbalances during pregnancy is the consumption of high-
fat diets. Maternal overweight has been associated in hu-
mans with increased risk of poor neurodevelopmental out-
comes [45]. In rodents, consumption of a high-fat or West-
ern diet prior and during pregnancy impairs the trajectory 
of maternal and offspring’s microbiota  [37, 46]. This al-
Formula feeding is associated with a distinctive fingerprint in the 
intestinal microbiota 
teration was associated with a neuroinflammatory profile 
in the hippocampus and amygdala of the offspring, result-
ing in juvenile impaired social behaviour and anxiety-like 
phenotype [47]. Interestingly, a high-fat diet prior to and 
during  pregnancy  impairs  maternal  HPA  axis  plasticity 
and the offspring’s hypothalamic gene response to stress 
[48, 49]. However, caution is required when interpreting 
the literature on the neurobiological changes induced by 
diets rich in fat and sugar in rodents as the content of the 
control diets regarding fibre and other nutrients needs to 
be  taken  into  account  [50,  51].  Nevertheless,  preclinical 
studies on maternal high-fat and Western diets (see [8] for 
an extensive review) support the idea of a role for diet-in-
duced microbiota changes in brain programming. 
During  fetal  development,  micronutrients  are  re-
quired for neurological development. Deficiency in B vi-
tamins, folate or ions, such as iron and zinc, exerts detri-
mental effects on neurocognitive development in humans 
and rodents [52, 53]. Folate deficiency is paradigmatic of 
the impact of micronutrient deficit on offspring neurode-
velopment. Mammalian cells are unable to synthetize this 
vitamin; thus, humans depend on food or supplements to 
compensate for their requirement [54]. Failure to achieve 
normal serum folate levels during pregnancy has been as-
sociated  with  increased  neural  tube  defects  in  the  off-
spring [55]. Conveniently, bacteria residing in our colon 
can produce many vitamins of the B group, including fo-
late. In mice, a loss-of-function mutation in an intestinal 
folate transporter can account for folate malabsorption, 
suggesting  that  bacterial  produced  folate  plays  a  major 
role in host metabolism [56]. In humans, consumption of 
a vegetarian diet during early pregnancy was associated 
with a distinctive microbial composition rich in biosyn-
thesis pathways for fatty acids, lipids and folate [57]. 
Prebiotics and Probiotics
Research on the effect of prebiotic and probiotic ad-
ministration during pregnancy is at an early stage (Table 
3).  Current  reports  indicate  that  the  administration  of 
prebiotics or probiotics to pregnant women is not associ-
ated with an increase or decrease in the risk of preterm 
birth  or  other  infant  and  maternal  adverse  pregnancy 
outcomes [58]. Researchers are beginning to shed light on 
their  effects  on  offspring’s  brain  and  immune  develop-
ment [58]. 
Prebiotics  promote  the  growth  of  beneficial  bacteria 
and include indigestible fibres that are fermented by co-
lonic bacteria to produce short-chain fatty acids and pro-
vide a health benefit [59]. In humans, the effects of mater-
nal  intake  of  prebiotics  on  neurodevelopment  have  not 
been well studied, and there is uncertainty about their ef-
fects  on  allergy  risk  [60,  61].  Galacto-oligosaccharide 
(GOS) and inulin administration to pregnant mice modu-
lated the gut microbiota and prevented immune activation 
and  intestinal  permeability  in  the  offspring  [62].  More-
over, it has recently been shown that the addition of inulin 
to a mouse maternal high-fat diet abrogated the negative 
metabolic effect of the high-fat diet on offspring [63]. 
Probiotics are beneficial strains of bacteria that confer 
a health benefit to the host [64]. There is lack of research 
on  the  prenatal  impact  of  probiotics  on  neurodevelop-
ment in humans and rodents. Administration of probiot-
ics to pregnant women impact on immunity, reducing the 
risk of atopy but not of asthma [65, 66]. More preclinical 
and clinical research must be conducted to determine the 
impact  of  prenatal  probiotics  on  the  maternal  and  off-
spring microbiota. 
Drugs
Antibiotics
Antibiotics are widely used during pregnancy, but lit-
tle is known about their effects on the trajectory of the 
maternal microbiome [67]. Preclinical models are start-
ing to shed light on the effect of antibiotic exposure on 
offspring  neurodevelopment.  Administration  of  antibi-
otics to pregnant rats caused impairments in social be-
haviour and pre-pulse inhibition of the offspring [68]. In 
mice, administration of non-absorbable antibiotics dur-
ing pregnancy reduced the exploratory behaviour in the 
offspring [69]. These results warrant further research on 
the effect of microbiota. 
Psychotropics
Recently, Maier et al. [70] showed that a large amount 
of non-antibiotic human-targeted drugs have antimicro-
bial  properties.  Among  them,  drugs  that  can  be  pre-
scribed during pregnancy, such as proton pump inhibi-
tors, were found to disturb the growth of commensal bac-
teria  (Table  2).  Interestingly,  psychotropic  medications 
also influence the composition of gut bacteria in rodents 
[70,  71].  Selective  serotonin  uptake  inhibitors,  tricyclic 
antidepressants  and  antipsychotics  negatively  impact 
bacterial growth [71–73]. Looking at the effects on post-
natal  development,  prenatal  exposure  to  fluoxetine  in-
duces an anxiety-like phenotype in rats [74]. Also, in ro-
dents,  valproic  acid  administration  during  pregnancy 
disturbs the microbiome of the offspring and results in 
impairment of the social behaviour of the offspring [75, 
76]. Owing to the prevalence of psychotropic administra-
tion during pregnancy, it is crucial to characterize the in-
teraction  between  maternal  health,  microbiota  and  off-
spring neurodevelopment. 
Stress and the Maternal Microbiota 
In humans, prenatal and postnatal maternal stress has 
been associated with young adult offspring behavioural 
and depressive symptoms [77] and aberrant infant intes-
tinal microbiota development (Table 2) [78, 79]. In ro-
dents, prenatal stress shifts maternal gut and vaginal bac-
terial community and induces long-lasting alterations in 
the gut microbiota composition of the offspring [40, 80]. 
Moreover,  this  alteration  was  shown  to  occur  in  a  sex-
specific manner, and it correlates with hyper-reactivity of 
the HPA axis [40].
The Microbiota in Transition: from Prenatal to 
Postnatal 
When the first contact with the microbiota occurs re-
mains  controversial.  The  sterility  of  the  uterus  during 
pregnancy is one of the paradigms that research on the 
microbiome is revisiting. Bacteria have been found in the 
placenta  [81,  82],  amniotic  fluid  and  meconium  of  hu-
mans [83, 84]. Moreover, the presence of specific bacteria 
in utero has been associated with pregnancy risks, includ-
ing  higher  rates  of  preterm  delivery  [85].  Nevertheless, 
the reliability of these findings is widely debated in the 
context of whether it is contamination or not [86, 87]. The 
existence of germ-free mice models further dismisses the 
idea of a prenatal microbiome [86]. It is generally accept-
ed that the moment of birth is the first opportunity for 
large-scale bacterial colonization of the newborn. Thus, 
the mode of delivery has a tremendous impact on the es-
tablishment of the microbiota of infants.
Codagnone/Stanton/O’Mahony/Dinan/CryanAnn Nutr Metab 2019;74(suppl 2):16–27DOI: 10.1159/000499144Early-Life Microbiota and Birth Mode
A large number of studies associate the mode of deliv-
ery to a distinctive trajectory of microbiota development 
in  the  newborn  [35,  36,  66,  88–99].  Unexposed  to  the 
birth  canal,  Caesarean  section  (C-section)-born  babies 
elude  mother-neonate  vertical  vaginal  transmission  of 
bacteria and viruses [36, 89, 100]. In turn, the microbiota 
resembles skin and environment microbiota, suggesting 
that C-section first colonizers come from diverse sources 
(Table 2) [35, 89]. 
That said it is worth reinforcing that mode of delivery-
induced  changes  in  microbiota  composition  are  transi-
tory. Vaginally delivered infants have significantly higher 
.........................................................................................................................
Mode of delivery-induced changes  
in microbiota composition are  
transitory
.........................................................................................................................
microbiota  richness  and  diversity  than  C-section-born 
infants as early as 3 days after birth [88, 100–102]. Never-
theless,  the  early  decline  in  Proteobacteria  and  the  late 
Firmicutes expansion occur timely over the first year of 
life of C-section-born infants [101].
The time course of these microbiota alterations over-
laps with a critical period for neuro- and immune devel-
opment (see [103] for extensive review). It has been sug-
gested that C-section-distinctive microbiota composition 
plays a functional role in predisposing these infants to a 
greater relative risk of neonatal infections, allergy, asth-
ma, obesity and type 1 diabetes [35, 101, 104–108]. Pre-
clinical models of C-section suggest that the mode of de-
livery could impact on early neuronal maturation [109, 
110]. Whether modifying the initial colonizing microbi-
ota induces directly or indirectly different trajectories in 
brain development has yet to be deciphered.
Various  strategies  have  been  designed  to  restore  the 
normal trajectory of the microbiota [113]. Although con-
troversial, artificial vaginal microbiota transference was 
performed  to  C-section-born  infants  to  mimic  vertical 
transmission [114]. Other interventions, including sup-
plementation  with  probiotics  and  prebiotics,  were  pro-
posed to decrease the impact of delivery mode on the mi-
crobiota. 
Early Postnatal Perturbations of the Microbiota
Early postnatal life entails an intrinsic sensitivity to en-
vironmental factors. As with the maternal microbiome, 
infant exposure to differences in diet, drugs and stress can 
interfere with the trajectory of the microbiota and neuro-
development in a manner that is characteristic of this de-
velopmental period. 
Mode of Nutritional Provision in Early Life
The stability and composition of the early-life gut mi-
crobiota community is also dependent on diet [115]. Ac-
cumulating evidence suggests that breastfeeding and for-
mula-based nutrition leave a distinctive fingerprint in the 
intestinal  microbiota  (Table  2).  Gut  bacterial  composi-
tion  of  infants  exclusively  breastfed  is  characterized  by 
higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Bifidobacte-
rium compared to the one from formula-fed infants [108, 
116]. Furthermore, breastfeeding had a positive effect on 
myelination and increased general, verbal and non-verbal 
cognitive abilities during childhood [117]. The implica-
tions of these findings are still unclear, but longitudinal 
studies are starting to shed light on the effect of early-life 
nutrition on the temporal course of microbiota matura-
tion. 
Human breast milk has a unique composition that in-
teracts with the developing gut microbiota. Culture-de-
pendent and -independent techniques revealed that it is 
a source of bacteria [118]. Interestingly, the human milk 
microbiome can be influenced by maternal body mass in-
dex and mode of delivery [119]. The other main compo-
nents  of  breast  milk  are  human  milk  oligosaccharides, 
which  act  as  prebiotics  [120,  121].  Supplementation  of 
infant formula with GOS increases the abundance of Bi-
fidobacteria and Lactobacilli to levels reported in breast-
fed infants [122, 123]. Both breast milk microbes and pre-
biotics play a role in the standard gut microbial develop-
mental trajectory. 
Later  in  life,  feeding  transitions  drive  important 
changes in composition and functionality of the intesti-
nal microbiota [36, 89, 124]. From breastfeeding to sol-
id  food,  the  microbiome  transitions  from  being  en-
riched in genes associated with digestion of sugars from 
breast milk, vitamin production and iron transport to 
degradation  of  starch  and  high  sugars  [36].  Further-
more, the microbiota continues to undergo change; at 
7–12 years of age, the composition and function of the 
microbiota remains significantly different from the one 
of adults [125], suggesting a role of the microbiome in 
the neurodevelopmental changes associated with ado-
lescence. 
Fig. 1. Factors that determine the trajectory 
of the microbiota during early life. The gut 
and  vaginal  microbiome  of  the  mother  is 
altered by diet, drugs and stress. The mode 
of delivery determines the first colonizers 
of  the  newborn’s  gut.  Early  in  life,  diet, 
drugs and stress can also affect the infant 
microbiota composition. 
Probiotics and Prebiotics
Most of the evidence available on the effect of early-life 
exposure to pre- and probiotics comes from preclinical 
studies. Early-life prebiotic administration in humans has 
shown effects on reducing the risk of atopy, an autoim-
mune disease [126], but neurodevelopmental outcomes 
have not been studied yet. In preclinical studies, oligosac-
charides have been shown to modulate the gut-brain axis, 
highlighting  the  role  of  breastfeeding  in  neurodevelop-
ment.  Administration  of  the  human  milk  oligosaccha-
rides 3’Sialyllactose (3’SL) or 6’Sialyllactose (6’SL) to mice 
exposed  to  social  disruption  prevented  stress-induced  
colonic  microbial  disruption  and  anxiety-like  behavior 
[127].  Furthermore,  fructo-oligosaccharide  (FOS)  and 
GOS administration attenuated corticosterone release in 
response to an acute stressor and protected the mice from 
the impact of chronic stress on the microbiota [128]. 
Preliminary  clinical  trials  of  probiotic  interventions 
have  yielded  promising  results  with  regard  to  reducing 
the risk for gastrointestinal problems, sepsis, allergies and 
even autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit hy-
peractivity disorder [129–134]. Several groups have now 
shown that early probiotic interventions mitigate the ef-
fects of early-life stress, maternal high-fat diet and mater-
nal immune activation on infant outcomes [47, 135–138]. 
Oral administration at weaning of Bifidobacterium fragi-
lis ameliorates the abnormal stereotyped and anxiety-like 
behaviours  of  the  maternal  immune  activation  mouse 
model of autism [136]. Probiotic administration during 
adolescence  restores  social  interaction-induced  long-
term potentiation in an animal model of social impair-
ment by maternal high-fat diet exposure [47]. In mater-
nally separated rat pups, a combination of Lactobacillus 
rhamnosus and Lactobacillus helveticus reduced pup cor-
ticosterone  responses  to  stress  and  normalized  fear  be-
haviour [135, 137, 138]. Another probiotic, Bifidobacte-
rium  infantis,  normalized  behavioural  deficits  in  adult 
rats exposed to maternal separation [139]. 
Although clinical evidence on the role of pre- and pro-
biotics for neurodevelopment is still lacking, preclinical 
research gives cause for a focus on early-life microbiota 
interventions. 
Drugs: Antibiotics and Beyond in a Paediatric Setting
Antibiotics are commonly prescribed during the first 
years of life, yet the effect on brain health programming is 
unknown. Longitudinal clinical studies support the idea 
that early-life exposure to antibiotics perturbs the natural 
trajectory of the microbial communities by altering their 
stability [140]. Furthermore, neonatal exposure to antibi-
otics in rodents not only altered the microbiota but also 
induced  increased  visceral  sensitivity  and  long-lasting 
changes in brain cytokines and behaviour [141, 142]. 
The interaction between early-life exposure to psycho-
tropics,  neurodevelopment  and  the  microbiota  is  cur-
rently unknown. Not only exposure to psychotropics me-
diated by breastfeeding but direct administration of these 
drugs early in life could impact the developing microbio-
ta. Serotonin uptake inhibitors and atypical antipsychot-
ics indicated for the treatment of paediatric psychiatric 
disorders are among the non-antibiotic drugs known to 
change  the  microbiome  composition  [70,  71].  Atypical 
Codagnone/Stanton/O’Mahony/Dinan/CryanAnn Nutr Metab 2019;74(suppl 2):16–27DOI: 10.1159/000499144antipsychotics indicated for the treatment of the irritabil-
ity associated with autism spectrum disorders have been 
shown to inhibit gut bacteria [70]. At the same time, the 
composition  of  the  microbiota  of  autistic  patients  was 
shown to be altered [143–147]. Whether there is an inter-
action  between  microbiota  populations,  psychotropic 
drugs and behaviour has yet to be determined. 
Early-Life Stress
The impact of stress on the development of the HPA 
axis has been shown to contribute to the programming of 
brain  health  in  later  life  [148].  Interestingly,  evidence 
from preclinical studies shows that early-life stress also 
alters  the  microbiota.  Maternal  separation  during  early 
life  disrupted  the  microbiota  of  the  offspring  of  rhesus 
monkeys and rats [149, 150]. Interestingly, a diet contain-
ing  prebiotics  in  combination  with  live  Lactobacillus 
rhamnosus GG attenuated the effects of early-life mater-
nal separation on anxiety-like behaviour and hippocam-
pal-dependent learning [151]. Germ-free mice were more 
vulnerable to restraint stress, resulting in higher adreno-
corticotropic hormone and corticosterone in plasma [14, 
16], a reduction in glucocorticoid receptor mRNA and an 
increased stress response [14]. Remarkably, these effects 
were rescued with microbiota transplantation during ad-
olescence but not adulthood [14].
Future Perspectives
Pregnancy and the first years of life are unique stages 
of plasticity for the intestinal microbiota. In both cases, 
there is a dynamic trajectory of the intestinal microbiota 
composition that is functional to the requirements of the 
host.  Although  plasticity  represents  an  opportunity  for 
adaptation, it is also a vulnerable stage. As we have re-
viewed, clinical and preclinical studies suggest that diet, 
stress and drugs can interact with the natural trajectory of 
the  microbiota  and  play  a  part  in  programming  brain 
health (Fig. 1). However, the evidence is still scarce, and 
further research is needed to understand the functional 
implications of these interactions. 
The nervous system and the microbiota show concur-
rent developmental trajectories, offering a unique oppor-
tunity for intervention. There is potential for the develop-
ment of early-life-targeted interventions of the microbi-
ome,  aiming  to  reduce  the  risk  of  disease  later  in  life. 
Further research is needed on the characterization of crit-
ical windows to modulate the microbiota and the conse-
quences of early intervention. 
The writing of this article was supported by Nestlé Nutrition 
Institute.  The  APC  Microbiome  Institute  is  funded  by  Science 
Foundation  Ireland  (SFI),  through  the  Irish  Government’s  Na-
tional Development Plan. The APC Microbiome Institute has con-
ducted research funded by many Pharmaceutical and Food Com-
panies. M.G.C. is funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodows-
ka-Curie grant agreement No. 754535. J.F.C., T.G.D. and C.S. are 
supported by SFI (Grant 12/RC/2273). T.G.D. has been an invited 
speaker at meetings organized by Servier, Lundbeck, Janssen and 
AstraZeneca and has received research funding from Mead John-
son, Cremo, Suntory Wellness, Nutricia and 4D Pharma. J.F.C. has 
been an invited speaker at meetings organized by Mead Johnson, 
Yakult, Alkermes and Janssen and has received research funding 
from Mead Johnson, Cremo, Suntory Wellness, Nutricia, Dupont 
and 4D Pharma. M.G.C., S.M.O. and C.S. have no other conflicts 
of interest to declare. 
