T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327 
given  ecosystem.  Yet,  since  all  these  analyses  depend  on  the  qual-
ity  of  databases  that  integrate  information  gained  from  genomic,
chemical,  and  functional  studies,  they  will  beneﬁt  from  future
experiments  carried  out  with  cultured  representatives.  In  many
instances,  comparative  analysis  of  patient  and  healthy  control
cohorts  revealed  that  shifts  in  the  microbiome  are  associated  with
human  diseases  (Berry  and  Reinisch,  2013).  However,  to  causally
link  microbiome  signatures  identiﬁed  in  clinical  surveys,  robust
experimental  in  vitro  and  in  vivo  models  are  required  to  enable
systematic  experimental  manipulation  of  the  microbiota.
The  laboratory  mouse  is  currently  the  primary  experimen-
tal  model  organism  in  preclinical  research.  A  large  variety  of
genetically-engineered  strains  and  mouse  models  for  human  dis-
eases  exist  (Eppig  et  al.,  2015),  and  mouse  strains  can  be  relatively
easily  re-derived  germ-free  (Macpherson  and  McCoy,  2015),  which
has  set  the  stage  for  the  establishment  of  gnotobiotic  models  (i.e.
mice  colonized  with  deﬁned  bacterial  strains  or  mixtures).  Gno-
tobiology  (Greek:  gnosis:   knowledge;  bios:  life;  logos:  study)  has  a
long-standing  tradition  in  this  ﬁeld  of  research  because  it  is  instru-
mental  to  test  causal  relationships  between  microbes  and  their
host  (Nuttal  and  Thierfelder,  1895;  Orcutt  et  al.,  1987;  Trexler
and  Reynolds,  1957).  Of  course,  a  signiﬁcant  number  of  differ-
ences  exist  between  human  and  mice  that  must  be  taken  into
account  when  interpreting  data,  in  particular  differences  in  gut
physiology  and  the  immune  system  (Mestas  and  Hughes,  2004),  but
also  dietary  habits,  behavior  and  living  environment.  In  addition,
maintenance  of  germ-free  mice  is  demanding  and  requires  special-
ized  equipment  and  experienced  staff.  Despite  these  challenges,
gnotobiotic  mice  are  widely  used  and  can  in  combination  with
“omics”  technologies  and  genetic  engineering  provide  important
mechanistic  insights  into  the  molecular  mechanisms  underlying
microbe–microbe  and  microbe–host  interactions.
Recently,  the  cultivation  of  bacteria  experienced  a  great
upswing.  So  far,  effort  has  been  focused  on  the  establishment
of  culture  collections  of  human-  and  plant-associated  microbial
ecosystems  (Bai  et  al.,  2015;  Fodor  et  al.,  2012;  Hugon  et  al.,  2015;
Rettedal  et  al.,  2014).  These  collections  are  essential  to  carry  out
microbial  reconstitution  experiments  in  germ-free  model  orga-
nisms.  However,  to  investigate  microbiota  evolution  and  functions
including  host-speciﬁcity,  the  scientiﬁc  community  needs  public
bacterial  collections  derived  from  mice,  which  presently  do  not
exist.  In  this  review,  we  revisit  current  knowledge  of  the  mouse
gut  microbiota,  the  relevance  of  mouse  models  for  microbe–host
interactions  studies,  and  give  an  outlook  on  future  challenges  and
opportunities  in  the  ﬁeld.
2.  Humanized  mice  from  a  microbial  perspective:  Hybrid
models  of  clinical  relevance
  number  of  pioneering  studies  have  employed  human-derived
Escherichia  coli  and  Bacteroides  spp.  as  model  organisms  to  elucidate
key  principles  of  microbe–host  interactions  in  gnotobiotic  mice.
These  bacteria  can  be  genetically  manipulated  and  allow  functional
genetic  analysis.  E.  coli,  the  workhorse  of  traditional  and  modern
microbiology  and  genetics,  is  the  most  abundant  facultative  anaer-
obic  commensal  of  the  human  gut  (Bachmann,  1996).  Over  the  last
decade,  the  groups  of  Conway  and  Cohen  (2015)  studied  E.  coli  car-
bohydrate  utilization  and  competition  in  the  intestine  in  detail.  A
seminal  study  by  Hapfelmeier  and  colleagues  used  an  auxotrophic
E.  coli  mutant  strain  to  generate  a  gnotobiotic  mouse  model  for
reversible  bacterial  colonization  (Hapfelmeier  et  al.,  2010).  The
growth  of  this  mutant  strain  depends  on  exogenous  supplemen-
d-alanine  and  meso-diaminopimelic  acid,
tation  of  the  amino  acids 
which  are  not  provided  by  the  germ-free  murine  host.  Thus,  the
mutant  only  transiently  colonizes  the  gut  after  which  the  mice
re-establish  a  completely  germ-free  state.  This  model  allows  a
number  of  fundamental  principles  underlying  bacterial  induction
of  mucosal  immune  responses  to  be  addressed.
Using  Bacteroides  spp.,  several  fundamental  principles  under-
lying  host–microbe  interactions  have  been  elucidated.  Bacteroides
thetaiotaomicron  (B.  theta)  and  Bacteroides  fragilis  are  highly  abun-
dant  and  ubiquitous  obligate  anaerobic  members  of  the  human  gut
microbiota  (Moore  and  Holdeman,  1974;  Qin  et  al.,  2010).  Their
genomes  encode  a  vast  number  of  enzyme  systems  that  mediate
degradation  of  polysaccharides  derived  from  the  diet  and  mucosal
secretions  (Xu  et  al.,  2003),  which  shapes  the  mutualistic  relation-
ship  between  Bacteroides  spp.  and  their  human  host  (Comstock,
2009).  Mono-colonization  of  mice  with  B.  theta  induces  pronounced
changes  in  host  mucosal  gene  expression  (Hooper  and  Gordon,
2001).  Speciﬁcally,  B.  theta  can  modify  host  epithelial  differen-
tiation  in  a  way  that  supports  its  own   growth:  it  promotes  the
production  of  fucosylated  glycans  by  the  host  and  in  turn  uses
them  as  nutrient  sources  (Bry  et  al.,  1996).  Intriguingly,  this  pro-
cess  is  dependent  on  the  capacity  of  B.  theta  to  utilize  fucose,
reﬂecting  the  mutualistic  nature  of  commensal-host  relationships.
B.  fragilis  produces  a  polysaccharide  with  immune  modulatory
activities  (Mazmanian  et  al.,  2005)  that  prevents  gut  inﬂammation
(Mazmanian,  2008)  and  promotes  tolerogenic  immune  responses
by  signaling  on  Foxp3(+)  regulatory  T  cells  through  TLR2  (Round
et  al.,  2011).
In  addition  to  mono-colonization  experiments,  interaction  of  B.
theta  with  other  strains  has  been  studied  in  detail  by  transcriptome
proﬁling.  B.  theta  was   shown  to  adapt  to  the  presence  of  Eubac-
terium  rectale  or  the  probiotic  strains  Biﬁdobacterium  longum  and
Lactobacillus  casei  by  expanding  the  breadth  of  its  carbohydrate
utilization  (Mahowald  et  al.,  2009;  Sonnenburg  et  al.,  2006).  Co-
colonization  with  methanogenic,  sulfate-reducing,  and  acetogenic
bacteria  also  yielded  valuable  insights  into  the  metabolism  of  these
generally  lowly  abundant  members  of  mammalian  gut  ecosys-
tems  (Rey  et  al.,  2010,  2013;  Samuel  and  Gordon,  2006).  Taken
together,  these  paradigm  studies  illustrate  how  members  of  the
microbiota  are  able  to  adapt  their  substrate  utilization  in  response
to  one  another  and  engage  in  cross-feeding,  which  are  fundamen-
tal  principles  also  operating  in  complex  ecosystems.  Besides  the
species  mentioned  above,  numerous  other  commensal  bacteria
(the  majority  of  which  is  derived  from  humans)  have  been  used
to  interrogate  microbe–host  interactions  in  gnotobiotic  models
(Table  1).  Although  models  harboring  only  few  bacteria  have  been
very  helpful,  care  must  be  taken  when  interpreting  data.  In  sim-
pliﬁed  bacterial  communities,  the  context  of  a  fully  diverse  and
competitive  bacterial  ecosystem  is  lacking.  Several  studies  have
therefore  started  using  deﬁned  bacterial  consortia  of  higher  com-
plexity  (Table  1).
Germ-free  mice  can  also  be  used  to  investigate  functions  of
complex  human-derived  microbiota.  Human  fecal  microbiota  or
culture  collections  can  be  stably  transplanted  into  germ-free  mice
(Goodman  et  al.,  2011;  Kibe  et  al.,  2005;  Turnbaugh  et  al.,  2009;
Wos-Oxley  et  al.,  2012).  The  microbiota  in  these  models  is  complex
and  thus  not  fully  characterized,  and  therefore  these  models  are
not  gnotobiotic.  Nevertheless,  they  allow  mining  the  human  micro-
biome  for  speciﬁc  functions  and  address  microbiota-speciﬁc  effects
on  the  immune  system  and  metabolome  and  study  inter-individual
differences  (Ahern  et  al.,  2014;  Marcobal  et  al.,  2013).  Moreover,
mice  with  a  humanized  microbiota  make  it  possible  to  test  whether
a
  complex  human  disease  phenotype  can  be  transmitted  by  micro-
biota  transplantation  (Ridaura  et  al.,  2013;  Subramanian  et  al.,
2014).  Hence,  mice  colonized  with  human  gut  microbiota  are  very
helpful  to  test  the  clinical  relevance  of  dysbiotic  communities
associated  with  diseases.  However,  it  remains  unclear  how  well  dif-
ferent  human  gut  bacterial  taxa  establish  in  the  mouse  intestinal
milieu.
T.  Clavel  et  al.  /  International  Journal  of  Medical  Microbiology  306  (2016)  316–327
Table  1
Examples  of  human-  and  mouse-derived  bacterial  species  and  consortia  use  in  gnotobiotic  mice.